=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.1.20064
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.1.20064
creationDate: D:20230309174326+09'00'
modDate: D:20230309174326+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP205 
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
2 March 2023 
Meeting of the Board 
13 - 16 March 2023 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional Agenda Item 11 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a)
A funding proposal summary titled “Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)” submitted
by the Africa Finance Corporation;
b)
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c)
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d)
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)” by 
the Africa Finance Corporation is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity      
 1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s)  
  135 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure       
  155 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment       
  157 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s              182 
assessment 
Gender documentation
  184

=== PAGE 3 ===
This document is classified as: DC3 Internal - Not Approved for Public Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Program title: 
Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)  
Country(ies): 19 
Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic 
of Congo, Djibouti, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, 
Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra 
Leone, Togo, Zambia. 
Accredited Entity: 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC)  
Date of first submission: 
[2022/05/06]  
Date of current submission  
[2022/12/06]  
Version number 
[V.009]

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAM SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAM INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and program funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
FP-AFC-Multi-AFRICA-2022/06/06

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAM SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or program Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.                    Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/program targets below. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-financers’ 
contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% for GCF 
and Co-financers’ contribution, respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-
financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
10%  
10% 
☐  Health and well-being, and food and water 
security 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
90%  
90% 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter 
number % 
Enter 
number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed / 
sequestered) 
Not applicable 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
Number of 
direct 
beneficiaries  
50,365,031 
(50% women) 
Number of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
144,115,769 
(50% women) 
8.8% direct 
beneficiaries 
vis-à-vis total 
population  
25.18% 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
vis-à-vis total 
population 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co-finance2)  
765.075 million USD 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
253.755 million USD 
For multi-country 
proposals, please fill 
out annex 17.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts 
should be consistent with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
13.755 million USD
 
☐  Loan 
Enter 
number 
☐  Guarantee Enter number 
☒  Equity  
 
240 million USD 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
10 years  
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that 
the Accredited Entity 
obtained/will obtain its 
own approval to 
implement the 
project/ program, if 
available.  
6/30/2023 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard 
policy and GCF ESS Standards 
to assess your FP category. 
 
I-1 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work program? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country program? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/program complement other climate finance funding (e.g., GEF, 
AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e., GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
program described in the funding proposal. 
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
A.20. Executing Entity information 
Executing Entity(ies) and its country of registration 
and ownership type.  
 
Executing Entities:  
 
1. AFC Capital Partners (ACP)3, a limited liability 
company incorporated on 8 July 2021 under the 
laws of the Republic of Mauritius having its 
registered offices at Ocorian Corporate Services 
Ltd, 6th Floor, Tower A, 1 CyberCity, Ebene, 
Mauritius. ACP is the 100% owned Asset 
Management Subsidiary of AFC. ACP was 
created to mobilize capital at scale from 
institutional investors, and offer them the 
opportunity to invest, alongside AFC, in low 
carbon and climate resilient infrastructure 
projects across Africa. ACP will be the fund 
manager of the Infrastructure Climate Resilient 
Fund (ICRF). ACP was granted on 8 July 2021 a 
Global Business License by the Financial 
Services Commission, Mauritius. ACP has 
applied for a Collective Investment Scheme 
License (CIS) manager license from the Financial 
Services Commission to be able to operate as a 
fund investment manager. 
 
2. Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF): 
an investment vehicle to be (i) incorporated in the 
Republic of Mauritius (ICRF Mauritius) under the 
form of a limited partnership, without legal 
personality, pursuant to the Limited Partnerships 
Act 2011 of Mauritius and (i) independently 
managed by ACP; The ICRF is established to 
climate proof the African infrastructure by 
integrating scientifically based climate resilient 
measures as articulated in this funding proposal  
in the planning, design and construction and 
operations of the infrastructure projects. ICRF 
financing for sub-projects will be in the form of 
equity or quasi-equity and debt; the ICRF would 
invest in project companies alongside AFC and 
other investment partners (such as banks, and 
other 
financial 
institutions), 
including 
by 
leveraging additional investments. Through the 
ICRF, ACP leverages the scale and breath of 
AFC’s investment track record (via a co-
investment approach) to offer institutional 
investors unique access to attractive, de-risked 
investment opportunities in climate resilient 
infrastructure with commercial returns.  
 
3. The “General Partner” – an entity to be formed 
by the Accredited Entity, which is expected to be 
a limited liability company under Mauritius law. 
The General Partner will be owned, directly or

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
indirectly, by the Accredited Entity. The General 
Partner shall appoint ACP to perform the day-to-
day 
management 
and 
operation 
of 
the 
Partnership (including portfolio management and 
risk management) pursuant to the Management 
Agreement. 
 
4. Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) 4  is a 
multilateral financial institution, based in Lagos – 
Nigeria, created by African sovereign states to 
provide 
pragmatic 
solutions 
to 
Africa’s 
infrastructure deficit and challenging operating 
environment. To date, AFC has disbursed over 
US$ 10 billion to support transformative 
sustainable infrastructure projects in 35 African 
countries.  AFC is a regional entity, accredited by 
GCF, with the core focus on innovative home-
grown solutions to Africa’s development and 
climate change challenges as it relates to 
infrastructure. AFC is also an Executing Entity 
exercising certain rights and obligations in 
respect of the GCF funding in the implementation 
of the ICRF programme in a co-investment 
approach with ACP. 
 
 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
Executive summary:  
 
African key development sectors have already experienced widespread losses and damages attributable to 
anthropogenic climate change. Exposure of people, assets and infrastructure to climate hazards is 
increasing compounded by rapid urbanization, infrastructure deficit, and growing population in informal 
settlements. Although Africa has contributed among the least to greenhouse gas emissions, the region bears 
the greatest burden given its vulnerability, risks, and exposure profile 5. In Africa, the level of exposure of 
critical infrastructures to climate change is dire as the continent records some of the most extreme climatic 
conditions. Climate extremes and trends present significantly varying adverse consequences on 
infrastructure assets. This poses huge implications for the quality, quantity, and accessibility of countries’ 
infrastructure and the services they intend to offer, thereby truncating economic growth and development.  
 
Over the past 50 years (from 1970 to 2019), Africa recorded 1,695 disasters that caused the loss of 731 747 
lives and US$ 38.5 billion economic damages6. Over the same period, Africa accounted for 15% of weather-, 
climate- and water-related disasters, 35% of associated deaths (Figures 1.1 & 1.2 reflect the reported 
disruptive climate related events witnessed in Africa over the past decades). 
 
A failure to adapt by not taking climate change into account in the design, construction, and maintenance of 
infrastructure assets will not only cause costs to owners and operators but will leave entire communities 
 
3 AFC Capital partners https://www.africafc.org/about-us/our-company/afc-capital-partners  
4 AFC https://www.africafc.org/about-us/our-company/afc  
5 Sixth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, the Working Group II 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FinalDraft_FullReport.pdf 
6 WMO Atlas of Mortality and Economic Losses from Weather, Climate and Water Extremes (1970–2019) | 
https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10989

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
exposed and vulnerable. Adaptation can deliver a strong return both by reducing costs from climate-related 
damage to infrastructure itself and by avoiding significant knock-on effects in wider society by disrupting the 
availability of infrastructure services to the general population.  
 
 
Figure 1.1: Africa: Impacts of climate related disasters, 1990-2019 | Source: IFC Report on adapting to natural disasters (2022) 
and Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, Emergency Events (EM-DAT) Database. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2. Distribution of (a) number of disasters, (b) number of deaths and (c) economic losses by United Nations country 
classification in Africa and the World Bank country classification in Africa | WMO Atlas of Mortality and Economic Losses from 
Weather, Climate and Water Extremes (1970–2019)

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
Infrastructure assets respond differently to climatic events, depending on their nature and type, their 
technical and engineering design and their vulnerability to the projected climate in a given location. Hence 
designing infrastructure assets without considering potential climactic risks that could arise in the future 
would be extremely risky and could result in a deficiency in provision of infrastructure services. 
Consequently, the vulnerability of an asset is also a factor of the technical specifications and structural 
elements of that asset components and their degree of exposure to the changing climatic hazards. Climate-
resilient infrastructure in that context refers to infrastructure built today with the technical specification and 
structural elements that will make them ready to cope with tomorrow’s changing climate. The term has also 
been applied to infrastructures that support and contribute to climate resilience. Depending on the asset, 
infrastructure is built for long-time horizons (20 to 100 years+), giving latitude to a very wide variation in 
potential climate outcomes. The long-lived nature of infrastructure assets means that decisions made today 
will lock in vulnerability if they ignore to take climate change into consideration.  
 
Africa’s annual infrastructure spending surpassed USD 100 billion for the first time in 2018. Recent estimated 
needs amount to $130–170 billion a year. As most of the African infrastructure is yet to be built over the 
coming years and considering the large amount of financing that infrastructure investments require, making 
them resilient under future climates is critical to ensure that these investments achieved intended objective 
and lasting benefits, while avoiding being destroyed prematurely before they fully deliver on their investment 
return and societal benefits. Given the uncertainty about the future and the risk to invest to little or too much 
in resilience, adaptive management approaches can facilitate cost-effective climate resilience throughout 
the lifetime of an infrastructure asset. It is therefore critical to better understand the different characteristics 
for the successful design, planning, location, investment, construction, and maintenance of critical assets.  
 
Making infrastructure assets climate resilient is ‘a very robust solution’ to avoid massive losses and 
catastrophic consequences.7 The proposed Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) is set up to 
promote the development of climate resilient infrastructures and prevent significant climate-induced losses 
that could be associated to infrastructure damages in Africa. The programme seeks to build climate 
resilience upfront into the design and financing of infrastructure projects. ICRF’s unique financing modality 
combines blended capital strategies with capability-building intertwined with policy interventions while 
incentivizing climate risk preparedness and transfer. ICRF will support the climate-resilient sustainable 
development of target countries, reaching 50,365,031 direct beneficiaries and 144,115,769 indirect 
beneficiaries and making infrastructure assets worth 2 billion USD more resilient to the effects of 
climate change.  
 
• 
In relation to blended capital strategies, the aim is to catalyze blended finance at scale towards 
evidence-based climate-resilient infrastructure in Africa. The transformative approach of the programme 
is the introduction of tailor-made capital structures that enable the incorporation of climatic risk data into 
the design and construction of infra-assets, arising out of the aforementioned capacity building 
preparedness. As financing the cost of resilience and adaptation measures in infrastructure projects is 
typically non-remunerative, there is understandably an averseness among infrastructure project 
developers to incur these additional project costs attributable to building resilience. Hence, the success 
of the ICRF strategy relies on its ability to mobilize concessional capital to absorb the substantial increase 
in project costs on account of incorporating climate resilience. 
 
• 
In relation to capacity building preparedness and policy interventions, the programme will address 
the need to strengthen climate risk assessments to provide robust climate data and information to 
governments, engineers, project sponsors, and investors to enable them to make more informed 
decisions and adopt effective preventative and adaptive measures to reduce the risks and impacts of 
climate change and extreme weather events. In addition, the programme will strengthen the regulatory 
framework and incentivise the development of innovative climate risk parametric insurance (CRPI) 
products for the long-term viability of climate resilient infrastructure (CRI) investments in Africa. 
 
ICRF will primarily target greenfield projects, and on selective basis, could invest in the resilience of existing 
infrastructure projects. Indicatively, at least 75% of the ICRF portfolio will be dedicated to new investments

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
in CRI assets (including greenfield, expansion and growth investments); and up to 25% may be invested in 
existing infrastructure assets to be made climate-resilient through climate adaptation solutions. New 
infrastructure and expansions will be prioritised, planned, designed, built, and operated in the light of climate 
change that may occur during their lifetimes. Existing infrastructure may need to be retrofitted or managed 
differently due to climate change - opportunities to climate-proof existing infrastructure will be examined on 
a case by case. The ICRF programme will be dedicated to the development and investment in new climate-
resilient infrastructure asset classes (CRI Asset Classes) in the selected African States: 
 
1) Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics (Ports, Roads, Bridges, Railways, Airports etc.) 
2) Climate-resilient Energy Systems 
3) Climate-resilient Economic zones 
4) Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures 
 
 
Programme Outcomes: 
 
AFC will play a catalytic role in promoting the development of climate resilient infrastructure through its 
investment, expertise, and strong partnerships at the country and pan African levels. This multi country 
program is organized into three mutually reinforcing components: scaling blended finance through 
demonstrative effect of resilience measures and de-risking residual climate risk by incentivizing climate risk 
parametric insurance in infrastructure investments, improving climate risk assessments and strengthened 
regulatory framework. These outputs will lead to improved access of vulnerable people and communities to 
climate-resilient infrastructure services and infrastructure assets (all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, 
ports, telecommunication, digital) able to withstand climate hazards. 
 
This proposal seeks USD 240M in Equity and USD 11M in Grant funding from the Green Climate Fund to 
deliver three (3) outcomes:  
 
Outcome 1: Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the beneficiary 
African countries for infrastructure assets made resilient and able to withstand climate hazards and for 
improved access of vulnerable people to climate-resilient infrastructure services.  
 
GCF will provide equity investment into ICRF to leverage private and institutional capital at the fund level 
and at the project level to accelerate investments into climate resilient infrastructure projects in Africa, 
enabled by the GCF’s catalytic first-loss capital position (please refer to Figure 2 on ICRF Strategy). 
 
Outcome 2: Improved climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for CRI; improved 
capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa to support systematic integration of climate risks assessments into 
and prioritisation of resilience and adaptation measures for infrastructures financed by ICRF. In addition, 
capacity building activity will be provided to a large range of stakeholders engaged in infrastructure 
planning and financing in ICRF countries.  
 
GCF will provide USD 8 M for technical assistance (TA) to create capacity and deploy climate risk 
assessment and adaptation solutions with climate innovations for CRI Asset Classes. Also, ICRF will identify 
and bridge gaps in the technical capacity and infrastructure for collecting, processing, and disseminating 
data on climate hazards and climate change, and its impact on infrastructure in the participating countries. 
  
Outcome 3: Strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk parametric insurance 
(CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI investments in Africa 
 
GCF will further provide USD 3 million to support policy dialogue and incentives, including the full feasibility 
and the design of a new scheme to expand climate risk parametric insurance applications to the 
 
7 World Bank Group, Strengthening New Infrastructure Assets: A Cost-Benefit Analysis https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/962751560793977276/pdf/Strengthening-New-
Infrastructure-Assets-A-Cost-Benefit-Analysis.pdf

=== PAGE 12 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
infrastructure sector, exploring innovative approaches tailored for the African context. AFC will promote 
stakeholder engagement and public/private sector dialogue towards strengthening of the regulatory 
framework and mainstreaming of innovative climate risk parametric insurance (CRPI) for the long-term 
viability of CRI investments in Africa.  
 
ICRF targeted sectors are transport, clean energy, economic zones and telecoms. The programme will reach 
50,365,031 direct beneficiaries and 144,115,769 indirect beneficiaries The programme will favorably affect 
women as the most vulnerable population groups to climate change and the largest segment of the 
populations in the targeted countries. Following conclusive due diligence based on their national process, 
the National Designated Authorities (NDA) of nineteen (19) African countries have issued a no-objection 
letter, confirming the programme truly reflects one of the key priorities of their countries, including their 
NDCs. 
 
In international climate change diplomacy, Africa has always set adaptation as its top priority as the continent 
remains the most vulnerable to climate change. ICRF will therefore contribute to the efforts of the 
participating countries to transition towards low emission and climate-resilient development pathways, as 
expressed in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). ICRF will provide a substantial contribution 
to the achievement of the goals of the Paris Agreement. Resilient infrastructure will increase the ability to 
adapt to climate change making infrastructure financing consistent with the purpose of the Paris Agreement, 
namely in its article 2b “increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and foster 
climate resilience and related global goal on adaptation…”, as well as 2c “making finance flows consistent 
with a pathway towards climate resilient development”.  In addition to the Paris Agreement, climate-resilient 
infrastructure financing can support efforts to achieve a number of the Sustainable Development Goals (6-
9, 11, and 13) as well as the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. 
 
 
Figure 2: Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) – Strategy and Fund Structure

=== PAGE 13 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
Climate Resilient Infrastructure: Trade-off between Resilience Cost, Return and Bankability – GCF 
concessional equity is the enabler to balance the equation

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
8Will infrastructure bend or break under climate stress? 
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/sustainability/our%20insights/will%20infrastructure%20
bend%20or%20break%20under%20climate%20stress/will-infrastructure-bend-or-break-under-climate-stress-case-study-
old.pdf 
9 Buyana Kareem et al 2020 Environ. Res. Lett. 15 073002 
10https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/business%20functions/sustainability/our%20insights/will%20infrastructure%
20bend%20or%20break%20under%20climate%20stress/will-infrastructure-bend-or-break-under-climate-stress-case-study-
old.pdf 
 PROJECT/PROGRAM INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate change problem: To date, the design of infrastructure typically assumes a future climate that is the 
same as today’s climate. However, a changing climate and the resulting more extreme weather events 
mean those climate bands are becoming outdated, leaving infrastructure to operate outside of their 
tolerance levels. This presents direct threats to the assets as well as significant knock-on effects for 
population relying on the services they deliver. Infrastructure is expected to bear the brunt of anticipated 
climate change adaptation costs, typically estimated to be between 60 and 80 percent of total climate 
change adaptation spending globally, which could average $150 billion to $450 billion per year on 
infrastructure in 20508. These risks underscore the need to address the adaptation of critical infrastructures 
taking into account their specific exposure, risks, and hazards.  
 
Figure B.1.1. Africa map of African cities and associated 
climate risk (Kareem et al., 2020) 
Climate change and variability in Africa 
presents significant but varying adverse 
consequences on infrastructure assets. 
This poses huge implications on the 
quality, quantity, and accessibility of 
countries' infrastructure services, 
thereby truncating economic growth and 
development. Climate change impacts 
on African infrastructure amid pre-
existing deficit, their low density and 
their poor conditions are detrimental to 
the continent's growth. Climate risks to 
infrastructure are both pervasive and 
diverse as each type of infrastructure 
system has specific elements vulnerable 
to specific climate hazards (Figure 
B.1.1)9.  Hence, assets respond 
differently to projected climatic events by 
a certain order of magnitude increase in 
risk from a specific climate hazard while 
others may be much less affected10. 
 
These climate-related risks can be 
directly assessed by the likelihood of the 
hazard, its severity, the level of 
exposure, and resilience of different 
infrastructure components to those 
hazards.  
 
 
However, the biggest threats to assets differ significantly depending on the technical specifications of asset 
components and their degree of exposure to the changing climatic hazards. These specifications point out 
the need to better understand these different characteristics for the successful design, planning, location, 
investment, construction and maintenance of critical assets.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
11 https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/?_ga=2.98165404.204120138.1642344109-80085860.1642344109 
12 https://cordex.org/ 
13 IPCC AR6. Regional Fact Sheet – Africa. Working Group, I- The Physical Science Basis. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/factsheets/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Regional_Fact_Sheet_Africa.pdf  
Analysis of past climate data over Africa: Climatologically, more precipitation is recorded within the 
latitude bands of 20oN and 20oS for the period 1976-2005 as agreed in both gridded observation from the 
Climate Research Unit11 archive (CRU) and ensemble of three regional climate models (RCM) from the 
Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment12 (CORDEX) Africa domain (Figure B.1.2. a & b). 
Relative to CRU, the RCM ensemble shows a good pattern correlation of 0.85, although with RMSE of 539 
mm/year. Higher temperature values are observed and modelled around land areas, especially over the 
Saharan desert region. Although modelled minimum and maximum temperature have RMSE of 1.41oC and 
2oC, respectively, there is a good agreement compared to precipitation.  
 
 
 
Figure B.1.2. Spatial distribution of mean annual total precipitation (first column), annual minimum temperature (second column) 
and annual maximum temperature (third column) from CRU (first row) and RCM ensemble mean (bottom row) for the period 
1976-2005. R represents the pattern correlation relative to the observed data (CRU) whereas RMSE represents the root mean 
square error relative to CRU data. 
 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) sixth assessment report13 (IPCC 
AR6), common regional characteristics exist in Africa. Some of such changes are that the mean 
temperatures and hot extremes have exceeded natural variability in all land regions relative to 1850-1900. 
Equally, the rate of surface temperature increases more rapidly compared to the global average. This 
increase is largely influenced by human-induced climate change drivers, such as anthropogenic emission 
and land surface modification. Furthermore, sea level has increased at a higher rate than global mean sea 
level around Africa over the last three decades. Sea level rise is reported to certainly continue around the 
continent thereby contributing to increases in the frequency and severity of coastal flooding in low-lying 
areas to coastal erosion and along most sandy coasts with adverse consequences for seaports and other 
critical infrastructures situated around the coastline. 
 
d
a
b
c
e
f

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
14 Dosio, A., Jury, M.W., Almazroui, M., Ashfaq, M., Diallo, I., Engelbrecht, F.A., Klutse, N.A., Lennard, C., Pinto, I., Sylla, 
M.B. and Tamoffo, A.T., 2021. Projected future daily characteristics of African precipitation based on global (CMIP5, CMIP6) 
and regional (CORDEX, CORDEX-CORE) climate models. Climate Dynamics, 57(11), pp.3135-3158. 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.3a. A map showing the elevation in 
meters and Africa sub-regions represented by 
blue boxes in the map (Dosio et al. 202114) 
 
Figure B.1.3b. Time series of average annual mean temperature (oC) and 
temporal trend over each Africa sub-regions for the period 1976-2005. Black 
lines are observations from CRU (black) and red lines depict model ensemble. 
Asterisk (*) indicates that the trend is significant at 95% confidence interval. 
 
Figure B.1.3. presents the elevation of Africa sub-regions and trends in temperature for the period 1976-
2005 over the eleven sub-regions. Generally, all sub-regions show significant warming trends in observed 
and modelled mean surface temperature. Unlike precipitation, which exhibits a substantial spatial and 
temporal heterogeneity across subregions and between observation and model, where trends could be 
positive or negative depending on the subregion. Decreasing trends in precipitation were observed and 
modelled in some subregions including SAF-W, CAF-S, HRN, EAF, and ATL (Figure B.1.4). The decreasing 
trends are only significant in the observed precipitation in CAF-S and EAF subregions.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
15https://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature%20Story/Africa/Conference%20Edition%20Enhancing%20Afri
cas%20Infrastructure.pdf 
 
 
Figure B.1.4. Time series of annual mean monthly precipitation (mm/month) and temporal trend over each 
Africa sub-regions for the period 1976-2005. Black lines are observations from CRU (black) and red line 
depicts model ensemble. Asterisk (*) indicates that the trend is significant at 95% confidence interval. 
 
Climate change projections and future climate over Africa: Models project precipitation and 
temperature in the future climate to change significantly in Africa15. According to the IPCC AR6, additional 
increases in global warming will cause changes in hot and cold temperature extremes and increase in 
mean maximum one day precipitation. Projected minimum and maximum temperature change is expected 
to reach 5oC in some land areas at 4oC global warming level (Figure B.1.5.). The percentage change in 
annual total precipitation ranges between -40% to 40%. Regions around central West Africa and East 
Africa are expected to experience increase in precipitation while the western edge of West Africa and 
larger area of South Africa are likely to record less annual total precipitation in the future. These signals 
are expected to intensify at 4oC global warming.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
16 UNESCO, 2022, Mathematics for action: supporting science-based decision-making, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380883.locale=en 
 
Figure B.1.5 Projected temperature and precipitation change at 1.5, 2, and 4oC global warming level  
Climate models project that by 2050 multiple climatic impact-drivers (CIDs) will change across Africa (see Figure B.1.6)16. 
Temperatures and extreme heats will increase, and cold spells will decrease across the Continent. Frequency and intensity of 
heavy precipitation events are projected to increase in almost every region of Africa. Increase of the coastal CIDs, such as relative 
sea level, coastal flood and coastal erosion, will have devastating consequences for Africa. The CIDs’ changes in magnitude, 
frequency, duration, seasonality, and spatial extent will threaten human health, food and water security, and socio-economic 
development. 
 
Figure B.1.6. Climate impact drivers (CIDs) in Africa (Source UNESCO, 2022)

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
17 What infrastructure pathways stands for: https://infrastructure-pathways.org/overview/ 
The uncertainty in future climate underscores the need for considering different climate scenarios, which 
has potential financial implications for adaptation and the pathways approach across the infrastructure 
system lifecycle17. Largely, the financial situation for adaptation depends on the climate change scenario 
considered. Higher impacts are expected under higher greenhouse gases (GHG) emission scenarios 
resulting in higher cost savings over the lifecycle of an infrastructure project. On the other hand, lesser 
impacts are likely to materialize under low-medium emission scenarios causing smaller savings, relative to 
the upfront adaptation cost. Though considerations of many potential future climates could complicate the 
assessment of climate risks, it remains critical to realize a robust outlook of those climates, which is crucial 
in planning climate-sensitive infrastructures to avoid over- or under-investments in climate resilience. 
 
Impacts of climate change on infrastructure: Projected changes in climate parameters, such as 
temperature, precipitation, and flooding, will have significant effects on built and most critically, yet to be 
built, infrastructures throughout Africa. These effects will further have huge adverse implications on most 
African nations with already low quantity, quality and accessibility of infrastructure. Cities are expected to 
be most affected by climate change impacts because of the heavy reliance on extensive infrastructure 
networks for access to water, energy, and food. Nonetheless, the understanding of current and future 
climate impacts on infrastructure are still very limited in Africa, hence, limiting the integration of climate risks 
into infrastructure planning and investments. Table B.1.7 presents some examples of potential direct climate 
change impacts by sector. In addition to the direct physical and socio-economic impacts, climate change 
may have indirect impacts on infrastructures.  
Table B.1.7 Expected frequency of adaptation interventions based on climate stressors on different ICRF 
infrastructure types.  
S/N 
Infrastructure 
type 
Infrastructure 
expected life cycle 
Climate stressors 
Type of adaptation 
interventions 
1. 
Port 
- 
50–100 years 
a. Sea level rise 
- 
Major refurbishment 
- 
Reconstruction/major 
upgrade 
b. Heat stress 
c. Water extreme 
d. Water availability 
e. Humidity 
f. Wind 
g. Storm 
2. 
Road 
- 
20–30 years 
a. Precipitation 
- 
Maintenance 
- 
Resurface 
- 
Reconstruction/major 
upgrade 
b. Temperature 
c.  Humidity 
3. 
Bridge 
- 
60–100 years 
a.  Precipitation 
- 
Maintenance 
- 
Resurface concrete 
- 
Reconstruction/major 
upgrade 
b. Temperature 
c. Humidity 
4. 
Railways 
- 
50–100 years 
a. Temperature 
- 
Major refurbishment 
- 
Reconstruction/major 
upgrade                           
b. Precipitation 
5. 
Renewable 
Energy (Solar) 
- 
25-30 years 
a. Temperature 
- 
Replacement of solar 
panels 
b. Solar radiation 
 
Table B.1.7 presents the most common climate stressors, while in reality a larger set of climate stressors 
impact infrastructure.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
Extreme weather events in Africa powerfully illustrate how physical infrastructure and the provision of 
services that depends on them could be affected by the effects of climate change. In addition to extremes, 
trend changes will also have significant impacts on infrastructure. All ICRF countries had experienced 
climatic events in recent years that impacted severely their infrastructures. Photo B.1.8 presents selected 
events reported over the past five years (2017-2021) demonstrating likely effects of weather slow and 
extreme onset events on infrastructure.  
 
 
 
Photo B.1.8 Selection of reported climatic events affecting infrastructure in ICRF countries. 
 
- 
Cameroon – flood, August 2021, showing people making their way through a flooded street after heavy 
rains in Douala. (REUTERS, 2021)  
- 
Chad – flood, September 2020, presenting floods in N’Djamena — roads and streets turned into rivers 
while houses in many neighborhoods were flooded (FloodList, 2020)  
- 
Côte d’Ivoire – flood, November 2021, showing floods in Abidjan — The Indénié crossroads are 
completely flooded. (YEO, 2021) and heavy rain triggered flooding and a landslide in Anyama, June 
2020, showing Landslide at Anyama causing 50m of damaged railway tracks (Abidjan.net, 2020) 
- 
The Democratic Republic of Congo – flood, 2020, showing flooded villages (IFRC,2020) and flood, 
2018, showing floods in the Funa district, Kinshasa (Davies, 2018) 
- 
Gabon – mudslide and flood, April 2017, showing a blocked nozzle caused by a mudslide creates 
flooding in Libreville (Obiang, 2017), as well flood, March 2020, showing the neighborhood of Libreville 
flooded after torrential rains (Mussavu, 2020)

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
Gambia – flood, 2021, showing flooded streets in Banjul following the rainy season (Bekai, 2021) 
- 
Guinea – flood, May 2019, Flash flooding in streets of Conakry following torrential rains (ACDM, 2019) 
- 
Mali – flood, May 2019, A vehicle engulfed by flood waters in the streets of Bamako (GFDDR, 2019), 
and flood, 2020, Vehicles in flood waters in the streets of Bamako (Maliweb, 2020) 
- 
Namibia – flood over the bridge, January 2021, The Guruchab River bridge is washed over with 
rainwater as it flows into the Naute Dam which was filled to over 117,8% of its full capacity (The 
Namibian, 2021) 
- 
Sierra Leone – flood in the port, August 2019, Floods in Freetown after torrential rains (THE SPECIMEN 
NEWS, 2019) 
- 
Nigeria – flood, 2020, Floods in Lagos causing building collapse. (Ogechi, 2020) 
- 
Togo – coastal erosion damaging the road, 2021, Road Infrastructure near Lomé that is affected by 
Coastal Erosion (Le Nouveau Reporter, 2021). 
 
Most of these events are predicted to become the new normal under unabated climate change and can 
have devasted economic implications of these events as reported in the 3 cases highlighted below:  
 
Côte d’Ivoire 
 
2018 Abidjan floods and effects on infrastructure 
In 2018 heavy rains were recorded in several parts of 
Cote d'Ivoire causing flooding in Abidjan, Aboisso, Grand 
Bassam, and Ayamé. Several streets in western Abidjan, 
which houses one of Abidjan's industrial zones, were 
flooded, bringing the local industrial infrastructure to a 
standstill. The access road to this strategic economic 
zone was engulfed by water, preventing the movement 
of vehicles 18  To address flood risks in Abidjan and 
making urban infrastructure more resilient, a €48 million 
loan has been provided by the African Development 
Bank19. 
Togo 
 
2008 Amakpape National1 bridge destroyed by heavy rains 
In 2008, devastating floods affected all the southern 
regions of the country, resulting in the destruction of 
eleven (11) bridges, including the Togblékopé, Lilikopé, 
and Amakpapé bridges located on the national road No. 
1, which links the capital to the interior of the country and 
Burkina Faso. However, the cost of rebuilding the 
Amakpapé bridge was approximately 2.7 billion CFA 
francs. 20 .  Similarly, in 2016, it was the turn of the 
Bakocopé bridge located on the National Road N°1 
which threatened to collapse following heavy flooding, 
thus disrupting traffic.  
Namibia

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 Sixth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, the Working Group II 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FinalDraft_FullReport.pdf 
 
2009 Namibia Floods and impacts on toll road  
Namibia experiences frequent transport failures due to 
flooding. The 2009 floods caused the destruction of 
infrastructure and the decline of economic flows in 
Namibia. In 2009, damage to the transport and energy 
infrastructure amounted to US$27.4 million and US$1.1 
million, respectively21. Another effect of climate change 
that threatens Namibia is drought, which is the most 
devastating risk to the country in terms of the total 
number of people affected and the total cost of damage. 
Indeed, previous droughts have cost the country about 
$175 million per year and the impacts on the economic 
output of the affected areas are estimated at $3.6 billion 
per year22. 
 
The likelihood of increasing climate change potential effects on infrastructure assets in the 
Programme countries is high (See Annex 23a – Country level climate analysis including a detailed 
programme country climate profiles and vulnerability analysis for the ICRF CRI). This makes a strong 
case for earlier interventions for a systematic integration of climate risk assessment, integration, 
reduction and transfer in critical infrastructure planning, design, and financing. In the absence of 
proactive measures to make these infrastructures more resilient to climate change, private 
investors’ risk aversion to climate-related risks associated with infrastructure will increase to divert 
already scarce resources from infrastructure financing in Africa. 
 
Maladaptation is one of the focus areas of  the Sixth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2022. For urban 
areas, the report points out the establishment of inflexible infrastructure in cities and settlements that cannot 
be adjusted easily or affordably for increased heavy rainfall23.  Avoiding maladaptation is a significant 
consideration in ICRF design and for its implementation. Towards that end, a state-of-the-art ICRF Climate 
Assessment Methodology (See Annex 23 c) has been prepared to ensure a holistic assessment of the 
climate risks for the infrastructure, taking into account impacts on nearby vulnerable population and users, 
value chains and other dependent infrastructures. This methodology supports the systematic consideration 
of climate risks in ICRF investment decision making process,  taking into account existing and future climate 
impacts. Three case studies testing the methodology (for road, port and solar plant) have been provided as 
supplement for Annex 2.  
 
ICRF Climate Assessment Methodology (Annex 23c) & Operations Manual (Annex 21).  
The ICRF Climate Assessment Methodology and Approach in Annex 23c is designed as a “tool” that would 
be used by AFC and ACP when assessing the climate impact potential for each sub-project under this 
programme. Every asset has its unique vulnerabilities to different climate hazards and extremes, making 
the degree of climate change impact on infrastructures site-specific. Assuming resilience is not built in the 
design of a given infrastructure, then, climate change could gradually disrupt this infrastructure to increase 
operation costs, worsen the funding gap, and eventually impact societies and economic growth. Due to the 
complexity of climate change impacts assessment on infrastructure, a system dynamic thinking has been 
prioritized for the ICRF programme to quantify the socioeconomic and cost implications of the climate 
hazards. It explores a science-based approach to integrating climate risk assessment and management in 
infrastructure financing and design. It establishes the scientific evidence and climate rationale for ICRF 
investments. 
 
The ICRF Climate Assessment Methodology and Approach (Annex 23c) is built on the premises of the 
programmatic approach.  It is underpinned by a detailed climate assessment based on CMIP6 models and

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
impact assessment that considers different types of infrastructure crucial to economic growth. The ICRF’s 
methodology is comprised of a multitude of methods targeting different climate resilience, infrastructure-
specific analysis components. The approach provides a decision tree for asset-specific resilience options 
for the ICRF’s pipeline to customize climate risk assessments and vulnerability management based on 
hazard identification, system impact potential, site-specific project’s vulnerabilities assessment and 
adaptation options decision-making. The approach identifies at least 4 critical steps that will enable 
AFC/ACP team to ensure ICRF investments are provided to sub projects with real need for building 
resilience: 
 
1. The first step consists of a detailed climate analysis, considering understanding of past, present day 
and future climate in a given location and understanding of potential impacts on targeted 
infrastructure, based on the intensity and frequency of the most relevant climate stressors and 
drivers for the infrastructure site. (See annex 23a) 
2. The second step consists of applying a system dynamic modeling using the outputs of the climate 
assessment to quantify the impacts of changes in climate stressors on an infrastructure of 
interest. The system dynamic analysis is useful as it can be customized to assess not only impact 
on the infrastructure but also on vulnerable population (city dwellers living in close proximity of the 
infrastructure and susceptible to be affected when it damaged and dependent users); wider system 
elements such as any dependent value chain or infrastructure). ( See Annex 3ai, ii, iii) 
3. Third, the assessment results from both the climate stressors and system modelling analysis are 
used to inform a suite of socio economic and financial analyses to provide information on the 
financial aspects based on different scenarios and ultimately for decision making. (See Annex 3bi, 
ii, iii) 
4. Fourth, a pathway adaptation strategy of the programme will allow to prioritize well informed and 
cost-effective adaptation measures to be integrated as part of the infrastructure technical and 
engineering design options (both structural and soft measures). An adaptation pathways strategy 
considering uncertainties will be proposed to plan measures as climate change scenarios unfold. It 
will allow to build multiple options and flexibility into projects adaptation plans.  
.  
 
 
 
The Methodology includes safeguard for a system approach consideration for integrated infrastructure 
systems and nature-based solutions to ensure socioeconomic and financial sustainability of ICRF projects

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
Table B.1.8 Example of the climate change impact and consideration for potential climate adaptation 
measures in Cote d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone (See Annex 23d for all ICRF countries). 
 
Region 
Sector or 
Typology 
Hazard  
Risk/Impact 
Adaptation activity  
COTE D'IVOIRE 
San-Pedro 
Port 
Sea level rise increased 
storminess and storm 
surges: 
under RCP6.0, the sea 
level is expected to rise by 
39 cm until 2080 
Damage to port 
infrastructure and 
equipment and loss of 
port operability 
- 
Increase of sea walls’ height 
and strength and facilitation 
of ecosystem-based 
adaptation (e.g., 
mangroves) 
- 
Provision of breakwaters 
and shore revetments to 
protect the harbour from the 
force of waves 
- 
Use of tetra pods to 
dissipate the force of 
incoming waves 
Increased extreme 
rainfall: future wet periods 
are likely to become more 
extreme 
Reduced navigability of 
rivers due to Increased 
magnitude and frequency 
of ﬂooding and siltation 
- 
Implementation of a 
navigation warning system 
Abidjan 
Road/Bridge 
Increases in very hot days 
and heatwaves: 
temperature in Côte 
d’Ivoire is projected to rise 
by between 1.7 and 
3.7 °C by 2080, compared 
to pre-industrial levels, 
with higher temperatures 
and more temperature 
extremes projected for the 
north of Côte d’Ivoire 
- 
Deterioration of road 
surface integrity, 
e.g., through 
softening and traﬃc-
related rutting 
(Asphalt has a 
strong heat heat-
absorbing capacity 
that easily causes 
pavement high 
temperatures.  
- 
Temperature is a 
significant factor that 
affects the 
performance and 
service life of asphalt 
pavements. 
- 
The higher 
temperatures make 
the asphalt softer, 
thus the risk is high 
that heavy vehicles 
cause rutting due to 
the plastic 
deformation, which 
will decrease the 
pavement evenness 
and consequently 
affect traffic safety.  
- 
Thermal expansion 
of bridge joints, 
increased stresses in 
concrete bridge 
girders and 
accelerated material 
degradation in paved 
surfaces 
- 
Enhancement of design 
criteria to withstand extreme 
heat Introduction of cool 
pavement techniques (e.g., 
specifying use of porous 
materials) 
- 
Use of asphalt binders with 
high melting point 
- 
Use of modified asphalt 
binders  
- 
Use of innovation such as 
heat-collecting technologies 
- 
Use of expansion gaps and 
Asphalt Plug Joints (APJ) on 
bridge structures 
- 
Use of cooling (reflective) 
paints on structural 
members 
Sea level rise and storm 
surges: under RCP6.0, 
the sea level is expected 
to rise by 39 cm until 2080 
Damage to bridges due 
to ﬂooding, inundation of 
coastal areas and coastal 
erosion 
- 
Raising road level  
- 
Construction of sea defense 
walls 
- 
Building and upgrading flood 
pumps and drainage 
systems

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
- 
Construction of retention 
areas / lagoons for 
attenuation 
Increase in intense 
precipitation events 
Damage to road 
infrastructure due to 
landslides and  
 surface water ﬂooding 
- 
Use of improved natural 
drainage such as rain 
gardens, wetlands, and 
lagoons  
- 
Improvement of 
maintenance regime, 
emergency repair 
procedures  
- 
 Construction of water 
retention areas/ Lagoons for 
flood risk mitigation  
Increased extreme 
rainfall: increase in the 
proportion of total annual 
rainfall that falls during 
heavy events 
Reduced navigability of 
rivers due to Increased 
magnitude and frequency 
of ﬂooding and siltation 
- 
Implement a navigation 
warning system 
Changes in average 
precipitation: 
the projected annual 
change of the precipitation 
ranges from -23 to +18% 
by the 2090s 
Negative impacts on the 
navigation of inland 
waterways as river ﬂows 
are reduced 
- 
Implement a navigation 
warning system 
Gusty Winds  
Reduction of the 
efficiency of the mirror 
field 
- 
Use of automatic systems to 
rotate solar panels out of the 
wind  
- 
Installing panels about 1 m 
above the ground to reduce 
abrasive effects 
Gusty Winds 
Disruption in energy 
utilities 
Increase damage to 
electric transmission line  
- 
Adoption of norms and 
standards that consider 
extreme events 
- 
Underground installation of 
electric transmission line  
Abuja, 
Badagry 
Road 
Road 
Increases in very hot days 
and heatwaves: 
Nigeria’s mean annual 
temperature ranges 
between 17°C to 37°C in 
the south to 12°C to 45°C 
in the north. For the 
country, temperature 
increases of 0.03°C per 
decade were observed 
between 1901–2016, with 
stronger increases 
occurring over the last 30 
years of 0.19°C per 
decade. Nigeria are 
expected to increase by 
2.9°C to as much as 
5.7°C by end of the 
century 
- 
Deterioration of road 
surface integrity, 
e.g., through 
softening and traﬃc-
related rutting 
(Asphalt has a 
strong heat heat-
absorbing capacity 
that easily causes 
pavement high 
temperatures.  
- 
Temperature is a 
significant factor that 
affects the 
performance and 
service life of asphalt 
pavements. 
- 
The higher 
temperatures make 
the asphalt softer, 
thus the risk is high 
that heavy vehicles 
cause rutting due to 
the plastic 
deformation, which 
will decrease the 
pavement evenness 
- 
Enhancement of design 
criteria to withstand extreme 
heat  
- 
Introduction of cool 
pavement techniques (e.g., 
specifying the use of porous 
materials) 
- 
Use of asphalt binders with 
a high melting point 
- 
Use of modified asphalt 
binders  
- 
Use of innovation such as 
heat-collecting technologies 
- 
Use of expansion gaps and 
Asphalt Plug Joints (APJ) on 
bridge structures 
- 
- Use of cooling (reflective) 
paints on structural 
members

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
and consequently 
affect traffic safety. 
- 
Accelerated material 
degradation in paved 
surfaces 
SIERRA LEONE 
Lungi 
Airport 
Increases in very hot days 
and heatwaves 
Deterioration of runway 
surface integrity, e.g., 
through softening of 
pavement surface and 
aircraft- related rutting 
- 
Enhancement of design 
criteria 
- 
Use of modified asphalt 
pavement 
- 
Use of rigid pavement 
Increase in intense 
precipitation events 
 
Surcharging of airport 
drainage systems leading 
to ﬂooding 
Flooding damage 
Erosion of slopes  
Saturated and weakened 
pavement foundations 
- 
Design and installation of 
drainage system for 
collection and disposal of 
runoff 
- 
Provision for adequate 
subsurface drainage 
- 
Expand and improve 
existing drainage system 
capacity 
Baomahun 
Renewable 
Energy / Solar 
Hailstorms 
Tube collectors can be 
damaged 
- 
Adoption of modern flat 
plate collectors incorporated 
with reinforced glass are not 
easily damaged by 
hailstones 
Extreme Temperatures/ 
Heat waves: 
mean annual temperature 
has increased by 0.8˚C 
since 1960, an average 
rate of 0.18˚C per 
decade. temperature is 
projected to increase by 
1.0 to 2.6˚C by the 2060s, 
and 1.5 to 4.6˚C by the 
2090s. 
Efficiency of PV modules 
drops by about 0.5 % for 
every 1 °C increase in 
temperature. 
Long-term exposure to 
heat will cause the panel 
to age more rapidly, while 
some materials may not 
be able to withstand short 
peaks of very high 
temperatures 
- 
Use of photovoltaic modules 
that perform better in 
warmer environments  
- 
Adoption of thin-film 
technologies which are far 
better than crystalline silicon 
in such environments 
- 
Adoption of passively 
cooling techniques through 
natural air flows  
- 
Use of forced air and liquid 
coolants to actively cool PV 
modules  
Gusty Winds  
Reduction of the 
efficiency of the mirror 
field 
- 
Use of automatic systems to 
rotate solar panels out of the 
wind Installing panels about 
1 m above the ground to 
reduce abrasive effects 
 
 
- 
Decreasing 
precipitation and 
drought:  
- 
Annual Precipitation 
Anomaly (mm)-24.1 
to +29.2 (−0.5 mm) 
Damage to buildings and 
infrastructure, 
environmental 
degradation, risks to 
human health, and 
considerable economic 
losses. 
- 
Deployment of water-saving 
and re-use systems to 
balance water consumption 
across the region 
- 
Advocating for a mandatory 
water saving and re-use 
systems for corporate and 
public facilities  
 
 
Country-level climate analysis is performed for infrastructure  specific site in every country -  integral 
to ICRF sub-projects assessment process and  eligibility criteria for ICRF investment. The ICRF country-
level climate analysis (Annex 23a) provides detailed assessment of the spatio-temporal distribution of 
precipitation, temperature and other relevant climatic drivers in current climate. It computes present-day 
climate trend and the projected changes in future climates under two scenarios (two shared socio-economic 
pathways - SSP2-45 and SSP5-85, corresponding to two representative concentration pathways - RCP4.5 
and RCP8.5) for each of the ICRF host countries and for the infrastructure sites. Climate vulnerability 
analysis for ICRF countries by sector at regional level (Annex 23b) including detailed information on 
regional specific climate hazards, risks / impacts and initial consideration of adaptation measures for

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
24 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Landscape-of-Climate-Finance-in-
Africa.pdf  
infrastructure sectors and assets will also inform climate risks assessment as part of the ICRF due diligence 
process.  
 
Status of climate adaptation financing flow in Africa (Source CPI: 2022)24 
Current levels of climate finance in Africa fall far short of needs. The total cost of implementing NDCs in 
Africa is estimated at USD 2.8 trillion over 2020- 2030. Africa’s climate finance needs between 2020 and 
2030 requires, on average, USD 250 to 280 billion each year (see Figure B1.9). In 2020, total climate 
finance flows into Africa from domestic and international sources amounted to only USD 30 billion, about 
12% of the amount needed. The financing gap is undoubtedly significant. With the continent’s total GDP of 
USD 2.4 trillion (World Bank 2021), An equivalent to 10% of Africa’s current annual GDP are required for 
climate finance, above and beyond current flows every year for the next 10 years. The estimated USD 250 
billion plus, defined as climate finance needs’ is the gap and must largely come from international public 
sources and domestic and international private actors (CPI, 2022).  
 
Implementing Africa’s climate response will cost around USD 277 billion annually between 2020-2030 (CPI, 
2022) based on each country’s NDCs. African Governments have committed USD 26.4 billion of domestic 
public resources annually, about 10% of the total cost. However, given debt levels and other development 
priorities, compounding from concurrent crises, African countries may not be able to provide as much 
domestic public climate finance as initially estimated. In fact, 23 African countries are either in debt distress 
or at high risk of debt distress (IMF, 2022).  
 
 
Figure B1.9: Estimated climate finance needs in Africa by region 
 
 
 
Mitigation accounts for the largest share of reported needs in 2020-2030, at 66% of total climate finance 
needs. Adaptation accounted for only 24% of total climate finance reported needs, despite Africa 
being highly vulnerable to climate change.  Figures on access to climate finance also show lower

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
volumes for adaptation. This reflects countries’ challenge in assessing and costing climate risks 
and costs associated to adaptation measures while calling for a better balance between mitigation 
and adaptation finance.  In addition, adaptation finance has not attracted private capital flows (see 
Figure B1.10).  
 
Figure B1.10: Private and public climate finance flows vs. total cost by climate use (USD billion) 
 
 
 
Figure B1.11: Climate finance needs by subregions, thematic area, and sectors (2020-2030, USD 
billion) 
 
 
 
Figure B1.12: Climate finance flows in Africa, 2019/2020 (USD billion), still largely dominated by 
public flows DFIs and Governments.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
 
Low level of private sector climate finance in Africa 
Though typically overlooked in NDC conversations, the private sector has significant potential to meet 
Africa’s climate finance needs including significant adaptation needs. The private sector needs to 
increase its contribution towards climate finance in Africa as public funding alone is not sufficient to meet 
the continent’s climate action requirements. The private sector contributed only 14% (USD 4.2 billion) of 
total climate finance in Africa, much lower than in other regions like South Asia (37%), East Asia and 
Pacific (39%), and Latin America & Caribbean (49%) (CPI, 2021a), (see Figure below: B1.13 and B1.14). 
 
Figure B1.13: Private and public climate finance flows vs. total cost by climate use (USD billion) 
 
 
 
Figure B1.14: Private climate finance by providers (2019/2020 average, USD billion)

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
25 Climate Change Is an Increasing Threat to Africa https://unfccc.int/news/climate-change-is-an-increasing-threat-to-africa 
26 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report ‘Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability’ 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FinalDraft_FullReport.pdf 
 
 
 
Infrastructure investments prospects in Africa: As part of a large effort to expand and upgrade its 
infrastructure system, Africa has planned substantial investments in infrastructure over the next decades. 
For road infrastructures only, capital investment for combined both regional initiatives and country-level 
masterplans averages about $4.6 billion per annum, for a total of $78 billion through 2030. In addition to 
the capital investment, funding for maintenance is needed to prevent the accelerated deterioration of the 
infrastructure. In addition, all climate models unanimously show that weather extremes will put considerable 
pressure on Africa's infrastructure. The damage and accelerated aging caused by climate change will 
require increased maintenance and more frequent rehabilitation. While climate change is projected to take 
a heavy toll on the African infrastructure system, securing strong adaptation and resilience outcomes are 
critical priorities to boosting responses to the impacts that are already heavily felt in the continent. These 
priorities are reflected in African countries' nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and other adaptation 
planning and priorities programming documents. All African NDCs submitted so far incorporate adaptation 
priorities. The nineteen (19) individual African countries highlighted the need to build climate-resilient 
infrastructure systems in their NDCs’ adaptation priorities.  
 
 
Barriers: Although there are numerous adaptation options that are relevant for all infrastructure sectors, 
some barriers impeding efforts to improve infrastructure resilience to climate change, especially in Africa, 
include: (i)  increased exposure to climate change risk in Africa2526,(ii) inadequate capacity to assess risks, 
vulnerability, and impacts, and to integrate into investment strategy, (iii) absence of mobilization of capital 
to fund adaptation, and (iv) absence of construction codes, standards, and metrics for climate risks 
integration in infrastructure design and financing. Therefore, the imperative to address these barriers to 
ensure that current and future infrastructure are safeguarded from climate risks including socioeconomic 
an environmental impact. Otherwise, failure to adapt to climate change by considering climate risks in the 
design, construction, and maintenance of infrastructure assets will run the risks to become stranded and 
unable to recover their investment cost, leading to a huge cost implication for owners and operators and 
increase the exposure and vulnerability of people.  
 
ICRF’ contributions and alignment with national and regional priorities: ICRF is a first attempt to 
demonstrate that financing adaptation and resilience of infrastructures can deliver a strong return both by 
reducing costs from climate-related damage to the infrastructure itself and by avoiding pronounced

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
cumulative effects on the wider society. This programme will also support national and regional 
infrastructure master plans that are made resilient to climate impacts. This effort will complement existing 
initiatives, including the recent Africa Climate Resilient Investment Facility (AFRI-RES) set up by the African 
Development Bank (AfDB) in collaboration with the African Union Commission, the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and the World Bank including through the Global Facility for 
Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) to incorporate climate change into infrastructure asset 
management and develop the region's capacity to integrate climate change considerations into the planning 
and design of long-lived investments. Climate-resilient investment would reduce the impact of these climate 
hazards on the physical infrastructures.  
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus 
diagram) 
Theory of change (ToC): This programme  is designed to offer tailored financial products (concessional first 
loss equity), technical assistance funding to mainstream climate risk assessment in infrastructure 
investments and  incentivise the development of innovative parametric climate risk insurance solutions to 
climate-resilient infrastructure while reducing the impact of climate hazards on the physical infrastructures 
in the selected African States. The AFC is committed to addressing these risks and improving infrastructure 
resilience to climate change in Africa by attracting private sector investments with a particular interest in 
institutional investors. This proposal seeks to establish the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF), 
the first effort to mobilize private capital in climate resilient infrastructure (CRI) in Africa. In addition to AFC’ 
investment at the fund level, ICRF will also co-finance with AFC at the project level. ICRF will ensure 
systematic integration of climate risks in infrastructure planning, design, location, construction, financing, 
and operation. The programme will provide technical support to assess the potential future climate impact 
on any infrastructure at the project level.  
 
On best effort, AFC will work with other partners to pilot and create market for a parametric insurance 
scheme as a complementary instrument for climate resilient infrastructure in Africa.  Climate risk insurance 
will shift the paradigm for investments in the targeted countries based on the integration of science-based 
data, metrics and standards, as well as adequate legal frameworks. Also, the introduction of new 
construction codes for climate resilience infrastructure assets will have a transformational impact in 
establishing CRI as a new distinctive asset class. 
 
The transformative approach of the programme is the introduction of tailor-made capital structures that 
allow private investors to incorporate climatic risk data into the design and construction of the new and 
existing climate-resilient infrastructure Asset Classes (CRI Asset Classes) of the programme. The 
overarching objective of the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF or “the Fund”) is to support Africa 
climate resilient and sustainable development path by catalyzing blended finance at scale towards 
evidence-based, climate-resilient infrastructure in Africa and ensuring that people in Africa will have access 
to these climate-resilient, reliable, and durable infrastructure assets. Investments in climate-proof 
infrastructure support the sustainable development of the Continent by ensuring that the people of Africa 
will have access to climate-resilient, reliable, and affordable infrastructure assets. Considering that financing 
the cost of resilience and adaptation measures in infrastructure projects bear typically no to minimum profit, 
ICR seeks to mobilize concessional capital to absorb the substantial increase in project costs on account 
of incorporating climate resilience. GCF’ concessional finance is perfectly suitable to finance project these 
additional costs attributable to building resilience in the targeted sectors : (1) Climate-resilient Transport 
and Logistics, (2) Climate-resilient Energy Systems, (3) Climate-resilient Economic zones, and (4)  
Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures.  
 
Since infrastructure benefits the public, principally the ultimate beneficiaries of the ICRF are the 
governments of the targeted countries and users of the resilient infrastructures, the sub-project sponsors 
and investors and those that employed in project sites. The positive investment environment to resilient 
infrastructure will ensure sustainable development. Immediate beneficiaries are the national or sub-national 
(as relevant) authorities controlling infrastructure procurement and project development. These

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
stakeholders will also benefit from improved conditions and enabling environment that can attract long-term 
and stable green investments. The positive Climate and SDG impacts will link to and directly support host 
country Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
amplifying impact beyond the projects’ close location. Other direct beneficiaries include the project 
developers (primarily private sector entities, thus encouraging and empowering local developers) in terms 
of finance and technical support to advance sustainable, green infrastructure projects.  
 
This project will have a significant climate change adaptation impact, both directly through the provision of 
concessional pilot climate-resilient infrastructure and indirectly and structurally through the mainstreaming 
of climate change adaptation into ICRF. This project will contribute to SDG goals 6-9, 11, and 13. And by 
promoting climate-resilient infrastructure, the ICRF will play a key role in strengthening economic 
development through ICRF infrastructure investments, increased productivity of climate-resilient assets and 
job creation, contributing to the development of national economies. Social sustainability will be achieved 
by increased safety through resilient infrastructure assets, access to education by offering resilient road 
network, and deploying telecommunication and digital infrastructure network, as well as increased energy 
security. As environmental considerations are at the core of ICRF approach, the programme will set a clear 
economic case for promoting environmental principles in infrastructure investment, promote quality and 
safety. The Environmental and social management system for ICRF is presented in Annex 6. 
 
Anchor funding from the GCF will unlock, private investors (pension funds, insurance companies, family 
offices, private banks, philanthropies, and other institutional investors) which are willing to invest in resilient 
projects including in infrastructure but do not have access to attractive investment vehicles to invest at both 
the national and regional levels.  
 
A key factor affecting private investors’ decision to invest in climate-resilient infrastructure is bankability that 
require acceptable risk exposure, future cash flow to make it attractive. One key barrier that may constrain 
or hamper the bankability of climate resilient infrastructure is the risk adjusted returned. Climate resilient 
infrastructure investments present the profile of higher risks projects for lower return due to the need to 
invest in incremental cost. Yet, many of the benefits of investing in infrastructure may be hard to monetize, 
particularly for protective infrastructure such as flood defences. In addition, many investors do not have 
allocation for this type of resilient infrastructure investment as these are not yet considered as an asset 
class. However, growing examples in other markets (not Africa) show how blended finance and other 
instruments and mechanisms are being implemented to translate the potential benefits of climate-resilient 
infrastructure into adequate revenue streams with an optimal risk-sharing allocation in combination with  
efficient resource use to ensure bankability for suitable projects. Learning from these models, ICRF is 
designed to overcome financial, technical, and regulatory barriers to investing in infrastructure. (See section 
D.4 on detailed barrier analysis). 
 
Goal statement / Impact: Paradigm shift 
The ICRF  is built on the premise that IF blended capital is mobilized at scale to de-risk and accelerate 
investments in climate resilient infrastructure (CRI), and climate risk assessments and regulatory 
frameworks for CRI are strengthened and mainstreamed THEN Africa will be on a climate resilient and 
sustainable development pathway BECAUSE vital infrastructure will be more resilient to climate hazards, 
and vulnerable people and communities will have improved access to these infrastructures for livelihoods 
and other social services. ICRF design structure encompasses three outcomes:  
 
Outcome 1 – Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the beneficiary 
African countries for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and able to withstand climate 
hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-resilient infrastructure 
services (all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports and logistics, special economic zones, 
telecommunication, and digital infrastructure services).

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
By providing anchor financing in the form of junior equity, the GCF contribution will allow ICRF to mobilize 
private capital at the fund level. The target size of the ICRF capital is up to USD 750 million, including USD 
240 million of concessional financing from the GCF, to be channeled by AFC through AFC Capital Partners 
(ACP). The ICRF has the mandate to only invest in CRI projects and programmes, including to a limited 
extent (25% maximum) to improving the quality of existing and building new roads, bridges, airports, 
railways, telecommunications, clean energy, ports, and logistics that exhibit vulnerability and risk to at least 
one main climatic driver. ICRF will contribute to climate resilience and sustainable development reaching 
50,365,031 direct beneficiaries and 144,115,769 indirect beneficiaries and making infrastructure assets 2 
billion USD worth more resilient to climate change.  
 
The core pillar of the ICRF will be to de-risk investments towards an emerging recognition of the needs for 
CRI Asset Classes while ensuring alignment with Paris Agreement. De-risking of investments will be 
achieved through a proper blended capital structure, designed to de-risk investors, and enhance bankability 
by covering the incremental cost of climate-resilient measures with GCF’s patient first loss equity capital. 
The ICRF will mobilize private capital at scale to accelerate investments in resilient infrastructure in the 
African targeted countries. 
 
The ICRF mission will be supported by the managing partner AFC Capital Partners in collaboration with 
designated climate technical firms for CRI investments, backed by the AFC’s strong track record to co-
invest / co-develop transformative infrastructure projects. 
 
Outcome 2 – Improved climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for CRI; improved 
capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa for infrastructure assets made resilient and able to withstand 
climate hazards, enabling improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-resilient 
infrastructure services. 
 
The programme will help to overcome the technical barriers by using the GCF Technical Assistance funding 
(TA) to create an enabling environment and scale up investments in CRI in Africa. The TA will address 
challenge of accessing and processing reliable data, strengthening climate risk assessments, knowledge, 
and capacity in countries around climate change to increase preparedness and risk management led by 
AFC in collaboration with ACP. This component of the programme will also support prioritisation and 
selection of optimal adaptation solutions for ICRF investments in CRI avoiding risk of maladaptation and 
ensuring state-of-the-art climate assessment and decision-making tools for CRI investments. The 
programme will achieve increasing longevity of infrastructure assets as compared to the sector average 
baseline achieved through resilience measures to the climate change physical risks.  
 
Outcome 3 – Strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk parametric insurance 
(CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI investments in Africa 
 
Outcome 3 will address regulatory barriers to ensure the programme’s paradigm shift affect in the 
beneficiaries’ countries and across Africa as a whole. The programme will help to adopt new climate-
resilient infrastructure asset classes, favorable investment policies and fiscal incentives on a country and 
regional level based on the regulatory gaps and the country priorities. Improving regulatory framework is a 
crucial milestone for attracting investments from the private sector in resilient infrastructure in the 
programme countries. In addition, AFC will support design and development of innovative products of CRPI 
tailored for Africa to transfer residual climate change risks and seek donors to sponsor CRPI for ICRF and 
other investments in critical infrastructure assets. This intervention will enable the development and 
implementation of tailored insurance products for physical climate risk for infrastructure in Africa. Such 
initiative will be supported by a USD 1 million GCF grant to AFC, which will contribute to designing tailored 
products for climate risk parametric insurance (CRPI) in Africa.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
ICRF investments support national climate priorities, in particular countries’ choices to prioritise Public-
Private-Partnership for infrastructure financing considering their restricted fiscal space. IRCF addresses 
both climate related and typical risks and barriers to infrastructure financing, with the later remaining valid 
for resilient infrastructure financing. 
 
Outcome 1 addresses Barrier 1 - financial: limited capital flows to infrastructure investments in Africa due 
to investors’ perception of a high-risk (risk allocation and financial instruments mismatch, low return on 
investment (ROI) of climate-proof assets due to incremental cost, limited benefit from climate risk insurance, 
low appetite from private sector).   
 
Outcomes 2 and 3 will be achieved through activities for enabling environment to ensure sustainability and 
scalability of the ICRF in the programme countries and potentially expanding knowledge sharing at a 
regional and global scale, which will help to overcome barriers 2 and 3:  
 
Barrier 2 - technical: absence of site-specific infrastructure climate assessment methodology (lack of data, 
methodology and technical skills for infrastructure; absence of standards and metrics on climate-resilient 
infrastructure; no technical assistance for projects design and implementation). 
 
Barrier 3 - regulatory: acceleration required for adaptation investments through regulatory incentives (gaps 
in the regulatory framework for infrastructure investments; lack of fiscal incentives; adequate policies are 
missing at a national and regional level). Outcome 2 will be achieved through interventions for strengthening 
the regulatory framework for CRI in the region and overcoming the barriers. 
 
The ICRF programme has a country specific approach in addressing risks and barriers for infrastructure 
development. The risks and barriers analysis (see the Table B.2a.1) is developed in support of the 
programme activities and is an integral part of the ICRF Country Climate Assessments and Investment 
Decision Making Process (Annex 23b). A country centered approach has been incorporated in the feasibility 
study - physical climate risk assessment with country specific climate change hazards, across infrastructure 
assets (Annex 2), creating country-specific risks and barriers overview proactively for infrastructure 
investments allows meeting country’s needs and priorities and streamlining projects eligibility for ICRF 
investments.       
 
Outcomes 2 and 3 will be implemented with the grant support of USD 11 million from GCF. AFC will procure 
and engage designated climate analytics and technical engineering firms, as well as legal / policymaking 
firms for the delivery of technical assistance services on a competitive basis in accordance with the AFC’s 
procurement policy.  
 
ICRF programme will have a demonstrative effect of the investment case and long-term viability of 
integrating climate resilience in infrastructure projects. Therefore, the Fund will seek exit from the projects 
as GCF de-risking at the fund level will no longer be required. The investors would be more comfortable 
deploying capital in Africa at scale for this new climate resilient infrastructure asset class as a proof of the 
successful completion of the programme.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
Theory of change diagram:  
 
 
Assumptions 
ICRF is designed based on the assumptions that:  
• 
Countries are willing to participate in the CRI programme for climate risk preparedness and climate risk 
transfer which can be translated into a complete regulatory framework, and fiscal incentives. All NOLs 
will be secured before the Board review. 
• 
Ability and willingness of the governments to provide data / support for parametric insurance.   
• 
Infrastructure stakeholders support transparency and make infrastructure climate risk disclosure 
information available.  
• 
Investors have an appetite to invest in CRI in Africa but require de-risking financial instruments to provide 
sufficient investments.  
• 
The demonstration effect is sufficient to attract private sector investments to secure longer term viability. 
Governments will set aside adequate funding for infrastructure O&M.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
GCF results areas 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry 
and land 
use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communitie
s 
ARA 2 
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructu
re and built 
environme
nt 
ARA 4 
Ecosystem
s and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1: 
Blended 
finance is 
mobilized at 
scale to 
accelerate 
CRI 
investments 
in the 
beneficiary 
African 
countries 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 2: 
Improved 
climate risk 
assessment
s and 
adaptation 
solutions for 
CRI; 
improved 
capacity for 
scaling up 
CRI in Africa 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 3: 
Strengthene
d regulatory 
framework 
and 
innovative 
climate risk 
parametric 
insurance 
(CRPI) is 
mainstream
ed for the 
long-term 
viability of 
CRI 
investments 
in Africa 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 4 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome ... 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome ... 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-
benefit to the corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environme
ntal 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
ICRF 
infrastructure 
investment, 
increased 
productivity of 
climate 
resilient 
assets and job 
creation 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Increased 
safety of 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
through 
resilient 
infrastructure 
assets 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
GHG 
emission 
reduction 
through clean 
technologies 
and nature-
based 
solutions in 
CRI 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Nature-based 
solutions 
integrated as 
part of 
resilience 
measures 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
B.3. Project/program description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Project/program description  
 
The programme’s main objective is to increase climate resilience in African infrastructure and enhance the 
livelihoods of the population by offering reliable, safe and affordable climate-resilient infrastructure assets. 
The programme will deliver its objectives through systematic integration of climate risk management into 
design and valuation of infrastructure in nineteen (19) countries in the sub-Sahara area. The programme 
seeks to achieve this goal by raising US$ 750 million that will enable the financing of portfolio companies, 
projects, and platforms across four target sectors: (1) Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics (Ports, 
Roads, Bridges, Railways, Airports etc.), 2) Climate-resilient Energy Systems, 3) Climate-resilient 
Economic zones, 4) Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures. 
 
B3.1 Programme Outcomes, Outputs and Activities 
To address the averseness of private investors to finance the incremental cost associated with adaptation 
measures required to make infrastructure resilient due to their low or no return potential, the ICRF will be 
structured as a blended finance vehicle with a junior and senior tranche (see Figure B3.1). Infrastructure 
investment has the potential to generate long-term benefits to society in terms of inclusive economic growth

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
27 https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf-b29-12.pdf 
and improvements to safety and wellbeing. Such investment could contribute immensely to key policy 
priorities, such as making societies more resilient, addressing disparities across regions and cities, and 
promoting sustainable development. ICRF also seeks to enable these countries to adopt a climate resilient 
pathways for infrastructure development by promoting, upgrading, and mainstreaming climate risk 
management measures in infrastructure while delivering helping 50 million direct beneficiaries and 144 
million indirect beneficiaries of the programme countries to adapt to the adverse impact of climate change 
(Annex 22 includes detailed breakdown of the indicative beneficiaries – populations with improved access 
to year-round to climate-resilient all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports, telecommunication, digital 
infrastructure services, and other programme infrastructure assets). 
 
To achieve the expected objectives, the programme is divided into three mutually reinforcing and interlinked 
components that contribute to the following three outcomes: 
 
• 
Outcome 1 - Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the 
beneficiary African countries for infrastructure assets made resilient and able to withstand 
climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-
resilient infrastructure services from all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports and logistics, 
special economic zones, telecommunication, and digital infrastructure services); 
 
• 
Outcome 2 - Improved climate risk assessment and adaptation solutions for CRI; improved 
capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and 
able to withstand climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities 
to climate-resilient infrastructure services;  
 
• 
Outcome 3 - Strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk parametric 
insurance (CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI investments in Africa. 
 
Outcome 1 - Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the beneficiary 
African countries for infrastructure assets made resilient and able to withstand climate hazards and for 
improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-resilient infrastructure services. 
 
Equity investment into ICRF: the objective is to leverage private and institutional capital at the fund level 
for further investments into climate resilient infrastructure projects and programs in Africa. The key output 
of the programme is long-term investment of equity capital in CRI Asset Classes (1. Climate-resilient 
Transport and Logistics, 2. Climate-resilient Energy Systems, 3. Climate-resilient Economic zones, and 4. 
Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures) with strong climate impact and innovation 
potential. These sectors correspond to GCF result areas for adaptation – increased resilience27:  
 
§ 
ARA1 - Most vulnerable people and communities  
§ 
ARA 3 - Infrastructure and built environment.  
 
Output 1.1 - ICRF is fully operational and raised capital at the fund level 
1.1.1: Implement the legal structure of, and form, the ICRF and related entities. Consummate first 
closing with the GCF. 
 
1.1.1.1: Procure international and local legal services to prepare underlying documentation – ACP, in 
collaboration with AFC, will launch an RFP process. It is expected that the international counsel will be 
the primary outside counsel for structuring the ICRF and preparing the related documentation. 
 
1.1.1.2: Implement legal structure for the ICRF and related entities – See Section B.4 of this Funding 
Proposal for a description of the contemplated legal structure for the ICRF subject to legal and tax due 
diligence;

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
1.1.1.3: Finalize the Term Sheet, draft formation documents and related Agreements for ICRF entities 
–  See Section B.4 of this Funding Proposal for a description of the contemplated legal structure for the 
ICRF subject to legal and tax due diligence; 
 
1.1.1.4: Consummate Initial Closing of the ICRF with GCF as anchor investor –  at the initial closing of 
the ICRF, the GCF (via AFC as described in Section B.4 below) will subscribe for the Junior Interests 
(as described below) in an amount equal to US$240 million pursuant to the terms of a Subscription 
Agreement to be entered into between the ICRF and AFC (acting on the behalf of the GCF). Also at the 
initial closing, the Accredited Entity or one or more of its affiliates will also subscribe for the Senior 
Interests (as described below) in an amount equal to US$50 million pursuant to the terms of a 
Subscription Agreement to be entered into between the ICRF and AFC (see Implementation 
Agreements).  
 
      1.1.2: Fundraise US$510 million of additional capital for the Junior Interest and Senior Interest. 
 
1.1.2.1: Prepare and adjust fundraising and marketing materials; ACP has extensive fundraising 
experience and may engage one or more third party consultants to assist in the fundraise. 
 
1.1.2.2: Draft Private Placement Memorandum and other fundraising and marketing materials. Continue 
to market the ICRF to other investors. The Private Placement Memorandum (PPM) and other 
fundraising and marketing materials will be prepared by ACP with the assistance of external qualified 
international and local counsels; the selected external counsels with review the PPM and other 
fundraising and marketing materials from a legal perspective (disclaimer, disclosure requirements, risks 
factors, etc.) 
 
1.1.2.3: Negotiate with potential investors and close on additional commitments to the ICRF – It is 
expected that the ICRF would hold several closings over the course of up to 24 months after the initial 
closing with GCF and AFC. 
 
Capital Structure of ICRF:  The capital of the ICRF will be appropriately divided into two tranches so as to 
attract multiple investor classes. 
 
“Tier 1 Interest” or “Junior Interest” will hold a junior equity position in the structure of the ICRF, which 
will absorb a higher portion of risk throughout the ICRF, acting as the principal enabler to attract commercial 
capital into the structure – by providing a ‘first loss’ buffer to the ICRF; Tier 1 Interests are proposed to be 
issued to AFC (in the name and on behalf of the GCF) against its commitment to ICRF. 
 
“Tier 2 Interest” or “Senior Interest” will rank in a senior equity position; Investors in the Tier 2 Interest 
will benefit from first loss capital protection provided by Investors in the Tier 1 Interest. The Tier 2 Interest 
shall target investors with appetite for commercial risk adjusted returns, which would not have participated 
in the Fund without capital protection offered by GCF. Tier 2 Interest will be issued to AFC and other 
investors against capital commitments to the ICRF.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
Figure B3.1: Capital structure: Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)  
 
 
Note: i) the SPV or Platform companies are the selected sub-projects in line with the eligibility criteria. There 
are no sub-funds involved. ii)  AFC, on behalf of GCF, will invest 240M in Tier 1 class units.  
  
 
Alignment of Interest: 
 
§ 
GCF investment is required to provide junior equity for the Tier 1 capital tranche to support the 
mobilization of commercial capital in the senior equity tranche (Tier 2 tranche). ‘Commercial Capital’ is 
defined as any sources of capital that mandate to invest on a commercial basis, including pension funds, 
insurance companies, sovereign wealth funds, DFIs or Foundations. Any additional concessional funds 
raised from other investors will be invested in Tier 1 junior equity tranche.  
 
§ 
There is a strong alignment between AFC and GCF in this innovative fund structure. AFC is taking a 
double risk exposure as ICRF is a co-investment fund: i) AFC will directly invest in each sub-projects 
(this portion of AFC parallel investment does not benefit from GCF first loss), and ii) in addition, AFC 
will invest in the senior equity tranche of the ICRF Fund as a limited partner. GCF has unique 
additionality as the anchor investor in Tier 1 junior equity tranche, which is crucial to mobilize funding at 
scale for climate-resilient infrastructure investments in Africa. 
 
Output 1.2: Co-investments - ICRF investments in sub-projects  
 
1.2.1: Deal origination, due diligence and execution of investments in sub-projects 
 
§ 
The ICRF’s investments in sub-projects will be selected and managed by ACP in cooperation 
with AFC as follow: 
o It is expected that AFC and ACP will enter into one or several support services agreement(s) 
(the “Support Services Agreement(s)”). Under the Support Services Agreement(s), AFC will 
provide to ACP (i) administrative and technical services as well as (i) investment operations 
services, including support in investment sourcing, processing, and portfolio management 
services. This ensures access to AFC’s sector and country expertise and its specialists in 
environmental, social and governance matters.

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
o It is also expected that AFC and the ICRF (represented by the General Partner) will enter into 
a co-investment agreement (the “Co-Investment Agreement”) which will define the allocation 
of investment opportunities between AFC and the ICRF, thereby ensuring access to AFC’s 
pipeline that meets the investment criteria of ICRF. Under the Co-Investment Agreement, the 
ICRF will have the option (not the obligation) to co-invest alongside AFC. The decision of the 
ICRF to investment in an opportunity would be made independently by the Investment 
Committee of the ICRF. 
 
§ 
Deal Screening:  ACP will test the characteristics of originated projects against the investment 
strategy and restrictions of ICRF and the eligibility criteria according to the ICRF Country Climate 
Assessments and Investment Decision Making Process (see Annex 21 Operations Manual and 
Climate Risk Mapping Annex 2b) as agreed with GCF and perform preliminary assessment of the 
attractiveness of the investment opportunity. Climate risk assessments and environmental and 
social considerations are an integral part of this process. 
 
§ 
Project Development is core to ICRF investment thesis: ACP will work closely with AFC in the 
development phase of the sub-projects to integrate climate resilience measures in the design, 
development, construction, and operation of the infrastructure investments considered by the ICRF. 
The lack of bankable projects and limited ﬁnancing are key bottlenecks to infrastructure 
development on the continent. Project development is a source of project pipeline for ICRF and 
creates a unique opportunity to develop well-built climate-resilient infrastructure across Africa. 
Climate resilience measures are integrated in the project design and development phase with 
specific construction guidelines to mitigate potential climate risks.  
 
§ 
Deal Appraisal: Each of AFC and ACP will apply its investment appraisal, due diligence and 
approval procedures in appraising potential Fund Investments, and only those sub-projects qualified 
under both the AFC’s and ACP internal criteria will be eligible for investment under the framework. 
The ACP investment process is designed with four core objectives in mind.  
 
These are: (i) to leverage AFC’s investment expertise- as the premier sustainable infrastructure 
solutions provider, market knowledge and understanding of climate and development impact 
investing without duplicating AFC’s resources, and investment and portfolio operations/ supervision 
process; (ii) to maintain independence of investment decision-making on behalf of the ACP-
managed fund, the ICRF; (iii) to ensure that investments are structured and negotiated in a way that 
meets the requirements of the ICRF and the GCF; and (iv) to make the processing of investments 
as streamlined and efficient as possible for all parties involved. ACP investment teams will work 
closely with AFC colleagues to identify, appraise, structure, and negotiate transactions and actively 
manage the resulting portfolios for the ICRF. ACP will operate from AFC headquarter in Lagos 
(Nigeria). In partnership with AFC under the Support Services Agreement(s) and the Co-Investment 
Agreement mentioned above, the ACP team will be responsible for deal origination, due 
diligence and execution, and operational management and exit of ICRF portfolio companies. 
The ACP Teams consist of staff with complementary and specific skills and experience required, 
which includes the following: sourcing expertise, deal execution experience, climate expertise, fund 
mobilization expertise, operational asset management experience, proven buy-and build track 
record in infrastructure sector, exit know-how, industry knowledge and environmental and social 
expertise.  
 
As mentioned above, the ACP team in cooperation with AFC will conduct comprehensive due 
diligence of prospective investments. The due diligence evaluation typically consists of multiple in-
person meetings, teleconferences, and written questionnaires with members of the potential 
investment’s management. A financial model is typically built using management’s projections and 
key assumptions are subjected to sensitivity analysis (See 3 examples in Annex 3b integrating 
effects of climate risks). Assuming the ACP team wishes to proceed, the ICRF will typically enter 
into a non-binding term sheet with the target company/project that outlines the key terms on which 
the ICRF would be willing to make an investment. Throughout the initial evaluation process, the

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
ACP team is in frequent communication with AFC co-investment team and the Investment 
Committee to gauge overall interest in the opportunity and discuss the opportunities and risks 
associated with the potential investment.   
 
After a term sheet is executed, the ACP team in cooperation with AFC will conduct a full due 
diligence review of the opportunity, including by engaging third-party advisors as appropriate, 
including legal, tax, accounting and regulatory, as needed. The AFC and the ACP teams will also 
conduct due diligence on ESG risks and opportunities in accordance with applicable AFC’s ESG 
policies. Depending on the circumstances, technical consultants may be engaged for additional 
expertise. 
 
§ 
The ACP team will prepare an investment memo for formal presentation and review by the 
Investment Committee, which summarizes the investment opportunity and key deal terms. The 
Investment Committee will then make a formal determination whether or not to proceed with the 
transaction. Once the Investment Committee has determined to proceed with the transaction, any 
material changes relating to the transaction will need to be further approved by the Investment 
Committee.  
 
Following approval of the Investment Committee, the ACP team, with the assistance of external 
counsels, will prepare and negotiate final investment agreements. 
 
1.2.2: Portfolio management  
 
Ö 
As from the investment, AFC and the ACP team will be involved with the growth and development 
of the portfolio companies. Most often, this is accomplished through one or more seats on a 
company’s board of directors or similar governing body. In situations where AFC and the ICRF holds 
a minority interest, the team will negotiate appropriate contractual rights and minority protections. 
The AFC/ACP teams will also perform regular review of the performance of the investments. 
 
1.2.3: Reporting to investors and GCF 
 
Ö 
Definitive reporting requirements will be specified in the ICRF documentation. It is expected that 
investors would receive unaudited financial information on a frequency to be agreed, audited year-
end financial statements, and a narrative update on each portfolio company on a frequency to be 
agreed. 
Ö 
Once received, any such document would be remitted to the GCF by AFC in its role as the 
Accredited Entity. 
 
1.2.4: Exit assets, return capital plus profit to investors, close out the ICRF 
 
Ö 
AFC, by virtue of having completed many transactions and full exits over the last 15 years, maintains 
privileged relationships with a number of the leading advisors that operate in Africa. The ICRF is 
expected to be able to leverage these relationships along with AFC’s other contacts to consider the 
full range of exit options even prior to formally mandating advisors. AFC’s network allows AFC to 
assess the depth of strategic investor interest for key assets and also to follow the evolution of key 
equity capital markets both in Africa and internationally. As part of the portfolio review process, the 
Investment Committee will review the proposed exit strategies, timing and exit projections on a 
quarterly basis. Discussions of proposed exit options will become more detailed in the 12-18 months 
before the proposed exit timing, and key decisions about when to launch an exit, the appointment 
of advisors etc. will be approved by the Investment Committee. 
 
Ö 
It is expected that the significant majority of exit transactions will consist of a sale for cash proceeds 
which are distributed by the ICRF to its investors (including AFC on behalf of the GCF), subject to 
reserves for expenses and contingent liabilities.

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
Ö 
Once all investments have been disposed, the ICRF would be liquidated.  
 
 
Outcome 2 - Improved climate risk assessment and adaptation solutions for CRI and improved 
capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and able to 
withstand climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-
resilient infrastructure services (all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports and logistics, special 
economic zones, telecommunication, and digital infrastructure services). 
 
AFC will use GCF Technical Assistance funding (TA), in collaboration with ACP to strengthen climate risk 
assessments and adaptation solutions for ICRF investments in CRI Asset Classes. The TA will be also 
used for creating enabling environment for scaling up CRI in Africa caused by the lack of reliable data, 
knowledge, and capacity in countries around climate change in order to increase preparedness and risk 
management. The ICRF programme will identify and bridge gaps in the technical capacity and infrastructure 
for collecting, processing, and disseminating data on climate hazards and climate change, and its impact 
on infrastructure in the participating countries. The programme will respond to such gaps by sharing 
knowledge captured from ICRF investments in CRI Asset Classes and provide a roadmap for CRI 
investments on the Continent through public accessible sources and trainings for public and private sector 
participants.  
 
Output 2.1 - Strengthened climate risk assessment and adaptation solutions for ICRF investments 
in CRI  
2.1.1 Procurement of technical firms for detailed climate risk assessments, engineering 
assessments of climate adaptation solutions for each ICRF projects 
2.1.2 Climate risk assessment of sub-projects pipeline for ICRF investments  
2.1.3 Enhancing climate adaptation measures in ICRF’s investments with the integration of climate 
resilience options 
2.1.4 Support to EPCs and project sponsors in the tender process of specialized firms/consultants 
to support the implementation of adaptation measures to enhance the climate resilience of the 
sub-projects 
2.1.5 Overseeing construction and implementation of ICRF projects to ensure adaptation solutions 
are deployed and implemented (EPC Management of the adaptation elements) 
2.1.6 Refinement and continuous development of ICRF Climate Assessment Methodology and 
Approach  
 
Output 2.2 - Improved capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa 
2.2.1 Capacity building events for ICRF programme  
Trainings will include capacity building activities on detailed climate risk assessment, adaptation 
solutions for CRI Asset Classes proponents, and building capacity and greater technical 
knowledge for national authorities and Union groups representing infrastructure users  on climate 
change disaster risk prevention and management in subproject location (for vulnerable people 
safety and climate resilience). 
2.2.2 Lessons learned are captured from ICRF CRI investments and roadmap is created for 
replication across the Continent 
2.2.3 Issue publication - knowledge sharing about de-risking methodologies for CRI Asset Classes 
based on ICRF programme. 
 
Outcome 3 - Strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk parametric insurance 
(CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI investments in Africa 
The success of the programme in terms of its paradigm shift potential will partially depend on the 
programme’s ability to contribute to favorable policy frameworks in targeted sectors and creating 
new climate-resilient infrastructure asset classes (CRI Asset Classes): 
1) Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics 
2) Climate-resilient Energy Systems

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
3) Climate-resilient Economic zones 
4) Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures. 
 
To this end, a specific TA amount is set-aside to support ICRF’s efforts in policy dialogue and regulatory 
framework development. 
 
The programme will promote stakeholder engagement and public/private sector dialogue that enable 
development of markets that ICRF portfolio companies operate in. The eligible expenditures include but 
are not limited to creating or contributing to working groups, financing roundtables and workshop 
discussions for stakeholder engagement, producing policy papers or regulatory frameworks. 
The ICRF programme will also advocate to achieve policy change. The eligible expenditure under this 
activity includes but are not limited to analysis of strengths and weaknesses of existing policies, holding 
policy advocacy campaigns, producing policy papers and/or white papers for suggested changes to 
regulatory frameworks for CRI Asset Classes. 
 
Output 3.1 - Standards and construction codes are enacted and applied 
3.1.1 Procure consortium of legal, policymaking, and climate expert firms for improving regulatory 
framework for CRI, CRPI, and capacity building in the programme countries 
3.1.2 Capacity building and engagement with key proponents, public and private sector 
participants, civil societies to identify the regulatory gaps for CRI investments 
3.1.3 Create a work group from the consortium of legal and policymaking firms for new CRI Asset 
Classes and construction codes implementation 
3.1.4 Create and share recommendation reports for improving regulatory framework for CRI Asset 
Classes per country 
3.1.5 Support regulatory, standards and policy making process for CRI Asset Classes to 
implement the recommendations according to each country needs 
3.1.6 Report on regulatory framework support for CRI Asset Classes 
3.1.7 Issue publication - knowledge sharing about lessons learned and recommendations on 
strengthening regulatory framework for CRI Asset Classes in the programme countries 
 
Output 3.2 - Strengthening fiscal incentives for CRI are supported with the objective to mobilize 
private investments in CRI through reduced or waived tax and customs duties, tax holidays, subsidies etc. 
as per the country priorities and needs: 
 
3.2.1 Procure fiscal regulatory framework and policymaking firms for promoting fiscal incentives for 
CRI Asset Classes in the programme countries 
3.2.2 Capacity building and engagement with key proponents, public and private sector 
participants, civil societies 
3.2.3 Create and share recommendation reports for improving fiscal policy for CRI Asset Classes 
3.2.4 Support legal regulatory and policy making process to implement the recommendations on 
fiscal policy according to each Country needs 
 
Output 3.3 - Innovative CRPI is designed for the long-term viability of infrastructure investments in 
Africa 
3.3.1 Feasibility study on the development of CRPI in Africa;  
3.3.2 CRPI design and development for CRI in Africa, stakeholder engagements;  
3.3.3 Engagement with donors to sponsor CRPI for ICRF projects and others 
3.3.4 Support capacity building activities (training) for key stakeholders of CRPI 
 
Parametric climate risk insurance for infrastructure is relatively new in Africa. On the other hand, large 
global insurers are already offering well developed PCRI products in developed markets - therefore there 
is an opportunity to replicate, develop and apply these parametric risk insurance products in Africa.

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
With support of GCF technical assistance funding (US$ 1 Million), AFC will support the design and 
development of parametric climate risk insurance products for the infrastructure sector in Africa. AFC will 
undertake i) a feasibility study on the development of parametric climate risk insurance products for climate 
resilient infrastructure, ii) stakeholder engagements with key industry players including insurance 
companies, private sector actors, government agencies in target countries, investors, industry groups such 
as the Insurance Development Forum and the Coalition for Climate Resilient Investments (CCRI), and iii) 
support capacity building activities (training) for key stakeholders in target countries and organize events to 
raise awareness on climate-risk parametric insurance (CRPI), and iv) engage other donors to mobilize 
funding on best effort basis to implement innovative and transformational parametric risk insurance 
solutions as part of the ICRF programme, and provide a strong demonstration effect with paradigm shift 
potential.  
 
Stakeholder Engagement: As a member of the Coalition for Climate Resilient Investment, and a member 
of the Insurance Development Forum (IDF), AFC has engaged several industry players who have 
expressed a strong commitment in building a market for climate resilient infrastructure. The IDF is a 
public/private partnership led by the insurance industry and supported by international organizations. The 
IDF was first announced at the United Nations Conference of the Parties (COP21) Paris Climate summit in 
2015 and was officially launched by leaders of the United Nations, the World Bank and the insurance 
industry in 2016. The IDF is on a mission to optimise and extend the use of insurance and its related risk 
management capabilities to build greater resilience and protection for people, communities, businesses, 
and public institutions that are vulnerable to disasters and their associated economic shocks. 
 
Efforts to improve climate resilience and address the protection gap have historically been primarily driven 
by a handful of private/public stakeholders. Given the scale, scope and complexity of the resilience and 
protection gap challenge, a coordinated and collaborative approach bringing together the insurance industry 
and all relevant stakeholders, both public and private, is critical to meeting the needs of climate-vulnerable 
people. Addressing the low level of insurance penetration in developing countries has become more urgent 
considering the growing risks related to climate change in Africa, the most vulnerable continent to climate 
change. Building the capacity of key stakeholders in target countries in Africa is essential. 
 
Climate Resilient Infrastructure: The Role of Insurance in Climate Risk Management  
The defining characteristic of climate-resilient infrastructure is that it is planned, designed, built, and 
operated in a way that anticipates, prepares for, and adapts to changing climate conditions. It can also 
withstand, respond to, and recover rapidly from disruptions caused by these climate conditions. Climate-
resilient infrastructure reduces, but may not fully eliminate, the risk of climate-related disruptions. According 
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Adaptation does not 
prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching soft and hard limits. 
With increasing global warming, losses and damages increase and become increasingly difficult to avoid, 
while strongly concentrated among the poorest vulnerable populations. Climate risks are evolving and 
cannot be forecasted with full precision, there are residual risks which adaptation may not fully address.  
 
Need for Insurance: The use of insurance as a risk transfer mechanism can be instrumental to protect 
infrastructure assets against future risks due to climate change. The ICRF programme aims to support the 
design and implementation of a parametric climate risk insurance cover as a risk transfer mechanism to 
climate-proof and further enhance the resilience of infrastructure investments. The long-term objective is to 
present demonstration and showcase smart uses of insurance-related schemes for climate risk-prone 
infrastructure assets in Africa that would progressively stimulate the creation of effective climate risk 
insurance markets and set the foundation for a systemic market transformation as owners and operators of 
infrastructure assets continue to face multiple challenges posed by climate change.  
 
Parametric Climate Risk Insurance: The term parametric insurance describes a type of insurance contract 
that insures a policyholder against the occurrence of a specific climate related events (e.g., excessive 
rainfall, drought, cyclone intensity, flood height, wind speed) by paying a set amount based on the 
magnitude of the event as agreed in the insurance policy. The payouts would support the sub-projects by

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
i) compensating financial losses due to disruptions caused by the specific climate events such as severe 
disruptions from extreme weather events (e.g., damages arising from hurricanes, typhoons, coastal 
flooding, sea level rise, heat waves, heavy precipitations) and/or disruptions resulting from chronic rise in 
temperature; and ii) support recovery measures and resilience response.  
 
  Figure B.3.3: Advantages of Parametric Insurance: Certainty, Transparency, and Speed 
 
 
B3.2 Guiding principles on climate resilience integration in ICRF investment process 
 
During project development and preparation, ICRF will work with relevant national government and the 
project sponsors to integrate climate resilience into the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) project framework.  
 
● Project Identification Phase: Infrastructure needs to be resilient to climate impacts and to help build the 
resilience of the communities it services. The project identification phase is the critical point in which the 
public partner can prioritise projects that build resilience through infrastructure. The public partner gains 
an understanding of the key climate hazards relevant to the project by conducting a high-level climate 
risk screening.  
 
● Project Appraisal Phase: During the project appraisal phase the public partner integrates principles 
around decision-making under uncertainty. In this phase, practitioners will assess the key climate 
hazards, exposure, and vulnerabilities of infrastructure assets and systems. Resilience options to 
mitigate and adapt to the climate risks, including Nature-based Solutions, will be identified and 
appraised to assess their robustness under different future climate scenarios. The preferred resilience 
option can either be indicated by the public partner in the tender documents or left to the private partner 
to propose their preferred solution. The vital input from the project appraisal would provide the key inputs 
to structuring a climate resilient bankable PPP.  
 
● Tender and Award Phase: A competent private party consortium with climate resilience as a core 
competency is selected. Market sounding and dialogue processes are considered at this stage to allow 
for the public and prospective private partners to discuss and refine the Request for Proposal (RFP) 
and documents to ensure the balance in risk allocation. Climate risk allocation must ensure that risks 
and uncertainties are explicitly stated and that there is a clear boundary for extreme climate events to 
constitute force majeure.  
 
● Contract Management Phase: Contract management plays a key role in monitoring the achievement of 
performance requirements and situations of high climate risk. Proactive engagement by the parties can

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
help to deal with changes and ensure that best practices in climate resilience are incorporated in 
operations and maintenance. Monitoring and reporting will be used to inform future projects and 
optimize resilience benefits. 
 
Figure B.3.4 Resilience intervention points within the PPP project framework 
 
 
 
Traditional infrastructure providers, such as governments and state-owned utility service providers, are 
under financial pressure as the demand for public infrastructure exceeds available public finance. Budgets 
are strained and will likely remain constrained. Governments are increasingly looking to private investment 
to address and bring efficiencies to this shortfall of public finance. PPPs and private financing offer a strong 
incentive mechanism for optimizing capital and operational investments, reinforced by the lenders’ 
oversight. PPPs allow for incentives from lenders, project owners and the government to be aligned around 
efficiency. The use of the PPP model will integrate best practices of climate resilience into infrastructure 
investment, design, operations, and maintenance. This includes embedding climate resilience into PPP 
contracts through resilient design and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), as well as setting higher 
resilience benchmarks into O&M standards and leveraging data to monitor resilience options and maximize 
benefits of current and future projects. Building resilience will be key to make PPPs bankable and allow 
them to tap into a growing market of climate finance. 
 
Figure B3.5: Typical PPP structure

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
Integrating Climate Risk Management within the ICRF Investment Process 
Climate resilience is embedded in ICRF investment process. ACP has established a tailored co-investment 
approach to leverage the solid investment track record of its parent, Africa Finance Corporation. ACP takes 
an efficient, disciplined, and proactive approach to all aspects of the investment process, with a focus on 
efficient deal execution, high-quality due diligence, expert deal structuring, climate resilience integration, 
balanced risk-adjusted return, rigorous portfolio management and exit management.  
The climate risk management process of ICRF is designed to fully integrate key stages of the ICRF 
investment cycle. This process will help ensure that current and future climate risks are properly recognised 
and addressed, including the identification and integration of potential adaptation response measures to 
reduce and manage physical impacts of climate change. The outlined process provides a detailed 
assessment of climate risks and resilience/adaptation options, including quantification of their costs and 
benefits at the level of the asset owner and broader societal and system impacts.  
Figure B3.6a: The ICRF climate risk management process across the investment cycle

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
Integrating climate resilience into the Project lifecycle 
The Figure B3.6b below shows how climate resilience is integrated in the project life cycle (see the 
Operations Manual Annex 21 for more details). 
 
Key climate resilience analysis across the project life cycle.  
1. 
SA 
Sensitivity analysis 
2. 
EE 
Evaluation of Exposure 
3. 
VA 
Vulnerability Analysis 
4. 
RA 
Risk Assessment (Climate Risk Impact Assessment) 
5. 
IAO 
Identification of adaptation options 
6. 
AAO 
Appraisal of adaptation options 
7. 
IAAP Integration of adaptation action plan into the project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOPERS AIMS
PROCESS/ ANALYSIS
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SA
EE
VA
RA
IAO AAO IAAP
Business model development
Pre-feasibility study
Conceptual design
Site selection
Contract planning
Technology Selection
Cost estimating & financial / 
economic modeling
Feasibility study
ESIA scoping & baseline
Front end engineering design 
(FEED)
Cost estimating & financial / 
economic modeling
Full ESIA & ESAP
Detailed engineering 
Engineering, Procurement & 
Construction Management 
Asset management
Operations & maintenance
Decommission & 
manage liabilities
Decommissioning plan
Finalize scope & 
execution plan
Detail & construct 
asset
Operate, maintain 
& improve asset
LIFE- 
CYCLE 
STAGE
CLIMATE RESILIENCE ANALYSIS
Establish preliminary 
scope & business 
strategy
Establish 
development 
options & execution 
strategy
PLAN 
DECISION 
PROCEDUR
DECOMMIS
STRATEGY

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
B3.3 ICRF Climate Governance Framework 
The ICRF has a robust governance framework aligned with best international standards. Figure B3.6c 
reflects the three committees that constitute the direct governance body of the fund. 
 
Figure B3.6c ICRF Governance – Committees formulation 
 
 
Roles and Responsibilities 
 
i) 
The ICRF’s Climate Governance Committee (CGC)  
The CGC operating under AFC Capital Partners (ACP), will oversee the application of ACP's Framework 
for integrating climate resilience in each transaction, and ensure that each investment integrates a climate 
risk assessment and includes resilience measures for climate-proofing, and is aligned with ICRF investment 
and eligibility criteria. All investments considered by the ICRF fund must be endorsed by the climate 
governance committee form the climate lens perspective. The CGC will consist of various members with 
prior climate investment-related experiences.  
  
ii) 
Investment Committee  
• 
Reviews all investments with a focus on the quality of due diligence (financial and commercial terms, 
climate risks, adaptation and resilience measures, environmental and social risk, legal, etc.)  
• 
Ensure compliance with the Fund’s investment strategy and policies 
• 
Final Approval of all ICRF investments considering the primary due diligence undertaken by the 
ACP & AFC joint co-investment team and the recommendations of the climate governance 
committee. 
 
The members of the committee include various members with prior climate investment-related experiences 
to effectively fully their role as describe below.  
iii) 
Advisory Committee  
§ 
The Advisory Committee is an advisory and consultative function to AFC Capital Partners (ACP). 
The committee considers all matters involving conflicts of interest as presented by ACP to obtain 
the committee’s consent or in some cases, the consent of all investors. 
§ 
The Advisory Committee I expected to consist of members of core investors in the ICRF Fund.

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
28 https://www.eib.org/attachments/documents/mdb_idfc_adaptation_common_principles_en.pdf  
29 https://resilientinvestment.org | https://resilientinvestment.org/pcram/  
30 https://www.climatebonds.net/files/page/files/climate-resilience-principles-climate-bonds-initiative-20190917-
.pdf  
31 https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/GCA-Handbook-V2.0-13-September-2021-2.pdf  
32https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/documents/200309-
sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-taxonomy-annexes_en.pdf (page 30) 
iv) 
Operational level - ICRF Climate Risk Manager(s) 
At the operational level, ICRF will have a Climate Risk Manager / Officer(s) with deep climate risk 
management expertise and experience, who will be responsible for leading, overseeing and managing the 
climate risk assessment and management process across the project life cycle (Figure B3.6b) and will be 
part of the climate governance committee (see the Operations Manual Annex 21 for more details). 
In addition, thanks to GCF technical assistance, AFC (in collaboration with ACP) will establish a roster of 
qualified technical firms through an efficient and competitive procurement process. AFC will contract 
industry-leading firms (with expertise in climate risk assessments) to carry out technical climate and 
engineering studies with significant experienced in assessing physical climate risks. AFC believes the 
combination of a roster of technical climate and engineering firms assembled to conduct the technical 
studies for each project to complement the internal capacity to deliver high-quality climate risk assessments 
and provide guidance on the design and implementation, and on-going refinement, of specific elements of 
ICRF climate risk management, and overall ensure that ICRF will continue to define best-in-class for 
climate-resilient investment vehicles. The climate risk manager will oversee the engagement and work of 
external consultants and climate analytics firms. 
 
B3.4 ICRF Climate Risk and Impact Assessment Methodology: Guiding Principles 
 
ACP would engage a roster of technical consulting firms to undertake location specific climate risk 
assessments for each project.  
ICRF investments integrate climate change risks into decision-making (ex-ante) and directly address 
identified risks, vulnerabilities, or effects while avoiding inadvertent increases in vulnerability of systems or 
social groups and avoiding placing assets or systems in harm’s way. Each investment should: 
§ 
reduce risk, exposure, or sensitivity to climate change. 
§ 
increase climate resilience. 
§ 
build problem-solving capacity to develop responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, or effects; or 
§ 
address effects directly linked to climate change. 
ACP will follow best practices combining: i) MDB Adaptation Finance Methodology and Guidance28, the 
principles of Physical Climate Risk Assessment Methodology (PCRAM) of the Coalition for Climate Resilient 
Investment (CCRI)29, the guiding principles of Climate Resilient Bonds Framework30, and the Climate 
Resilient Investment Officer Handbook of the Global Centre for Adaptation31, as well as the EU taxonomy32, 
taking into consideration the African context.  
Context of vulnerability to climate variability and change: for each sub-projects, the context of climate 
vulnerability must be set out clearly using a robust evidence base. This could take a variety of forms, 
including use of material from existing analyses and reports or original climate vulnerability analysis 
conducted as part of the preparation of a project.  
Examples of good practice in conducting original analysis include using records from trusted sources 
showing infrastructure ecosystems or communities that are particularly vulnerable to climate change and 
recent climate trends, including any departures from historic means. These may be combined with climate 
change projections drawn from a wide range of climate change models, with high and low GHG emission 
scenarios, to explore the full range of projected outcomes and uncertainties. Climate projection 
uncertainties should be presented transparently and interpreted carefully. The timescale of the projected

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
climate change effects should match the intended lifespan of the assets, systems, or institutions being 
financed through the project (e.g., time horizon of 2030, 2050, 2080, 2100). 
Statement of purpose or intent: How the project will address the context- and location-specific climate 
change vulnerabilities as set out in existing analyses, reports, or the project’s climate vulnerability 
assessment should be stated. This is important for distinguishing between a development project 
contributing to climate change adaptation and a standard “good development” project. The methodology is 
flexible regarding exactly where and how the statement of intent or purpose is documented. It is also 
important to record and track the rationale for each climate resilient project or resilience components of a 
project linked to the context of climate vulnerability established above, this could be described in the final 
technical document, board document, internal memo, or other associated project document. 
The ICRF methodology aimed at assessing the baseline resilience level of an asset in a system approach 
and to propose adaptation measures for its improvement. The methodology consists of 4 building blocks 
(see figure B.3.7 below): 
Þ Part 1: Scoping and Data Gathering & Climate Risk Screening 
Þ Part 2: Climate Risk and Impact Assessment 
Þ Part 3: Identify and Appraisal of Resilience Intervention (including Economic and Financial 
Analysis) 
Þ Part 4: Monitoring ICRF Resilience Metrics & Impact Tracking  
 
Figure B3.7 ICRF Climate Risk Assessment Methodology 
  
*Note: the climate risk and impact assessment follow a systemic approach which considers the physical 
infrastructure asset, the beneficiaries it serves (population and communities, businesses including SMEs), 
and the asset’s ecosystem including the supply chains (both in terms inputs needed for its operations and 
outputs / infrastructures services provided), the interdependent infrastructure assets which are part of its 
system, and the natural environment in which it operates.

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
Part 1: Scoping and Data Gathering & Climate Risk Screening (location specific)  
 
The aim of this climate risk screening is to develop a climate risk profile, which identifies the key climate 
risks facing an asset (resilience of the project), the community and beneficiaries it serves (resilience through 
the project), and its ecosystem (supply chains, interdependent infrastructures, natural environment etc..). 
The output of this screening is a climate risk profile which identifies the key hazards facing a project and 
how those hazards interact with the infrastructure vulnerabilities to determine the risk profile associated with 
that specific hazard. A scoping exercise determines the range of climate risk that the asset and its system 
is exposed to, with their evolving probabilities over time under different climate scenarios.  
 
This involves collecting location specific climate data on historic climate and projected climate change, 
relevant to the identified climate hazards, engineering data, and financial performance data, including: 
 
• 
Identify thresholds – Understand any climatic thresholds critical to successful delivery of the 
infrastructure services and/or financial objectives. Any climatic factors or thresholds included in the 
basis of design, asset management objectives or standards used in asset design should also be 
identified. 
• 
Understand performance of the asset – or similar assets under historic climate. Data to analyze 
include: 
 
– 
Historic records of climate stressors such as temperature, rainfall and wind patterns as well as sea 
level, in the locality of the project.  
– 
Records of extreme events, such as floods, droughts, or heatwaves, and how the asset was 
impacted (e.g., loss of service, down time, repair or early replacement) 
 
• 
Understand how climate is projected to change – data to collect includes climate projection data 
relevant to the hazards, time periods and climate scenarios  
• 
Scope risk associated to the infrastructure asset ecosystem (supply chains, interdependent 
infrastructures, natural environment etc. Highlight key interdependencies that could lead to cascading 
failures 
• 
Review of the asset life cycle and design life and provide this data to climate science workstream. 
• 
Identify and confirm relevant infrastructure asset management KPIs (e.g., downtime or availability 
requirements production targets, safety, environmental, CAPEX, OPEX, etc.) and ensure that the 
necessary linkages between asset performance and design are quantifiable. 
• 
Identify climate thresholds used in design of critical components and in the operations and 
maintenance plan (e.g., schedule/unscheduled downtime, response to extreme events). 
 
AFC and ACP have significant networks to originate infrastructure projects across the target countries. 
Screening projects for climate risks is a crucial component of ACP investment decision making process for 
the ICRF. It will serve as an entry point to enable ACP to integrate resilience early on, by identifying risks 
so adaptation measures can be taken to make the project more resilient to these risks.  This work is typically 
undertaken by a climate data analytics provider and an engineering firm working in collaboration with AFC, 
ACP, and the project developer.  
 
Part 2: Climate Risk and Impact Assessment 
The aim of this climate risk assessment is to build on the findings of the high-level climate risk screening, 
developed during the Project Identification Phase, to assess the risks qualitatively or quantitatively, 
depending on the methodology. The key steps of the assessment are: 
 
§ 
Analyse hazards to which the project, its beneficiaries, and ecosystem are exposed to 
§ 
Analyse the projects and beneficiaries’ vulnerability 
§ 
Analyse the project’s potential negative impacts on its surroundings or the project beneficiaries 
§ 
Apply different climate scenarios to assess future climate risks (i.e., IPCC scenarios) 
§ 
Summarise the climate risk assessment findings for the project

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
With the support of the GCF technical assistance, AFC in collaboration with ACP will procure the service of 
specialized climate and engineering firms to undertake the climate risk assessment. The external climate 
experts work closely with AFC’s sector specialists and ACP climate team. The climate risk assessment is 
finally reviewed and validated by the climate governance committee of ICRF, and the results of the climate 
analysis are fully integrated in the investment process and decision making of the ICRF.  As part of the 
climate risk assessment, the procured climate analytics and engineering firms will undertake the following: 
 
Analyse the project’s vulnerability 
This step will assess the project’s vulnerability to the hazards. This includes identifying the project and 
beneficiaries’ susceptibility to damage if exposed to the hazards, and the ability of the system or its features 
to resist impacts, cope with losses, or recover following impacts. We can do this by assessing the project 
bringing forward the impacts and root causes identified. 
 
Assessment of materiality  
The materiality of an asset’s exposure to physical climate risks (and its climate resilience) includes a 
quantification of the vulnerability of the asset to specific climate risks in terms of physical damages and 
associated repair costs, reduction in its availability or usability, and potential increase in its operating and 
maintenance costs. This is done through an adjustment to the asset cashflow forecast. The exercise is 
meant to identify materiality thresholds based on a combination of engineering, environmental, legal, 
commercial, and financial parameters. This is best summarized by testing the ability of the asset and its 
manager to meet their ongoing obligations to their various stakeholders in the face of chronic and acute 
climate risks.  Stakeholders include beneficiaries and users of the infrastructure, regulators and public 
sector entities which may have granted the right to build and operate the asset with certain conditions, local 
communities, which may both benefit from and be affected by the project. The materiality and severity 
impact assessment will determine whether one or several physical climate risks are material to the asset. 
 
Quantify Impacts on KPIs  
This analysis will identify and prioritize key risks, and for prioritized risks, it will quantify the scale of financial 
and non-financial impacts. These will be differentiated by impacts felt directly by the asset owner (e.g., 
structural damage leading to downtime of the asset and thus reduced cash flow as well expenses for 
repairs) and those felt by the broader beneficiaries of the asset (e.g., reduced service supply to local 
communities). It will reflect the full range of potential direct physical impacts on the assets themselves, the 
Asset ecosystem (value chain, other interconnected assets), the affected populations (beneficiaries). 
 
Interdependencies and systemic approach  
Compared to the vulnerability analysis, risk assessment more readily facilitates identification of longer 
‘cause-effect’ chains linking climate hazards to the performance of the project across several dimensions 
(technical, environmental, social and financial etc.) and allows for the interactions between factors to be 
considered. This is in line with a ‘systems thinking’ approach. Hence, a risk assessment may well identify 
issues which have not been picked up in the vulnerability analyses. 
 
ICRF projects assessment will also integrate a system approach which is a fundamental requirement for 
sustainable infrastructure investments, leveraging AFC’s experience and track record in infrastructure 
investments. This approach will examine the system interdependency of the targeted infrastructure project 
looking at ‘system of system’ interactions with connected infrastructure in its networks. Such an approach 
suggests extending the climate risk assessment into a cross-sector interdependencies or the entire value 
chain. These boundaries and interdependencies are important for scoping risk and benefits assessments, 
and ensuring the asset or activity being invested in is fit-for-purpose and does no harm to the system of 
which it is part. This will ensure that the target investments improve the ability of assets and systems to 
persist, adapt and/or transform in the face of climate-related stresses and shocks in a timely, efficient, and 
fair manner that reduces risk, avoids maladaptation, unlocks climate resilient development, and creates and 
maximize benefits and potential environmental and climate outcomes.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
When selecting adaptation measures for the new build project, it is important to consider how the measures 
might affect the whole system and its vulnerability. High level, broadly qualitative, risk assessments can be 
undertaken in the early phases of the asset lifecycle, with more detailed quantitative assessments 
conducted at later stages. 
 
Infrastructure assets such as Transport, Energy, Information Communication Technology (ICT), will often 
have interdependence. These sectors rely heavily on each other to deliver their services, creating 
interdependencies. Although the infrastructure of each sector was independently designed and built, they 
have become increasingly interconnected. As a result, when one part of this system of systems stops 
working, it has knock-on effects on others. In the context of climate change, these infrastructure 
interdependencies are an additional vulnerability. They amplify existing climate risks and emphasize the 
need to consider resilience as being a cross-sector, system-scale issue. 
 
As an example, the Transport sector interdependencies are far-reaching across sectors. As shown in Figure 
6.3b, the Transport infrastructure is highly connected to all other infrastructure sectors, primarily because it 
provides a direct supply link. For low-income countries in Africa, the road network is the primary mode of 
transport for goods, services and communities. Road disruption may therefore create major choke points 
in passenger and freight traffic, with knock-on effects on an already vulnerable area, affecting farmers 
(transport links for agriculture value chains), SMEs, communities, blocking road access to healthcare 
facilities, accidents (road safety), trade corridors, all of which leading to significant negative impacts on the 
economy and society.   
 
Figure B3.8: Sectoral interdependencies and their relationships (Transport, Energy and ICT which 
are part of ICRF sectors have significant interdependencies) 
 
 
Source: Africa Finance Corporation 
Food 
Energy 
Water 
Transport 
Solid 
waste 
ICT 
Wastewater

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
Part 3: Identify and Appraisal of Resilience Measures 
Identification of resilience of options for the asset and quantity potential impact. 
Once one or more physical climate risks have been determined to be material, a series of resilience options 
are identified. These options will offer incremental investments to improve the design of the asset (such as 
improved materials, location, protective barriers or maintenance features) or can relate to changes in 
operations (such as increased maintenance or planned shutdowns) to reduce its vulnerability. Each option 
should be quantified, with its range of economic, environmental, and social benefits identified. In addition, 
the impact of these resilience measures on the asset should be assessed.  
Economic and financial analysis: Appraisal of resilience options – technical, economic and financial 
analysis: The climate risk assessment analyzed quantitatively or qualitatively the key climate risks to the 
project, considering future scenarios. The resilience options appraisal stage seeks to conceive solutions to 
strengthen the project’s resilience.  
 
This step will identify the economic feasibility of the project without any resilience options, and the net 
benefits of alternative resilience options for the project. To do so, estimate the net present value (NPV) and 
IRR of the project with no resilience measures based on the physical impacts of climate change on the 
project, as identified in the climate risk assessment. Use a relevant time horizon, typically the full 
performance life of the asset, and a discount rate according to national or international standards. The key 
steps of the economic analysis are: 
 
§ 
Estimate the net present value of the project with no resilience measures. 
§ 
For each resilience option identified, identify and value incremental costs and benefits of alternative 
project designs that incorporate different resilience options. 
§ 
Identify and evaluate any net benefits (refer back to the co-benefits identified) that are additional to the 
direct resilience benefits. This is particularly relevant for NbS, as these will often have knock-on benefits 
outside of the direct resilience benefits, they offer to the project. 
§ 
Convert the cost and benefit flows into present values using the discount rate chosen according to 
national or international standards. 
§ 
Compare the estimated incremental costs of project design with the resilience option and the benefits 
of integrating that resilience option. 
§ 
Conduct a sensitivity analysis to account for uncertainties. 
§ 
Undertake a cost benefit analysis (CBA) to appraise the resilience options 
§ 
Rank the NPV and IRR of the alternative resilience options. 
 
GCF concessional funding: AFC/ACP will appraise the resilience options using a combination of methods 
above and estimate incremental cost. For each sub-project the climate risk assessment and incremental 
cost of resilience measures shall be documented. At the sub-project level, the portion of GCF funding as 
part of the overall sub-project cost shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, based on the climate risk 
assessment, and the capital required to de-risk investors and finance the cost of selected climate resilience 
measures to address the climate risks facing the infrastructure asset (resilience of the project) and the 
population it serves (resilience through the project). 
Illustrative application of Part 1-3 decision process for climate risk assessment and identification 
of resilience measures  
Expected exposure will be derived to classify assets into the following three categories based on an array 
of risk severity thresholds for physical risks: 
i 
Low exposure, indicating assets are in areas hardly exposed to relevant climate hazards,   
ii 
Moderate exposure, indicating assets are in in areas more frequently exposed to relevant climate 
hazards; and,

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
33 
Climate risk ‘R’ is a function of exposure ‘E’ and vulnerability. R=f (V, E) or alternatively R = V*E. Vulnerability and Exposure are 
non-weighted items and the order in which ‘V’ and ‘E’ are included in a risk function does not alter climate risks.  
iii High exposure, indicating assets are in areas extremely exposed to climate hazards. 
The combined assessment of the level of vulnerability and the expected exposure to a hazard will allow 
ICRF to derive an indicative level of climate risk for different assets.33 Scores for hazards and vulnerabilities 
will then be grouped into five tiers, where Tier 1 to Tier 4 investments require further analysis before 
proceeding to deal execution stage and where Tier 5 investments are deprioritized due to combined high 
vulnerability and exposure: 
1) Tier 1: Indicating a combination of low risks emerging from vulnerability and exposure to climate 
hazards; 
2) Tier 2: Indicating a combination of low exposure to climate hazards but medium of high vulnerability, 
or low vulnerability but medium or high exposure to climate hazards; 
3) Tier 3: Indicating moderate risks emerging from vulnerability and exposure to climate hazards; 
4) Tier 4: Indicating a combination of moderate and high risks emerging from vulnerability and exposure 
to climate hazards; 
5) Tier 5: Indicating a combination of high risks emerging from vulnerability and exposure to climate 
hazards. 
 
 
Part 4: Monitoring ICRF Resilience Metrics & Impact Tracking 
 
Following the integration of climate risk management levers at the project development stage and eventual 
deal closure, the focus regarding climate risks moves to ongoing review and management of climate risks 
and management options for assets in the ICRF portfolio, as part of ICRF overall portfolio management 
process. Periodic re-appraisals will allow us to recognize and manage risks emerging from changes in 
regional climate pathways. Additionally, re-appraisals serve as trigger points to upgrade the resilience of 
assets, e.g., if new technology is available that can effectively contribute to reducing climate risks.

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
Periodic re-appraisals are an important part of the overall risk management process and serve to determine 
the extent to which risks are optimally managed under current and expected future conditions. Re-
appraisals may involve screening selected assets and updating the risk profiles triggering re-assessments 
of quantifiable climate risks and re-assessments of potential mitigation options available. Re-appraisals 
may determine the need to ‘harden’ assets as new information uncovers increased risks, or new 
technologies broaden the suite of mitigation options, and/or the need to expand insurance coverage to 
account for higher risks.   
Illustrative resilience indicators (see OM Annex 21 for more details on the indicators for each sector) 
Sectors 
Breakdown 
Climate Resilience Indicators   
Infrastructure Assets 
- 
Climate-resilient Transport and 
Logistics 
- 
Climate-resilient Energy 
Systems 
- 
Climate-resilient Economic 
Zones 
- 
Climate-resilient 
Telecommunication and Digital 
Infrastructures 
 
- 
value of physical assets made more resilient to the 
effects of climate change [value of assets in USD] 
- 
Reduced expected financial losses due to climate-
change related damages to physical infrastructure 
assets [amount of reduced expected financial 
damages in USD] 
- 
Reduced repair/maintenance costs because of 
climate event induced damages to physical 
infrastructure assets [amount in USD] 
- 
Reduced number of infrastructure asset outages 
due to climate related events (e.g., road blockages, 
power outage, port disruption, etc.) [number of 
outages due to climate related events] 
- 
Reduced duration or downtime of infrastructure 
asset outages due to climate related events (e.g., 
road blockages, power outage, port disruption etc.) 
[cumulative number of days] 
- 
Reduced expected financial losses due to climate-
change related damages to the physical 
infrastructure asset, its beneficiaries and 
ecosystem including supply chains, interdependent 
infrastructure assets [amount of reduced expected 
financial damages in USD] 
- 
Beneficiaries (male/female) of improved climate 
resilience of infrastructure assets [# of individuals] 
- 
Reductions in mortality following acute climate 
events (e.g., flooding, heatwaves, and other 
climate resilient events) 
 
 
B3.5 Indicative Incremental Cost Analysis – ICRF Fund 
 
The GCF US$ 240Mln catalytic first loss equity investment will support the mobilization of funding scale 
including US$1.25 billion leverage financing at project level, US$ 460 million from various institutional 
investors at the fund-level, and US$ 150 million from AFC, leading to a total target of US$ 2 billion 
investments in climate resilient infrastructure assets. The GCF’s funding will be used primarily to fund 
the incremental costs for adaptation and resilience and de-risk investors, which represents about 
11.4% of the total funding required at project level.

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
34 https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/GCA-Handbook-V2.0-13-September-2021-2.pdf 
35 Enhancing the Climate Resilience of Africa’s Infrastructure | see page 19-20 of the report 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/270671478809724744/pdf/110137-WP-PUBLIC-
ECRAI-Transport-CLEAN-WEB.pdf     
 
Making infrastructure assets climate resilient requires incremental costs. That said, there is no universal 
incremental cost benchmark. The calculation of incremental cost is asset specific and location specific and 
depends on the climate risk assessments and resilience measures that are fit-for-purpose for each 
infrastructure assets depending on the sector and asset type. Infrastructure assets respond differently to 
climatic events, depending on their nature and type, their technical and engineering design and their 
vulnerability to the projected climate in a given location. Hence calibrating the cost of resilience measures 
is done on a case-by-case basis based on the technical specifications and structural elements of that asset 
components and their degree of exposure to the changing climatic hazards.  
 
Climate proofing and ensuring Paris-alignment of global infrastructure investment will require premium of 
9-27%. The incremental cost is calibrated on case-by-case basis and informed by the climate risk 
assessment and cost benefit analysis of the resilience or adaptation measures. Source: Handbook for 
Climate-Resilient Infrastructure Officers (CRIOs) developed by the Global Center on Adaptation (GCA) the 
High-Level Steering Group including all the Multilateral Development Banks: ADB, AIIB, ADB, EBRD, EIB, 
IADB, and the World Bank Group34:  
 
Some studies provide a wide range of incremental costs varying from three (3) to twenty-three (23) point 
percent resulting from small frequency and magnitude of climate change hazard impact and depending on 
the asset, its location and selected resilient interventions. For example, the World Bank conducted an 
extensive study on the Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA) focusing on road and bride 
infrastructure investments which will occur by 2030 (many have projected construction completion dates in 
2030), and the total construction cost without adaptation is estimated at $12.8 billion. Excluding climate 
outliers (the top and bottom 5%), construction costs with adaptation ranges between $13.3 and $15.7 billion 
(representing an increment cost of 3% to 23%35). The report also provides a framework for assessing 
climate related risks to road investments in Africa. A key finding is that, in the period from the present to

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
2050, climate change could cause direct damages of tens of billions of dollars in damages to roads, which 
will require additional maintenance to preserve basic serviceability; preliminary estimation of damage to 
bridges suggests costs may be even higher (in the order of $30 billion, mean estimate). Apart from 
increasing maintenance costs, climate changes will cause the disruption of road links, interrupting the flow 
of goods and people, all of which has a substantial economic cost. 
 
AFC collaborated on a similar analysis with the University of Oxford’s Programme for Sustainable 
Infrastructure Systems to assess the potential climate related damages on 121 African ports in (41 
countries). Physical port asset damages and revenue losses equally large (both around 130 million USD 
per year) at present. In future, revenue losses will start to dominate, under high expected trade scenarios 
  
o Physical asset damages: 400 – 550 million USD per year depending on RCP scenario (translating 
to US$ 11.2 – 14 billion in damages by 2050) 
o Revenue losses: 390 – 1230 million USD per year depending on RCP + trade scenario (translating 
to US$ 10.9billion to US$34.4billion by 2050) 
 
B3.6 Eligibility Criteria for ICRF Investments 
 
Table A1 below define criterion that will enable systematic integration of climate risks assessment in project 
screening and Table A2 defines the eligibility criteria for investment. 
 
Table A1 – Making climate risks assessment integral to technical screening criteria for climate resilient and 
adaptation activities - Technical screening criteria  
 
Criterion 
Description 
Target Sectors  
1. Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics  
2. Climate-resilient Energy Systems,  
3. Climate-resilient Economic zones, and 
4. Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures.  
A1: Reducing 
material physical 
climate risks 
Infrastructure assets with resilience measures that reduce all 
material physical climate risks to that activity to the extent possible 
and on a best effort basis. 
A1.1 
Infrastructure assets with integrated physical and non-physical 
resilience measures aimed at reducing – to the extent possible and on 
a best effort basis – all material physical climate risks to that activity 
which have been identified through a risk assessment. 
A1.2 
The above-mentioned assessment has the following characteristics: 
6) considers both current weather variability and future climate 
change, including uncertainty. 
7) is based on robust analysis of available climate data and 
projections across a range of future scenarios. 
8) is consistent with the expected lifetime of the activity. 
A2: Supporting 
system adaptation* 
The infrastructure asset and its adaptation measures do not adversely 
affect the adaptation efforts of other people, nature, and assets. 
A2.1* 
The infrastructure asset and its adaptation measures do not materially 
increase the risks of an adverse climate impact on other people, 
nature and assets, or hamper adaptation elsewhere. Consideration 
should be given to viable 'green' or 'nature-based-solutions' in 
combination to 'grey' measures to address adaptation. 
A2.3 
The infrastructure asset and its adaptation measures are consistent 
with sectoral, regional, and/or national adaptation efforts.

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
A3: Monitoring 
adaptation results 
The reduction of physical climate risks can be measured. 
A3.1 
Adaptation results can be monitored and measured against defined 
indicators. Recognizing that risk evolves over time, updated 
assessments of physical climate risks should be undertaken at the 
appropriate frequency where possible. 
*Note: Meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm to other environmental objectives, people, nature or assets, and 
comply with the required environmental and social safeguards. A robust Environmental and Social Management 
System has been developed for the ICRF. 
In line with Table A1, Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability, or sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, or effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate change. 
- 
Assess the climate impact on people, nature, and other interdependent assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent possible including Nature Based Solutions (NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm to other environmental objectives, people, nature, or assets, and 
comply with the required environmental and social safeguards 
Grey, green and blue infrastructure can be defined more precisely as follows:  
• 
Grey infrastructure – Grey infrastructures are built up, engineered and physical structures, often made of 
concrete or other long-lasting materials. These include roads, railways, canals, energy, ports, dikes, 
embankments, sea walls, centers, and breakwaters for riverine and coastal flood protection, piped drainage 
systems for storm water management (such as storm sewers or concrete detention basins), and air 
conditioning or cooling centers to cope with extreme heat.  
• 
Green infrastructures – Green infrastructure is principally characterized by well-functioning biophysical 
systems, primarily related to green spaces, that support biodiversity, natural ecological processes and to 
which some management and restoration may apply. They are represented by healthy oyster reefs, coastal 
salt marshes, mangroves, coral reefs, sea grasses, sand beaches and dunes in the coast environment and 
mainly by forests, parks, street trees, and grasslands inland.  
• 
Blue infrastructure – Blue infrastructure can also be characterized by well-functioning biophysical systems, 
but primarily related to water. This includes water bodies, including ponds, wetlands, rivers, lakes, and 
streams, as well as estuaries, seas, and oceans.  
Table A2 Eligible Sectors for Investments – Climate Resilience / Adaptation 
Climate Accounting: The ICRF will invest in the development and construction of climate resilient infrastructure in 
target sectors as reflected in the table below. In terms of climate accounting, only the incremental cost of adaptation 
measures will be counted as “Adaptation Finance”. GCF concessional funding will only be used to de-risk investors 
at fund-level and contribute to financing the incremental cost of adaptation measures as part of the overall project 
costs. 
 
Target Sector 
 
Examples of eligible 
investments 
Eligibility 
Climate resilient 
Transport and Logistics 
 
 
 
 
 
Roads and Bridges, and 
associated infrastructure with 
integrated investments in 
adaptation measures to 
ensure resilience to climatic 
changes impacts 
 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken. 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability, or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate resilient 
Transport and Logistics 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, 
or effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm 
to other environmental objectives, people, 
nature or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social 
safeguards 
Ports and logistics, and 
associated infrastructure with 
integrated investments in 
adaptation measures to 
ensure resilience to climatic 
changes impacts 
  
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, 
or effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature, 
and other assets in the ecosystem to the 
extent possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm 
to other environmental objectives, people, 
nature, or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social 
safeguards 
 
Railway and associated 
infrastructure with integrated 
investments in adaptation 
measures to ensure 
resilience to climatic changes 
impacts 
 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability, or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, 
or effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS)

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm 
to other environmental objectives, people, 
nature or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social 
safeguards 
 
Airport Investment in Airport 
Terminals / Investment in 
upgrading existing/new 
airport facilities and 
equipment  
with integrated investments in 
adaptation measures to 
ensure resilience to climatic 
changes impacts 
 
 
 
 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability, or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, 
or effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm 
to other environmental objectives, people, 
nature or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social 
safeguards 
Target Sectors 
Examples of eligible 
investments 
Eligibility 
Resilient Energy 
Systems 
Investment in resilient clean 
energy systems with integrated 
investments in adaptation 
measures for enhanced resilience 
in clean energy generation, 
transmission, and distribution to 
reduce the impacts of climate 
change 
Investments may include, but not 
limited to, underground 
cabling which allows adaption of 
electricity transmission and 
distribution systems to climate 
change, resilient transmission 
lines or upgrades for grid 
resilience, clean energy 
generation, increasing the height 
of poles supporting power lines, 
installing conductors with hotter 
operating limits using High 
Temperature Low Sag 
Conductors (HTLS). 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, or 
effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm to 
other environmental objectives, people, 
nature, or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social safeguards 
- 
 
Target Sectors 
Examples of eligible 
investments 
Eligibility

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
Resilient Economic 
Zones  
Investment in resilient special 
economic zones including but not 
limited to climate resilient agro-
parks, resilient industrial parks, 
socio economic infrastructure in 
urban and coastal areas, 
economic and technology-
development zones, high-tech 
zones, science and technology 
parks, free ports, enterprise 
zones, trade or export zones with 
integrated investments to reduce 
the impacts of climate change 
 
 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, or 
effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature, and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore low carbon options to the extent 
possible including Nature Based Solutions 
(NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm to 
other environmental objectives, people, 
nature, or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social safeguards 
- 
 
Target Sectors 
Examples of eligible 
investments 
Eligibility 
Resilient Telecom 
and digital 
infrastructure  
Telecom towers  
Data centers  
Fiber optics  
Digital infrastructure (internet, 
Connectivity, satellite, mobile 
services and payments, climate 
technologies etc.) with integrated 
investments in adaptation 
measures to ensure resilience to 
climatic changes impacts 
measures to ensure resilience to 
climatic changes impacts.  
 
Alignment with Criteria in Table A1 
A detailed location specific Climate Risk 
Assessment must be undertaken 
Each investment should: 
- 
reduce risk, exposure, vulnerability, or 
sensitivity to climate change 
- 
increase climate resilience 
- 
build problem-solving capacity to develop 
responses to identified risks, vulnerabilities, or 
effects 
- 
address effects directly linked to climate 
change. 
- 
Assess climate impact on people, nature, and 
other assets in the ecosystem to the extent 
possible.  
- 
explore and prioritize low carbon options to 
the extent possible including Nature Based 
Solutions (NBS) 
- 
meet the criteria for Do No Significant Harm to 
other environmental objectives, people, 
nature, or assets, and comply with the 
required environmental and social safeguards 
- 
 
 
Indicative Sector Breakdown 
§ 
Climate resilient Transport and Logistics (~40-50%) 
§ 
Climate resilient energy systems (~25-30%) 
§ 
Climate Resilient Economic Zone (~25-30%) 
§ 
Climate Resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructure (~5-10%).

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
Eligible beneficiaries for technical assistance and activities under Component 2 and 3 
The AE will procure consulting specialized firms with experience in climate risk assessments, CRPI, Policy 
and Regulatory issue on CRI  to undertake the activities under component 2 and 3. These activities and 
services are expected to enhance the quality of sub-projects by integrating climate resilience, and creating 
a solid enabling and regulatory environment to mainstream climate risk and resilience in the design, 
development, construction and operations of infrastructure assets in the built environment in the target 
countries. Therefore, the beneficiaries are the sub-projects, all stakeholders involved in the execution of 
sub-projects in target countries that have provided NOLs, project developers, private sector actors, 
investors, lenders, insurers, government ministries and agencies, NGOs and Civil Society, regulatory 
agencies, the AE, and EE, etc. ICRF will not invest in countries that have not provided NOLs. 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
B.4.1 Executive Summary - Implementation arrangements 
 
AFC will be responsible for the overall oversight of the framework implementation and will report to the GCF 
per the terms of the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). For 
managing the GCF resources, a GCF Account will be set-up within AFC to administer the GCF funds as 
follow: 
 
1. AFC (in the name and on behalf of the GCF) will subscribe  as the investor of record for the Junior 
Interests (as described below) in an amount equal to US$240 million pursuant to the terms of a 
Subscription Agreement (as defined below) to be entered into between the ICRF and AFC (the 
“Capital Commitment”); the Capital Commitment will be also documented in the LPA; Under the 
Capital Commitment, AFC will agree, during a 10 year period as from the first closing of the ICRF 
(the "Commitment Period') to make capital contributions in US Dollars to the ICRF on each payment 
date determined in the LPA to permit the ICRF to (i) make investments in the project companies in 
accordance with the investment policy of the ICRF, to pay the ICRF’s obligations, expenses and 
other liabilities and to fund operating reserves and (ii) to pay Management Fees , in each case in an 
amount equal to its pro rata share of the aggregate capital contributions to be made by all investors 
in the ICRF. At the end of Commitment Period, AFC will be released from any further obligation with 
respect to its undrawn Capital Commitments. The ICRF is targeting a total fund raise of US$ 750 
million, therefore GCF will not be the sole investor in any portfolio company.   
 
2. With the any amount of cash actually contributed by AFC and other investors to the ICRF, the ICRF,  
in its capacity as an Executing Entity, will make investments in the relevant projects (each a “Fund 
Investment”); A Fund Investment may include, without limitation, investments in assets, in securities 
such as common or preferred stock, or in any other securities or instruments, including debt, as a 
means to achieve the overall objective of the Fund. The Fund Investments may involve a variety of 
transactions, including construction equity, growth equity, project development, expansion 
financings, leveraged and unleveraged acquisitions, etc. 
 
3. The Fund Investments will be selected, invested and managed by ACP: 
 
a. in accordance with the AMA and the FAA through the Subsidiary Agreements (as defined 
below); and 
 
b. in cooperation with AFC, under the terms of the Support Services Agreement(s) and the Co-
Investment Agreement as described above under Outcome 1;  
 
4. At the Fund Investment level (sub-project level):

=== PAGE 66 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
- 
key responsibilities and agreements defining the project’s parameters include implementation 
agreements with the government, project capacity and elements such as the required climate 
risk assessment and environmental & social impact studies summarizing obligations to the 
developer. Typically, project SPV’s in which ICRF directly or indirectly (through an SPV) holds 
shares will be domiciled in the AFC member countries in which the projects are based, with or 
without the use of interposed entities, as applicable. 
 
- 
Revenues for the project are generated through a concession agreement or an off-taker 
Agreement, which for renewable energy, transport infrastructure, and other core infrastructure 
projects is typically arranged within a Power Purchase Agreement or a Concession Agreement. 
Next to the rates and payment structure, risk allocation is arranged for items such as resource 
risk, interconnection/grid availability, and political and natural force majeure. Normally both the 
Off-taker and the Independent Power Producer (IPP) have to provide certain performance 
obligations. 
 
- 
The construction works are arranged through an Equipment Supply Agreement (ESA) and a 
Balance of Plant (BoP) agreement, usually combined into an Engineering, Procurement & 
Construction (EPC) Contract. The number of EPC contractors used differs per sector and 
construction works are done under the EPC contractors. The EPC Contract contains scope of 
work, price and payment schedules including advance payment guarantees. Other key 
elements include the risk allocation on certain construction risks (e.g., geotechnical risk, 
physical climate risks and adverse weather conditions), performance bonds, warranty periods, 
liquidated damages and limitation of liability. ACP and AFC's specialist sector team will closely 
supervise the construction activities and engage independent engineering consultants as 
required. 
 
- 
The Operations & Maintenance (O&M) Contract deals with the activities for maintaining the 
project at a certain performance level. The performance or availability level that the O&M 
contractor guarantees is one of the critical components next to the scope of work, price and 
limitation of liability. Insurance policies (conventional project finance insurance and climate risk 
insurance where applicable to mitigate against financial losses in the event of operational 
disruptions caused by unforeseen climate hazards) and Land Lease Agreements also form part 
of the suite to key documents. The independent engineer is broadly required to: i) review of the 
drawings and documents; ii) determine the project facilities completion schedule; iii) review, 
inspection and monitoring of construction works including the climate resilience measures;  iv) 
conducting tests on completion of construction and issuing completion certificate; v) review, 
inspection and monitoring of O&M as well as the climate resilience metrics; vi) determining, as 
required under the agreement, the costs of any works or services and/or their reasonableness; 
vii) determining, as required under the agreement, the period or any extension thereof, for 
performing any duty or obligation; viii) assisting the parties in resolution of disputes; and 
undertaking all other duties and functions in accordance with the concession agreement. 
 
- 
The Financing and Shareholders’ Agreements are a set of legal documents that deal with the 
terms and conditions of the debt and equity finance, sponsor support, cash waterfall and 
security. 
 
- 
Financing for infrastructure projects can take a number of forms but are typically either financed 
through an owner’s balance sheet by way of corporate finance or on a limited or non-recourse 
basis through project finance. A key difference between the two approaches lies in how 
financing is structured. Both project and corporate finance often include a debt component (to 
leverage or preserve the owners’ equity, among other reasons) alongside the equity owned by 
the shareholders. In project finance, the project company borrows against the cash flow 
generated by the project alone (additionally secured by available assets and guarantees), while 
corporate finance leverages the companies’ balance sheet, not the cash flows. In the case of

=== PAGE 67 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
pure project development, AFC usually finances the new project with Equity or equity like 
instruments such as subordinated debt etc.  which is critical to catalyze the leverage debt 
financing required for each project. 
 
- 
A key point in project finance is that the cash flows from the project alone must be sufficient to 
service the debt e.g., to repay the debt without corporate guarantees. The magnitude of the 
cash flow that is deemed sufficient depends on the risk profile of the project. The process of 
structuring debt, equity, quasi equity is complex, time consuming and often costly. In addition, 
the covenants imposed by lenders put a degree of inflexibility into the financing structure, which 
makes it difficult for the project company to withstand variances from forecasts in the early 
years. The use of equity from the ICRF and AFC is designed to remove this complexity time lag 
and rigidity, and thereby increase the probability of a project reaching successful operations. 
 
5. For the Grant components (Outcome 2 & Outcome 3): Except for Output 2.1 where both AFC 
and ACP will be co-executing entities, AFC will be the executing entity for all other activities under 
Outcome 2 and Outcome 3. AFC will implement the activities in partnership with ACP (fund 
management and procurement will follow relevant policies and rules of AFC, guided by the FAA to 
be signed between AFC and the GCF. AFC will hold and manage the grant resources and make a 
direct payment to consultants/service providers. All procurement of services undertaken by ACP will 
be approved by AFC. AFC and ACP will sign a technical assistance agreement (TA Agreement) in 
this regard for the implementation of Outcome 2 & Outcome 3.  
 
B4.2 Governance Structure of the ICRF 
AFC is the sole shareholder of ACP.  In its role of AE and sole shareholder of ACP, AFC will oversee the 
program implementation and will ensure that all the GCF policies (including but not limited to anti-corruption 
and AML/CFT policy, ESS policies as the ESMF) are passed down to ACP, the Fund level and portfolio 
company-level. Furthermore, as the Accredited Entity it will require ACP and the ICRF to support the 
fulfillment of AFC’s rights and obligation under the AMA and FAA including its reporting obligations towards 
the GCF. AFC will ensure that any Subsidiary Agreement it enters into with ACP or the ICRF or any fund 
agreement between the ICRF and its investors will reflect the relevant provisions under the FAA and/or 
AMA and will take appropriate action and/or exercise remedies available to it under the Fund documentation 
to avoid or remedy a (pending) breach of the applicable provisions under the AMA and/or FAA to protect 
the interests of GCF. 
 
In addition, it will dedicate full-time team members to monitor EE’s compliance with FAA and AMA 
obligations, including compliance to the GCF’s policies, to analyze quarterly and annual performance 
reports, to disburse GCF proceeds for the Funded Activity. It will assess achievement of program, targeted 
outcomes, and results as per log-frame / the Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF), while 
commissioning independent interim and final evaluation reports as per GCF’s requirements. The GCF will 
enter into Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with the AFC, which will detail key implementation 
arrangements, commercial terms, and legal obligations, including obligation of AE to pass down GCF 
policies to ACP and the ICRF. These key terms will be summarized in the Term Sheet.   
 
The AE on behalf of GCF shall channel funds to ICRF. AFC will enter into Subscription Agreement with 
ICRF in respect of GCF equity investment and its own commitment in ICRF. The Subscription Agreement 
and the other fund documentation (including the limited partnership agreement) will detail terms of 
investment, in line with the AMA and the FAA signed between GCF and AFC. 
 
B4.3 Legal and Capital Structure of the ICRF 
 
It is envisaged that the ICRF will be a newly formed Mauritius law limited partnership without legal 
personality (LP/GP structure), and its general partner will be the General Partner, a newly formed limited 
liability company wholly controlled by AFC (via ACP) as the Accredited Entity. The General Partner will 
delegate investment decision-making authority to ACP pursuant to the Management Agreement.

=== PAGE 68 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
The capital of the ICRF will be appropriately divided into two tranches so as to attract multiple investor 
classes. 
 
“Tier 1 Interest” or “Junior Interest” will hold a junior equity position in the structure of the ICRF, which 
will absorb a higher portion of risk throughout the ICRF, acting as the principal enabler to attract commercial 
capital into the structure – by providing a ‘first loss’ buffer to the ICRF; 
 
“Tier 2 Interest” or “Senior Interest will rank in a senior equity position; Investors in the Tier 2 Interest will 
benefit from first loss capital protection provided by Investors in the Tier 1 Interest. The Tier 2 Interest shall 
target investors with appetite for commercial risk adjusted returns, which would not have participated in the 
Fund without capital protection offered by GCF.  
 
AFC acting as the EE will invest GCF’s fund commitment in the Tier 1 Interest of the ICRF by absorbing 
higher risk in the underlying ICRF fund performance and thereby providing the required capital protection 
to de-risk and mobilize commercial investors (including AFC’s commitment into the Fund from its own 
balance sheet resources) under the Tier 2 Interest. It is expected that GCF (via AFC) will be the sole investor 
in the Tier 1 Interests at first close. 
 
AFC (for its own account) intends to invest an amount equal to USD [50m] in the Tier 2 Interest.  
 
Figure B4.3: Capital structure: Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)  
 
 
Note: i) the SPV or Platform companies are the selected sub-projects in line with the eligibility criteria. There 
are no sub-funds involved. ii)  AFC, on behalf of GCF, will invest 240M in Tier 1 class units.  
 
B4.4 Implementation Legal Agreements 
 
Subscription Agreement: AFC, acting in the name and on behalf of GCF, will subscribe for the Tier 1 
Interests pursuant to the terms of a Subscription Agreement to be entered into between the ICRF and AFC 
(the “Subscription Agreement”). The Subscription Agreement will set forth the capital commitment of the 
GCF to the ICRF. 
 
Limited Partnership Agreement: AFC will also be a party, together with the General Partner (on its own 
behalf) and each additional limited partner in the ICRF, to the Limited Partnership Agreement (the “LPA”)

=== PAGE 69 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
of the ICRF, which will set forth the rights and obligations of AFC and any other investors as a limited 
partner.   
 
It is expected that the Subscription Agreement, the LPA and the Side Letter will be governed by Mauritius 
law and any disputes in relation thereto will be resolved through arbitration by LCIA or ICC Arbitration rules 
to be held in London, United Kingdom, although the final structure will be determined in consultation with 
outside counsel. 
 
Management Agreement: ACP and the general partner of the ICRF will enter into a management 
agreement pursuant to which the ICRF and the general partner will engage ACP to serve as manager for 
the ICRF.  In its capacity as manager for the ICRF, ACP shall be responsible for performing the following 
duties: (i)  structuring, arranging, and negotiating proposed investments for the ICRF, including: reviewing, 
and analyzing investment opportunities; negotiating the terms of investments, preparing documentation for 
investments, and arranging for the closing of investments; (ii) monitoring, advising, assisting, reviewing or 
otherwise participating in the management or control of portfolio companies, including taking all actions 
necessary or convenient to enforce, amend, compromise, or modify any agreement, contract, or other 
instrument relating to an investment of the ICRF and (iii)  exercising any rights of the ICRF to hold, control, 
participate in, consult regarding, or review the management and businesses of the portfolio companies, 
including providing individuals to serve as directors, officers, advisory committee members, or in a similar 
capacity for Portfolio Companies, exercising voting, consent, or approval rights in relation to shares and 
other securities of Portfolio Companies (the “Management Agreement”). It is expected that the 
Management Agreement will be governed by e English law and any disputes in relation thereto will be 
subject to ICC or LCIA arbitration in London. 
 
Side Letter AFC, ICRF and the General Partner: Accredited Entity is proposing to enter into a Side Letter 
(represented by the general partner as executing entity) and the General Partner. Neither the Private 
Placement Memorandum, the Subscription Agreement nor the LPA will be a Subsidiary Agreement. Instead, 
AFC, as the Accredited Entity is proposing to enter into a Side Letter with the ICRF (represented by the 
general partner as executing entity) and the General Partner (in its own capacity, as executing entity) with 
respect to implementation of the Funded Activity in order to pass down the relevant obligations under the 
AMA and the FAA to such entities. The AMA and FAA would be attached to the Side Letter.  The Accredited 
Entity is also proposing that the Management Agreement include provisions pursuant to which ACP 
acknowledges that the General Partner has contractually agreed in the Side Letter to ensure the ICRF’s 
compliance with the FAA and the AMA, (ii) confirms that it has been made aware of and has considered 
such terms and (iii) shall to comply with the applicable obligations contemplated thereby in any proposed 
investment decision and portfolio management; the Side Letter, AMA and FAA would be attached to the 
management Agreement. The Side Letter and the Management Agreement are intended to be a “Subsidiary 
Agreement” under the FAA. 
 
B4.5 EXECUTING ENTITIES  
The Outputs and Activities of the ICRF will be implemented by the Executing Entities as follows: 
 
Outputs 
Activities  
Responsible Executing Entity 
(ies) 
Outcome 1 - Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the 
beneficiary African countries for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and able to withstand 
climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-resilient 
infrastructure services (all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports and logistics, special economic 
zones, telecommunication, and digital infrastructure services) 
 
Output 1.1 - ICRF is fully 
operational and raised capital at 
the fund level 
1.1.1 
Implement 
the 
legal 
structure of, and form, the ICRF 
and related entities. Consummate 
first closing with the GCF. 
AFC will establish the ICRF fund 
and related entities for 
implementation.  AFC, on behalf

=== PAGE 70 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
of GCF, will invest US$ 
240Million in Tier 1 interests. 
 
The General Partner is also an 
EE for Output 1.2. The General 
Partner is an entity to be formed 
by the Accredited Entity, which is 
expected to be a limited liability 
company under Mauritius law. 
The General Partner will be 
owned, directly or indirectly, by 
the Accredited Entity. The 
General Partner shall appoint 
ACP to perform the day-to-day 
management and operation of 
the Partnership (including 
portfolio management and risk 
management) pursuant to the 
Management Agreement. 
 
ACP is the Manager of the ICRF.  
 
 
 
1.1.2: Fundraise US$510 million 
of additional capital for the junior 
and senior tranches. 
 
ACP 
Output 1.2: Co-investments - 
ICRF investments in sub-projects  
 
1.2.1: 
Deal 
origination, 
due 
diligence 
and 
execution 
of 
investments in sub-projects 
 
ACP, and the General Partner 
 
 
 
1.2.2: Portfolio management  
 
ACP, and the General Partner 
 
1.2.3 Reporting to investors and 
GCF 
ACP and the General Partner are 
responsible 
for 
investors 
reporting.   
AFC will report to GCF in its 
capacity as AE. 
 
1.2.4: Exit assets, return capital 
plus profit to investors, close out 
the ICRF 
 
ACP and the General Partner 
Outcome 2 - Improved climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for CRI; improved 
capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and able to 
withstand climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and communities to climate-
resilient infrastructure services (all-weather roads, bridges, power supply, ports and logistics, special 
economic zones, telecommunication, and digital infrastructure services) 
 
AFC and ACP will sign a technical assistance agreement based on which: ACP will procure all the services 
required in compliance with AFC procurement standards. All procurements will be approved by AFC.  
AFC will be responsible for the financial management of GCF grant funding and payments to the selected 
consulting firms / consultants. 
Output 2.1 - Strengthened 
climate risk assessment and 
2.1.1 Procurement of technical 
firms for detailed climate risk 
AFC and ACP

=== PAGE 71 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
adaptation solutions for ICRF 
investments in CRI 
assessments, engineering 
assessments of climate 
adaptation solutions for each 
ICRF projects 
 
 
 
2.1.2 Climate risk assessment of 
sub-projects pipeline for ICRF 
investments 
 
 
AFC and ACP 
 
 
2.1.3 Enhancing climate 
adaptation measures in ICRF’s 
investments with the integration 
of climate resilience options 
 
AFC and ACP 
 
 
2.1.4 Support to EPCs and 
project sponsors in the tender 
process of specialized 
firms/consultants to support the 
implementation of adaptation 
measures to enhance the climate 
resilience of the sub-projects 
 
AFC and ACP 
 
 
2.1.5 Overseeing construction 
and implementation of ICRF 
projects to ensure adaptation 
solutions are deployed and 
implemented (EPC Management 
of the adaptation elements) 
 
AFC and ACP 
 
 
2.1.6 Refinement and continuous 
development of ICRF Climate 
Assessment Methodology and 
Approach  
 
AFC and ACP 
 
2.2 Output - Improved capacity 
for scaling up CRI in Africa 
 
2.2.1 Capacity building event for 
ICRF programme incl. detailed 
climate risk assessment, 
adaptation solutions for CRI 
Asset Classes and technical 
knowledge for vulnerable people 
safety and resilience 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
2.2.2 Lessons learned are 
captured from ICRF CRI 
investments and roadmap is 
created for replication across the 
Continent 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
2.2.3 Issue publication - 
knowledge sharing about de-
risking methodologies for CRI 
Asset Classes based on ICRF 
programme 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP)

=== PAGE 72 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
Outcome 3 - Strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk parametric 
insurance (CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI investments in Africa 
AFC and ACP will sign a technical assistance agreement based on which: ACP will procure all the services 
required in compliance with AFC procurement standards. All procurements will be approved by AFC.  
AFC will be responsible for the financial management of GCF grant funding and payments to the selected 
consulting firms / consultants. 
 
Output 3.1 - Standards and 
construction codes are enacted 
and applied 
 
 
3.1.1 Procure consortium of legal, 
policymaking, and climate expert 
firms for improving regulatory 
framework for CRI, CRPI, and 
capacity 
building 
in 
the 
programme States 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.2 
Capacity 
building 
and 
engagement 
with 
key 
proponents, public and private 
sector participants, civil societies 
to identify the regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI Asset Classes  
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.3 Create a work group from 
the consortium of legal and 
policymaking firms for new CRI 
Asset Classes and construction 
codes implementation 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.4 
Create 
and 
share 
recommendation 
reports 
for 
improving regulatory framework 
for CRI Asset Classes per country 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.5 
Support 
regulatory, 
standards and policy making 
process for CRI Asset Classes to 
implement the recommendations 
according to each country needs 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.6 
Report 
on 
regulatory 
framework support for CRI Asset 
Classes 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.1.7 
Issue 
publication 
- 
knowledge sharing about lessons 
learned and recommendations on 
strengthening 
regulatory 
framework for CRI Asset Classes 
in the programme countries 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
Output 3.2 - Strengthening fiscal 
incentives for CRI are supported 
 
3.2.1 Procure fiscal regulatory 
framework 
and 
policymaking 
firms 
for 
promoting 
fiscal 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP)

=== PAGE 73 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
incentives for CRI Asset Classes 
in the programme countries 
3.2.2 
Capacity 
building 
and 
engagement 
with 
key 
proponents, public and private 
sector participants, civil societies 
 
 
3.2.3 
Create 
and 
share 
recommendation 
reports 
for 
improving fiscal policy for CRI 
Asset Classes 
 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.2.4 Support legal regulatory 
and policy making process to 
implement the recommendations 
on fiscal policy according to each 
Country needs 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
Output 3.3 - Innovative CRPI is 
designed for the long-term 
viability of infrastructure 
investments in Africa 
3.3.1 Feasibility study on the 
development of CRPI in Africa; 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.3.2 
CRI 
design 
and 
development for CRI in Africa,  
stakeholder engagements;  
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.3.3  Engagement with donors to 
sponsor CRPI for ICRF projects 
and others 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
3.3.4 Support capacity building 
activities 
(training) 
for 
key 
stakeholders of CRPI 
AFC (in collaboration with ACP) 
 
Note: *AFC (in collaboration with ACP)” means that AFC is the EE that makes the final decision and there 
is a collaboration with ACP. 
 
Relationship between AFC and ACP: ACP will enter into support services agreements with AFC and the 
ICRF will enter into a co-investment agreement with AFC (meaning that for each ICRF Investment will 
have an AFC Direct Investment- aligning the AE and EE interest completely). Under the support 
services agreements, AFC provides investment sourcing services, as well as support in investment 
processing and portfolio management. This ensures access to AFC’s sector and country expertise and its 
specialists in environmental, social and governance matters. The co-investment agreement will define the 
allocation of investment opportunities and the co-investment process between AFC and the ICRF, thereby 
ensuring access to AFC’s pipeline on a pre-agreed basis. 
 
4.6 Flow of Funds 
 
The GCF shall provide equity investment to ICRF, that will in turn invest into high-impact potential projects 
across CRI Asset Classes in Africa. The GCF funds will be channeled by the AE as follows: 
 
Fund Flows for investments 
1. The GCF and AFC will contractually agree that the GCF will commit an USD 240M millions amount of 
funding with the single and stated purpose of AFC investing those funds on behalf of the GCF in a first loss 
equity tranche of the ICRF, on the terms agreed in the FAA and the term sheet. The GCF funds for the 
purpose of the ICRF will be kept on a separate account without being commingled with any other funds.

=== PAGE 74 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
2. GCF (represented by the AFC) will make a capital commitment of USD 240M millions to the ICRF and 
subscribe to limited partnership interest via a subscription agreement. 
3. Once potential portfolio investments have been identified by the ACP (Investment Manager), the ACP 
will issue a drawdown notice to AFC (acting on behalf of GCF). 
4.Upon the receipt of a drawdown notice, AFC will remit the funds to the ICRF from its fiduciary GCF 
account, which in turn will utilize the funds received to make the portfolio investments. 
 
Technical Assistance (TA) 
The GCF will commit USD 11 millions of grant funding for Component 2 & 3. AFC will enter into a TA 
Services agreement with the ACP. The funds will be used according to the pre-agreed procurement and 
budget plans as per AFC’s procurement standards and in line with GCF requirements. 
 
Figure 4.6.1:  Flow of Funds  
 
 
 
Figure 4.6.2:  Flow of Funds GCF Grants 
 
 
Note:  GCF will transfer the grant funds to AFC for the implementation of Outcome 2 & 3, M&E and PMC as per 
the FAA.  AFC will hold and manage the grant resources and make a direct payment to consultants or service 
providers.

=== PAGE 75 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
4.7 Governance of the ICRF 
 
It is envisaged that the Fund will be registered in a Mauritius, a leading Private Equity jurisdiction in Africa, 
set up and ultimately managed by the ACP. The final legal structure of the Fund is subject to final due 
diligence and agreement with the investors in the ICRF. The Fund will be built upon different layers of risk 
tranches bearing different risk/return profiles, as described in greater detail in the Term Sheet. The ICRF 
may take the legal form of a partnership. To this effect, ACP will register a Limited Partnership without legal 
personality in Mauritius (LP/GP structure) which will include a subsidiary of ACP as the General Partner, 
and investors (AFC and other third-party investors) as the Limited Partners.  With respect to governance 
structure, only ACP (through the General Partner) may participate in the management of the LP. The 
Investors (as Limited Partners) will be prohibited from partaking in the management of the LP and shall not 
have the power to bind the LP. The indicative governance of the Fund is described below: 
 
Advisory Committee (AC): The ICRF will have an AC, which is composed of Limited Partners (LPs). The 
Advisory Committee will be compromised of members from investors selected by ACP in its discretion. The 
Advisory Committee shall have the power to: inter alia (i) review, assess and approve or disapprove conflicts 
of interest and (ii) consent to waivers of the investment policy agreed with the investors.  
 
The General Partner:  The General Partner will be responsible for the management of the assets of the 
Fund, for the day-to-day management of the affairs of the Fund as well as for the administration and 
marketing functions related to the Fund, including investigating, analysing, structuring, and negotiating 
potential investments, monitoring the performance of portfolio companies and advising the Fund on 
disposition opportunities. The General Partner holds the decision-making power and has the exclusive 
authority with regard to any decision not specifically delegated or attributed to another entity or service 
provider and supervises the Investment Advisor(s) and any other service providers in the performance of 
their duties. 
 
ACP:  The General Partner shall appoint ACP to perform the day-to-day management and operation of the 
LP (including portfolio management and risk management) pursuant to a Management Agreement to be 
entered into between the General Partner and ACP. At the level of ACP, the following governance structure 
is being implemented: 
 
- 
Board of Directors:  ACP’s Board of Directors is comprised of senior manager of AFC and independent 
directors. The Board is chaired by the AFC CEO and is responsible for oversight of ACP’s operations, 
finances and conflicts management. 
 
- 
Audit Committee:  The independent members of the Board will form the Audit Committee, which assists 
the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities for the integrity of ACP’s and the ICRF financial 
statements, the independent auditor’s qualifications and the performance of the independent auditor.  
 
- 
Conflict Management Committee:  ACP will establish a best-practice procedure for handling actual or 
potential conflicts of interest between AFC and the ICRF. The independent members of the ACP Board 
form the Conflicts Committee, which reviews how conflicts of interest are managed, including steps 
taken to mitigate such conflicts. The committee will provide regular updates to the Board of Directors.  
 
- 
Investment Committee:  Although ACP will leverage AFC services for investment sourcing, the ICRF 
will be managed by dedicated ACP teams and the decision to participate in any investment opportunity 
will be made independently by the Investment Committee of ACP. The IC will have fiduciary duty to the 
investors. The Investment Committees will include selected members of the Board of Directors of ACP, 
the Executive Management Committee of ACP, and any external independent members appointed by 
ACP.

=== PAGE 76 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
In addition, the following governance structure or policies will be set up: 
 
- 
Risk Committee: Prior to any final IC meeting, the Risk Committee is required to confirm approval of 
the deal including sign off on legal, financial, technical, ESG, climate and other diligence items. If actions 
are required pre-signing or post-completion, then the deal team prepares a Corrective Action Plan, 
completion of which becomes a condition for final IC approval. Approvals and Corrective Action Plans 
are recorded prior to final IC by the deal team. 
 
- 
Internal Compliance Committees: ACP will establish policies, procedures, and governance structures 
to identify and manage investment management and operational risks. Any such policy will be based 
on AFC’s existing applicable policies. It prioritizes adherence to the highest standards of corporate 
governance, compliance and ESG policies and strict enforcement of those policies. These policies cover 
issues from anti-bribery and anti-corruption, prevention of sexual harassment at the workplace, anti-
money laundering, insider trading and conflict of interests. ACP will also adopt certain codes for whistle-
blowers and fair pay and equal opportunities for employees etc. In this regard, the Investment Manager 
has formed various committees to ensure monitoring and due and proper implementation of the said 
policies.  
 
- 
Corporate Compliances: All fund related compliances will be outsourced to a law firm. For the Fund, 
Investment Manager and Portfolio companies, corporate secretarial compliances will be outsourced to 
a Company Secretary (CS) firm. These will be overseen by ACP’s Compliance and Finance function. 
 
- 
Investment Approval/Divestment Process: The Investment Manager will apply a three-tier approach 
to investment and divestment approval. The investment team together with the respective risk and 
internal compliance committees perform due diligence of investments or assessment of exits, that is put 
forward for Investment Committee approval. ICRF only invests in projects that meet eligibility criteria of 
the GCF. 
 
- 
Internal Compliance Process (Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Corruption Policy): ACP takes 
into consideration the potential risks of money laundering and corruption in local projects by developing 
robust anti-money laundering and anti-corruption policies and assessing potential risks already in 
investment due-diligence stage. The monitoring of risks is ensured by the respective policies as follows: 
 
- 
Anti-Money Laundering: ACP will have anti-money laundering policy, which will be designed as per 
local legislation and industry best practices.  Any such policy will be based on AFC’s existing AML policy. 
The policy gives importance to identification of investors and identification through scrutiny in order to 
check which investor poses money laundering risk. Transactions which are suspicious in nature (the 
source of which is unclear or involving large cash investments) shall be considered as part of the anti-
money laundering policy. 
 
- 
Anti-Corruption Policy: This policy, to be based on AFC anti-corruption policy, will be applicable to 
ACP and all personnel employed by it or acting for or on behalf of ACP wherever they are located such 
as any advisors /representatives hired by the ACP. The policy also provides for the development of anti-
corruption and sanctions, diligence procedures, where such procedures are “gate-checking” 
requirements for potential transactions and include restricted party screening, anti-corruption checklists, 
and mechanisms for heightened compliance review. IDD/ Business Integrity checks are undertaken by 
independent agencies, which reports are submitted to the Head of Operations along with the relevant 
Deal Captains for review. 
 
4.8 Track record of AE and EE: AFC was established in 2007 to be the catalyst for private sector-led 
infrastructure investment across Africa. Today, AFC has established itself as a preeminent investment 
grade-rated multilateral financial institution in Africa. AFC’s approach combines specialist industry expertise 
with a focus on financial and technical advisory, project structuring, project development and risk capital to 
address Africa’s infrastructure development needs and drive sustainable economic growth. AFC invests in 
high-quality infrastructure assets that provide essential services in the core infrastructure sectors of power,

=== PAGE 77 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
natural resources, heavy industry, transport, and telecommunications. To date, the Corporation has 
invested over USD 10billion in projects in 35 countries across Africa. AFC is committed to investing in 
projects that will provide substantial, measurable benefit to a region or sector in the long term and will be 
the template for future infrastructure investment and development. However, the Corporation also considers 
the short-term social, economic, and environmental impacts. Where possible, the projects will utilize local 
resources and suppliers, with jobs being created during both construction and operational phases. In recent 
years, AFC has been radically rethinking its approach in response to the ever-growing needs of Africa’s 
infrastructure and climate transition.  
 
AFC is now one of the leading infrastructure investors in renewable energy on the African continent. In 
terms of AFC’s track record, its renewable energy platform (Lekela) and portfolio include 1.4 GW of 
operating capacity in renewable power will a clear plan to grow this to 3GW in the next few years. AFC also 
led several award-winning renewable energy projects in Africa such as the 26MW Cabeolica wind farm 
project -providing over 20% of the energy needs of Cape Verde, the 60MW wind power investment in 
Djibouti – the country's first renewable energy plant, 44MW Hydro Power project in Cote D’Ivoire (Singrobo) 
and 420MW Nachtigal hydropower plant in Cameroon. 
 
The Corporation has invested $1.3B in the Transport & Logistics such as ports and roads which are 
increasingly vulnerable to the impacts of climate risks such as flooding, sea level rise, precipitation, high 
temperatures, etc... As a response, AFC’s strategy is to integrate climate resilience as part of its programme 
on the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund. AFC’s pipeline projects are often characterized by a clear 
analysis of the occurrence of various climate threats and the potential impacts. The Takoradi port in Ghana, 
where AFC holds 35% shareholding, is typical as AFC invested in several ports on the continent (i.e., New 
Owendo International Port, San Pedro Port in Ivory Coast, Arise Mauritania, etc..). AFC partnered with 
Takoradi port to expand its capacity to approximately ten times. The extension included measures to make 
it more resilient to climate stressors such as sea-level rise, storm surge, temperature, among others. In the 
road sector, AFC also played a key role in the development of the Henri Konan Bédié Bridge which is a 
US$365 million public private partnership (PPP) project in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire and consists of a 6.4km 
highway and 1.9km bridge connecting Abidjan’s residential Riviera district directly with the commercial 
district of Marcory. 
 
Rather than simply providing funding for individual projects, AFC now seeks to take a wholesale approach 
to infrastructure investments by investing in every step of the value chain through financing ecosystems 
that help integrate economies and communities and transform lives. This ecosystem-investment approach 
enables AFC to increase project competitiveness and further alleviate high social, economic, and 
environmental risks that governments face when they lack the necessary local capacity.  
 
Moreover, this approach also supports governments to overcome their capacity gaps. As one of the highest-
rated institutions in Africa – A3/P2 rating from Moody’s – AFC can deliver on ambitious projects, manage 
investments, and pursue the highest levels of corporate governance, transparency and sustainable 
development. In becoming a member of the Corporation and hence bestowing on the Corporation preferred 
creditor status, member countries can de-risk development projects and access capital at a cost they would 
be unable to attain. Looking forward, AFC aims to build an agile organization with USD 10 billion in assets 
under management by 2023 to address the urgent and important mandate of developing and financing 
climate-resilient infrastructure, natural resources, and industrial assets to catalyze sustainable, inclusive 
economic growth of the African continent for enhanced productivity. AFC has sought to address the wider 
infrastructure divide by originating, structuring, and executing projects in Africa (Figure B.4.8).

=== PAGE 78 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
Africa Finance Corporation at Glance – Member Countries and Investment Footprint 
 
  
 
 
Figure B.2.2. A map showing the AFC’s African member states and investments 
 
 
AFC Capital Partners (ACP): EE track record.  
 
AFC Capital Partners (ACP) is the wholly owned asset management subsidiary of Africa Finance 
Corporation (AFC) – a leading infrastructure solutions provider on the continent. The ACP’s inaugural 
leadership team has deep experience in both investments and climate change in developing countries and 
Africa and a track record with more than US$2 billion in climate investments. ACP aims to provide 
institutional investors with a unique access to attractive and de-risked investment opportunities in low 
carbon and climate resilient infrastructure across the African continent. ACP will leverage the scale and 
breath of AFC’s investment track record to offer co-investment opportunities in infrastructure projects with 
commercial returns.  
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Explain why the project/program requires GCF funding to address mitigation or adaptation measures, i.e. 
Why is the project/program not currently being financed by public and/or private sector? Which market 
failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other domestic or international sources of 
financing?  
 
The associated costs of climate impacts on infrastructures can be assessed based on two approaches; a 
reactive “no adaptation” approach which analyses a changing future climate on a given infrastructure design 
standards, and; a proactive “adaptation” approach which reduces future risks and damages by changing

=== PAGE 79 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
36https://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature%20Story/Africa/Conference%20Edition%20Enhancing%20Afri
cas%20Infrastructure.pdf 
37https://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Feature%20Story/Africa/Conference%20Edition%20Enhancing%20Afri
cas%20Infrastructure.pdf 
38 Bars that are higher than the 100 line represent costs of climate change relative to the optimal costs of maintenance for 
current climate; bars below the line indicate potential savings. Box indicates the range of costs over the 25th to the 75th 
percentile of climate change scenarios; line in box represents the mean value; and whiskers extending from box refer to the 
5th and 95th percentile of costs over climate change scenarios 
39 https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/54176/1/657452203.pdf  
design standards at upgrades or reconstruction (WBG36). Such cost can be provided for maintenance and 
new construction/reconstruction. Published engineering research and material studies have attempted to 
understand the relationship between climate stressors and response. Estimated reactive response costs 
associated with each climate stressor are significant for transportation infrastructure, including roads and 
bridges across selected regions in Africa 37. Figure C.2.1 presents the regional costs of conducting 
maintenance on a road network damaged by climate-induced events (WBG). The maintenance intends to 
restore roads to their pre-climate change condition, considering the periodic rehabilitation costs in the 
baseline (i.e., historical climate costs). Flooding is one of the most prominent climate stressors that causes 
a relatively higher cost increase relative to baseline costs across the region. These increases are high in 
the Central and Western regions due to stressors associated with temperature leading to higher costs in 
Central and Eastern Africa relative to other regions. The direct role of precipitation, a precursor of flooding, 
results in lower costs than other stressors. 
 
Figure C.2.1. Net reactive response costs to climate change impact by historical optimal maintenance cost 
(i.e., no climate change = 100) for the period 2015-2050. The vertical axis is normalized (at 100) to the 
historic (no-climate- change) costs38.  
 
Furthermore, it has been reported that 
the impact of climate change on 
infrastructure, specifically on roads, 
varies between the five different 
regions in Africa (Chinowsky et al., 
201139; Figure C.2.2). This inference 
was drawn from selected countries to 
compare all the regions quantitatively. 
The “worst-case” climate scenario is 
among the considered scenarios in the 
analysis because policymakers often 
desire to know the maximum impact of 
climate change on socio-economic 
activities 
to 
develop 
appropriate 
contingency plans against the greatest 
threat posed by climate change. In 
northern      Africa, where about 70% of 
the road networks are paved, much of 
the predicted climatic change is evident in the rise in temperatures which has a greater potential effect on 
paved roads than precipitation. The impact on the cost of new construction and/or maintenance under a no 
adaptation situation is estimated at USD 488.4 million compared to USD 61.7 million where appropriate 
adaptation measures are applied. The cost ratio of adaptation to no adaptation is USD137.1 to USD 468 
million in the western region. About 85% of the region’s road inventory is unpaved. Some parts of the region, 
including the Sahel, are expected to experience increased temperatures and precipitation. This makes the 
region’s inventory more vulnerable to increasing precipitation. The impact on cost is estimated at USD 203.4 
and USD 605.2 million for adaptation and no adaptation, respectively, for the East-Central Africa region. 
Like the western region, the east has a high percentage of unpaved roads, which is more susceptible to 
increasing precipitation. In the south-central region, where the road inventory consists of about 88% 
unpaved roads, the cost for applying adequate adaptation (no adaptation) measures is USD 159.3 (USD

=== PAGE 80 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
40 https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/54176/1/657452203.pdf 
 
298.5) million. The cost of adaptation (no adaptation) is 
estimated at USD 102.4 (USD 434.2) million for the 
southern region. 
 
  Figure C.2.2. Regional estimates of adapt/no adapt 
cost in Million $USD on road infrastructure40 (Source: 
Chinowsky et al. 2011) 
 
Considering all the above, it is evidential that:  
 
- 
The scarcity of domestic public resources of 
fiscally constrained African nations does not allow 
African countries to meet the need for traditional 
infrastructure financing, consequently abstracting the 
capacity to finance climate-resilient infrastructures.  
- 
The high upfront cost of these investments 
modifies the risk-adjusted return of these assets 
reduce the appetite for this type of investment, and 
finally.  
- 
The need for GCF investment in the  ICRF 
capital structure as anchor investor (given the theme 
of the fund and mandate to finance resilience), to 
finance non remunerative incremental cost of resilient 
measures and de-risk overall investment to attract 
private sector.  
 
The rationale above justifies the need for GCF resources to make ICRF a viable solution to market 
barriers and deliver on impacts that are core to the GCF investment thesis.  
 
With Africa being the most vulnerable continent to climate change, mainstreaming climate change is a 
key requirement for the long-term viability of its infrastructure. Financing Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) of African economies would require significant investments estimated at US$ 2.3 
trillion (which includes US$ 291 billion for adaptation) over the next decade. Yet, there are limited 
capital investments to infrastructure systems’ climate resilience. The ICRF will mobilize public and 
private sector finance to bridge this gap by removing current market barriers that limit a greater flow of 
capital in low carbon and climate-resilient projects in Africa. 
 
Removing market barriers: Several barriers may constrain or hamper the bankability of infrastructure 
projects in general, which are also relevant for new projects that will need to be climate proofed. These 
include, among other things, high real and perceived risks associated with these investments, 
weaknesses in the enabling environment, poor project preparation and/or market sounding. Creating 
a supportive enabling environment will be critical to driving more climate-resilient infrastructure 
investment. 
 
A particular challenge for funding climate-resilient infrastructure is that many of the benefits may be 
hard to monetize, particularly for protective infrastructure such as flood defenses. An optimal risk-
sharing allocation and concessional funding are crucial to ensuring bankability for suitable projects. 
This determination is typically undertaken at the outset of the project, during the project 
conceptualization and design phase. The resilience agenda brings a new dimension to this - given the 
need to consider how the allocation of climate-related risks will affect actors’ incentives to manage 
these risks.

=== PAGE 81 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
Within that context, public finance providers can use various tools to allocate risks effectively and bridge 
the bankability gap for climate-resilient infrastructure. These tools include: 
 
- 
Project preparation support, in the form of technical and financial assistance to project owners or 
concessionaires. This is particularly important given the potential additional complexity of considering 
climate resilience in infrastructure development. 
 
- 
Blended finance can be used to support investment in climate-resilient infrastructure. In this context, 
GCF can play an instrumental role to      mobilize institutional capital at scale by improving the risk-return 
profile of innovative investment vehicles and helping un-bankable projects become economically viable. 
For instance, blended finance can use credit enhancement instruments such as first loss concessional 
equity and insurance can de-risks physical and commercial risks.  
 
- 
Expanded safeguards that integrate resilience aspects are likely to play a key role in this regard by 
providing a standard for financing by private/commercial financial actors. A particular area of interest 
relates to the potential of insurance that could be developed for climate-resilient infrastructure.  
 
- 
Insuring new and existing infrastructure against future risks due to climate change could be a 
factor in reducing financing costs through risk mutualization. Premiums, or availability, of such insurance  
would need to reflect climate resilience as a potential avenue to internalize resilience into the project 
finance while reducing actual financing costs. However, this depends on the availability and commercial 
viability of such products 
 
 
ICRF will address financial market barriers to unlock capital at scale 
 
Table C.2.3. ICRF instruments to overcome financial market barriers 
 
Instruments 
Potential role 
ICRF Approach  
Project climate risk 
assessment, adaptation 
solutions and technical 
assistance for the 
projects development 
Support the development of 
bankable 
infrastructure 
projects 
up to 20% of the ICRF will be invested 
to support early equity investments in 
project development. AFC has a 
dedicated project development team 
with a solid track record.  
In addition, AFC capital partners will 
seek to mobilize technical assistance 
funding from various sources, including 
the Green Climate Fund, to provide 
technical 
support 
to 
sponsors 
in 
integrating climate risks in project 
design and construction. Technical 
assistance 
will 
also 
support 
the 
elaboration of standardized codes for 
climate-resilient infrastructure.  
Co-investment vehicles  
Pool public and private capital 
at scale to finance climate-
resilient infrastructure  
ICRF is designed to mobilize funding at 
scale to co-invest alongside AFC in low 
carbon 
and 
climate-resilient 
infrastructure. ICRF funding strategy is 
to blend concessional capital (public 
and philanthropic) with commercial 
capital from institutional investors to 
deliver 
market-rate 
returns 
and 
enhance the bankability of climate-
resilient projects.

=== PAGE 82 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
Equity subordination 
Reduce 
risk 
for 
private 
investors, as the public sector 
takes on the 
Highest risk tranches 
The mobilization of concessional capital 
for ICRF junior equity tranche will 
support i) the overall return objective of 
the Fund and ii) de-risk institutional 
capital as the concessional investors 
will be subordinated to commercial 
investors – hence offering a first loss 
shield 
Climate Insurance  
Improve the credit rating of 
investment 
projects 
by 
reducing 
physical 
climate 
change risk and commercial 
risks 
With the support of GCF, ICRF will 
develop climate risk insurance products 
to mitigate residual climate risks.  
 
Africa needs to reduce its massive infrastructure deficit to realize its full development potential, achieve 
structural transformation and market integration. The main constrain is the continent’s limited domestic 
revenue base calling for the need to tap into non-domestic revenue. In addition to the 93 billion annual 
deficit with the need for additional billions to make these infrastructures climate-resilient and ensure they 
have a low carbon footprint. This programme will address current challenges by supporting the 
enhancement of Africa’s legal and regulatory framework for investment in climate-resilient infrastructure, 
promoting the highest standards, providing necessary concessional finance, and reducing efficiency gaps 
prevailing in existing infrastructure spending.  
 
Private Sector, principally financial institutions, have demonstrated an increased appetite for infrastructure 
investments in Africa, both as debt and equity, influenced by the growing prevalence of the project finance 
structure. Private equity infrastructure funds have also been growing in participation and relevance in this 
space. The growth is attributable to the rising opportunities in physical assets induced by the strengthening 
of institutions to protect private sector investment. The DFI community, including the AFC, plays an 
important facilitation role by becoming more and more involved in projects at the early stage of development. 
This ensures that by the time a project comes to the market, it has a bankable set of project documents, 
appropriate environmental and social considerations have been accounted for. The regulatory framework 
is in place to undertake such transactions. However, the need for additional resources to address the 
resilience of current and future infrastructure modifies the risk profile of the investment and creditworthiness 
of the asset owner, reducing attractiveness for the private sector. GCF involvement is necessary to de-risk 
this type of investment and lock in other strategic investors, including institutional investors.  
 
Climate change has destroyed various physical assets or disrupted the service delivery of infrastructures, 
thus creating an obstacle to achieving the necessary economic and development goals. Thus, there is a 
threat of a decline in the overall asset value. In addition, the occurrence of climate hazards may also 
increase infrastructure maintenance costs, shorten asset life, and increase their rate of depreciation. 
Albeit availability of private capital globally for climate adaptation and mitigation, current allocations from 
institutional investors into infrastructure are low—approximately 1 per cent of total asset allocations. 
Moreover, there is a shortage of other private capital for climate-resilient infrastructure in developing 
countries, especially in Africa. Infrastructure finances require high amounts of finance at the project 
construction phase, in addition to the need to invest in project development and additional resources 
needed to make infrastructure climate resilient. Those high costs of capital will often render infrastructure 
projects financially unfeasible.  
 
Concessional resources are needed from the GCF to reduce risks sufficiently to blend other public and 
private sources of capital and accelerate deployment of investments in climate-resilient and more 
sustainable infrastructures. In addition, GCF concessional finance is needed to support risks assessment 
and management, capacity building and improvement to countries’ enabling environments, necessary 
conditions to reduce the risk across the infrastructure project lifecycle.

=== PAGE 83 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The ICRF programme is designed to remove market barriers and mainstream climate resilience as “THE 
NEW STANDARD” in the design, development, construction, and operation of targeted infrastructure assets 
in the built environment. ICRF is the first of its kind climate resilient infrastructure fund on the African 
Continent. The ICRF programme will remove several barriers that would typically constrain or hamper the 
bankability of climate resilient infrastructure projects. These include, among other things, high real and 
perceived risks associated with these investments, weaknesses in the enabling environment, weak capacity 
in terms climate risk assessment, limited or inexistent climate risk insurance for infrastructure, poor project 
preparation, lack of standards in building climate resilient infrastructure. The programme will create a 
supportive enabling environment which will be critical to driving more climate-resilient infrastructure 
investments at scale. ICRF will create a sustainable path to blending public and private capital to unlock 
investments at scale in climate resilient infrastructure projects. Specifically, ICRF will use concessional 
sources to increase bankability and cover the incremental CAPEX that is relevant to the climate-resilience 
upgrade of an asset and technology transfer cost including value chain creating and legal cost, best in class 
operational management integrating resilience options throughout the life cycle of the targeted 
infrastructure assets.  
 
In this manner, ICRF ensures that commercial investors can meet their investment hurdle rates. The 
benefits and risks of the ICRF investments will be captured through monitoring and evaluation process 
during the projects’ life cycle. The benefits will include savings in operations and maintenance (O&M), 
additions to the longevity of the assets, preventing of the value decline, offsetting losses by innovative 
insurance. The projects data and knowledge will be catalogued and shared with public, private sector, and 
civil societies to raise awareness about climate risk, to advocate for mitigating risks at the design stage, 
and use of climate risk insurance for long-term assets.  
 
Components 2 & 3 have [10] years life span which is deemed sufficient to deliver its agenda of developing 
climate change standards and metrics for climate-resilient infrastructure in Africa and support of resilient 
infrastructure regulatory framework including construction codes system, and climate data and standards 
implementation for parametric climate risk insurance. By the end of the programme, standards, models, 
and data will be made available for programme countries. ACP’s network of investors, climate think tanks 
and centers of excellence, and even the GCF Climate Network (C-NET) through community of practices 
indicated high interest in supporting the development and/or adoption of standards, metrics, and tools for 
climate data for climate-resilient infrastructure development in Africa. Component 3 implementation plan 
includes activities to ensure knowledge transfer and TA to the programme governments for using the 
climate change risk data collection and analysis model. As a recent member of Coalition for Climate 
Resilient Investment, ACP will take the opportunity to share the outcomes on a global scale.  
 
The desired outcome of the programme is to establish climate resilient infrastructure as a distinctive CRI 
Asset Classes. With GCF’s de-risking ICRF aspires to deliver a proof of concept that will provide comfort to 
conventional investors to scale up exploring blended structures or on commercial basis if possible. The 
desired outcome will be positively reinforced by the creation of enabling environment driven by an informed 
policy making, knowledge creation and sharing and climate data infrastructure.  
 
Exit: The ICRF fund will exit its portfolio investments in sub-projects through strategic trade sales to strategic 
investors or initial public offerings on capital markets. The proceeds from the investment exits will be 
reflowed to GCF and other investors in accordance with the term sheet. After a successful implementation 
of the programme, it is expected that GCF de-risking at fund level will no longer be required as the ICRF 
would have demonstrated the investment case and long-term viability of integrating climate resilience in 
infrastructure projects, but also these investors would be more comfortable deploying capital in Africa at 
scale for this new climate resilient infrastructure asset class.

=== PAGE 84 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
This document is classified as: DC3 Internal - Not Approved for Public Distribution 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) 
Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv 
+ v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
253.755  million 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
240 million 
 
 
Enter % 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
13.755 million  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
511.32  
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
AFC 
Equity 
 
50* 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
N/A 
senior 
 
Pension funds, 
insurance 
companies, 
sovereign 
wealth funds, 
DFIs and 
Foundations 
Equity 
 
460 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
 
 
 
senior 
 
AFC 
In kind 
 
1.32 ** 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = 
(a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
765.075  
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
* In addition to the contribution of AFC in the form of equity investment in the 
ICRF Fund, AFC will also aim to provide additional direct parallel investments in 
sub-projects amounting to US$100 million. 
** AFC will also provide US$ 1.32 M (in-kind contribution) for the programme 
management cost.  
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g., sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).

=== PAGE 85 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
This document is classified as: DC3 Internal - Not Approved for Public Distribution 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or program 
(refer to the co-financing policy).  
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. 
above and disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a 
single component or output. Provide the summarized cost estimates in the table below and the 
detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
Component 
Output 
Indicativ
e cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Name of 
Institutio
ns 
Component 
1: Blended 
finance is 
mobilized at 
scale to 
accelerate 
CRI 
investments 
in the 
beneficiary 
African 
countries 
1.1 ICRF is 
fully 
operational 
and raised 
capital at the 
fund level 
1.2 Co-
investments - 
ICRF 
investments in 
sub-projects 
750 
240 
Equity 
50 
Equity 
AFC 
 
 
460 
 
 
Equity 
Pension 
funds, 
insurance 
companie
s, 
sovereign 
wealth 
funds, 
DFIs and 
Foundatio
ns 
Component 
2 Improved 
climate risk 
assessments 
and 
adaptation 
solutions for 
CRI; 
improved 
capacity for 
scaling up 
CRI in Africa 
2.1 2.1 
Strengthened 
climate risk 
assessment 
and 
adaptation 
solutions for 
ICRF 
investments in 
CRI 
2.2 Improved 
capacity for 
scaling up 
investments in 
CRI in Africa 
8 
8 
Grants 
- 
Choose 
an item. 
Click here 
to enter 
text. 
Component 
3: 
Strengthene
d regulatory 
framework 
and 
innovative 
climate risk 
3.1 Standards 
and 
construction 
codes are 
enacted and 
applied 
3.2 
Strengthening 
3 
3 
Grants 
- 
Choose 
an item. 
Click here 
to enter 
text.

=== PAGE 86 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
This document is classified as: DC3 Internal - Not Approved for Public Distribution 
parametric 
insurance 
(CRPI) is 
mainstreame
d for the 
long-term 
viability of 
CRI 
investments 
in Africa 
fiscal 
incentives for 
CRI are 
supported 
3.3 Innovative 
CRPI is 
designed for 
the long-term 
viability of 
infrastructure 
investments in 
Africa 
Monitoring & 
evaluation 
costs 
Design and 
implementatio
n cost for M&E 
and 
Independent 
data collection 
for evaluative 
data and 
information 
2.1 
2.1 
Grants 
- 
 
 
Project 
Management 
Costs 
Gender 
mainstreaming
, compliance, 
audit, 
supervision 
1.975  
0.655  
Grants 
1.32 
 
In Kind 
AFC 
Indicative total cost (USD)** 765.075  
253.755 
 
511.32 
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information 
presented in other annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
In case of a multi-country/region program, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for 
each country in annex 17, if available. 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 
0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
 
If the project/program is expected to support capacity building and technology 
development/transfer, please provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total 
requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possible. 
 
The capacity building funding by GCF finance are planned and implemented via the technical 
assistance (TA). Please see further details in the Outcome 2 & 3 – TA information of the FP.

=== PAGE 87 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/program against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Potential of the project/program to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas. 
 
The aim and the purpose of the proposed Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) is to increase climate 
resilience and adaptative capacity of critical built infrastructures in African countries to current and future 
climatic events such as rising temperatures, changing rainfall patterns and rising sea levels as well as to 
potential increases in extreme weather events, such as storms, floods, extreme heat etc. 
 
By providing concessional finance, ICRF will primarily cover the adaptation and resilience costs necessary 
to catalyze financing for interventions to adapt infrastructure to climate change in four targeted sectors and 
create market for: Climate Resilient Transport and Logistics; Climate Resilient Energy systems; Climate 
Resilient Economic Zones and Climate Resilient Telecommunication and Digital assets. 
 
By promoting successful adaptation approaches to improve the long-term resilience of infrastructure, ICRF 
aims to provide a substantial contribution towards increased resilience for Infrastructure and built 
environment (GCF-ARA 3) and Most vulnerable people and communities (GCF-ARA 1) in [19] African 
countries of which [11] are among the least developed countries (LDCs). The total value of infrastructure 
assets expected to be protected against climatic events is about USD 2 billion. The programme is also 
expected to benefit about 50,365,031 direct beneficiaries, and 144,115,769 indirect beneficiaries respectively 
representing 8.8% and 25.18% vis-à-vis the total population of ICRF countries. Targeted beneficiaries are 
these infrastructures’ users from Africa that are expected to be protected from infrastructure damages from 
climate change, related service disruption associated with potential adverse economic impacts. It is expected 
that at least 50% of both direct and indirect resilient beneficiaries are women. 
 
ICRF investment decision-making is based on mandatory climate risks screening and assessments including 
through consideration of local and infrastructure specific climate stressors and prioritization of resilience and 
adaptation measures for projects / programmes. By systematically mainstreaming climate change adaptation 
into infrastructure planning, implementation, and maintenance, this project will ensure adaptation and long-
term sustainability are built-in from the start as a core consideration of infrastructure finance. Such good 
practice will contribute to avoiding the lock-in of long-lived climate-vulnerable infrastructure to a significant 
degree.  
 
Investing in the resilience of infrastructure (in the targeted African countries with GCF NOLs) is the core 
investment thesis of the ICRF. This way, ICRF will contribute to bridge the Africa infrastructure gap in a 
climate resilient way, which is a critical condition to ensure long-term connectivity amongst people, access 
to and from rural areas, as well as access to markets, energy and trade. By doing so, the programme 
supports vulnerable people’ livelihoods through enhanced access to a reliable, safe, and affordable 
infrastructure base.

=== PAGE 88 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Baseline: Climate change presents significant implications for infrastructure. Current design standards for 
infrastructure building are based on outdated, historic climate data; and today; infrastructure financing 
does not account for future climate risks. As infrastructure assets have long operational lifetimes they are 
sensitive not only to the existing climate at the time of their construction, but also to climate variations over 
the decades of their use. For example, a substantial proportion of infrastructure built in the next five years, 
will still be in use in the middle of the century.  In the face of climate change, planning, financing, operation, 
maintenance, and management of infrastructure need to be revised. Existing infrastructure stock 
comprised of bridges, roads, power stations and other energy infrastructures, as well as economic zones -  
most of them constructed in coastal zones in Africa  -  is already vulnerable to today’s extreme weather. 
Climate change will increase these vulnerabilities, affecting supply, access to resources, operations among 
others. To increase the resilience of both new and existing infrastructure, countries must be prepared to 
plan ahead and manage the impacts of climate change. 
 
ICRF’s paradigm shift potential: The paradigm shift lies in the programme’s holistic approach to building 
resilience to climate change by integrating strategies focused on climate adaptation, climate analytics, risk 
preparedness, and risk transfer in the context of infrastructure investment and finance. ICRF aspires to 
introduce a new product to the market that can be monetized and upscaled: climate resilient infrastructure 
as an asset class. The integration of the specific elements described in the programme’s design and 
implementation will create the conditions necessary to sustain impacts beyond project end and build 
potential for the scaling up of activities based on the premise that following GCF’s intervention a successful 
proof of concept will provide comfort to the private and public sector to take up subsequent phases on a 
pure commercial basis. 
 
ICRF will contribute to promote Systemic Resilience through: 
 
• 
Improving government prioritization of national resilience infrastructure and developing a 
metric for systemic resilience: Through utilization of existing network of early warning systems 
infrastructure, delivery of enhanced capacity-building to create building codes, meteorological 
agencies, and technicians, ICRF aims to deliver actionable outcomes that can be used from the 
countries in their future investment design and master planning. As such, the programme contributes to 
the development of more effective NAPs, NDCs, national strategic plans and country programming. 
 
• 
Infrastructure Asset Design & Structuring: ICRF develops a framework for the integration of 
physical climate risks in investment technical and economic appraisal. Engineers typically look at 
historical climate patterns to inform their asset designs. Often design is based on minimum regulatory 
requirements in the project location. Currently there is no incentive for engineers, contractors, or 
investors to exceed these regulatory requirements due to limited or no knowledge of the potential 
climate change risks impact.  
ICRF 1) develops a framework to quantify the economic, social and financial benefits of incremental 
investments in resilience and 2) uses GCF’s catalytic financing as a substantial and critical incentive for 
the financial markets and services to embed resilience upfront. 
 
• 
Financial Innovation and mobilizing funding at scale: the ICRF fund will blend commercial and 
concessional equity capital to mobilize institutional investors at scale for climate resilient infrastructure. 
The concessional capital from the GCF will support the resilience measures and de-risk the 
mobilization of institutional investors, while the commercial investors will provide equity required for the 
construction of the target infrastructure assets. This innovative capital structure of the ICRF will not 
only support the bankability of climate resilient infrastructure projects and the overall return objective of 
the Fund, but also de-risk the participation of institutional investors. The concessional equity tranche 
financed by GCF will be subordinated to the commercial equity tranche – hence providing a partial risk 
protection to institutional investors. The ICRF will primarily seek to raise capital from institutional 
investors such as pension funds, sovereign wealth funds (SWFs), and insurance companies as they 
hold the necessary long-term resources to scale up climate investments from “billions to trillions” at a

=== PAGE 89 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
global level. Institutional investors collectively have about USD 101 trillion in assets-under-
management (AUM) globally (2020 estimates- See Table D2.1 below). In Africa alone, this figure would 
amount to overall 1.8 trillion assets under management (AUM) in 2020. However, only a negligible 
portion of institutional capital is channeled into infrastructure and climate investments in Africa due to 
the following barriers which are addressed by the ICRF programme: 
 
i. 
High-risk perception and limited availability of risk-adjusted returns for climate investments in 
developing countries – mitigated by GCF de-risking in the blended finance structure 
ii. Lack of investment access and vehicles – ICRF is a unique investment vehicle for climate resilient 
infrastructure, and  
iii. Lack of credible institutional asset managers with solid track record in delivering returns to investors, 
mitigated by the investment track record of Africa Finance Corporation.  
 
Table D2.1: AUM per types of institutional investor globally
 
ICRF has a strong focus on de-risking and mobilizing African institutional investors for climate 
resilient infrastructure, as well as a targeted outreach to global investors 
Within Africa, the assets-under-management of domestic institutional investors is experiencing continuous 
rise and these types of investors are likely to provide the necessary long-term capital required for climate 
resilient infrastructure – unlike the banking sector that offers relatively shorter tenor financing due to their 
Assets-Liability mismatch.  
Table D2.2: AUM per types of institutional investor in Africa 
 
Source: PwC and AfDB, Mobilizing Institutional Investors for African Infrastructure (2020) 
African pension funds have been expanding in several countries across the continent, offering a viable 
option for long-term financing opportunities. PwC (2015) estimates that pension funds’ assets-under-
management in 12 African markets will rise to about USD 1.1 trillion by 2020, from USD 676 billion in 
2017. Based on asset size as a percentage of GDP, the top three pension funds on the continent are in 
South Africa (87.1%), Namibia (76.6%) and Botswana (47.3%). South Africa holds over USD 207 billion 
in assets – but strong growth is coming from other parts of the continent. In Nigeria, where regulatory 
changes were implemented in 2006, pension funds have managed to accumulate over USD 30 billion in 
assets. Collectively African Pensions funds, sovereign wealth funds manage over USD 1.8trillion, but a 
very limited amount is invested in infrastructure. There is a significant market potential for climate resilient 
infrastructure – and the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund is the first of its kind, aiming to unlock this

=== PAGE 90 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
market with GCF de-risking. AFC had preliminary engagements with institutional investors and received 
positive feedback on the ICRF investment proposition. The GCF’s commitment and de-risking will be 
instrumental to mobilize funding at scale from institutional investors.  
 
• 
Climate Risk Insurance: AFC will integrate parametric insurance as part of ICRF on best effort basis, 
aligned with ICRF's stated objective to become a successful investment vehicle providing capital to 
climate-resilient infrastructure development in Africa. This parametric insurance activities proposed 
under Output 3.3 could play several roles: 1) providing a demonstration effect supporting the use of 
parametric insurance to enable climate-resilient infrastructure, and 2) convening and engaging key 
stakeholders and market participants for a more structural / long-term market transformation and support 
the development of a favorable regulatory and policy framework for climate resilient infrastructure which 
would support scaling the adoption of climate insurance in the African infrastructure market. The use of 
parametric insurance solutions will address bankability issues linked to asset climatic risk exposure.  
 
• 
Knowledge sharing: ICRF advocates for the delivery of climate risk databases to be available as an 
open-source public good in support of the region’s sustainable economic and social development as an 
overarching goal of the programme. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/program in relation to the Sustainable Development 
Goals  
 
Climate resilient Infrastructure development sits at the center of all development pathways and is closely 
linked to economic growth, environmental outcomes, and well-being of populations, as such investing in 
climate resilient infrastructure is presented as a lifeline for sustainable development. ICRF aspires to meet 
African participating countries’ both climate and development objectives by promoting sustainable 
investing in infrastructure networks that are resilient to today’s climate and prepared for the future 
changing climate. ICRF will promote sustainability based on rigorous due diligence, capital discipline, 
stakeholders engagement, gender mainstreaming and social inclusion, local employment safeguards, with 
a view to also safeguarding affordability of the assets. ICRF principally contributes in participating 
countries to the direct realization of Sustainable Development Goal 9 especially its target 9.1 focusing on 
developing resilience of infrastructure and 9.4 calling for upgrading of existing infrastructure. 
 
• 
Target 9.1 Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and 
transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a focus 
on affordable and equitable access for all 
• 
Target 9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure […] to make them sustainable, with all countries taking 
action in accordance with their respective capabilities. 
 
By providing concessional finance to ICRF, the GCF will contribute to target 9.A inviting to : Facilitate 
sustainable and resilient infrastructure development in developing countries through enhanced financial, 
technological and technical support to African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing 
countries and small island developing States. In addition, ICRF is consistent with and provide contribution 
to following SDGs: 
 
• 
SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
• 
SDG 8 : Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all 
• 
SGD 10 : Reduce inequality within and among countries 
• 
SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
• 
SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
• 
SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to 
justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.

=== PAGE 91 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
ICRF presents a real potential to contribute to sustainable development with impacts on all the dimensions 
of sustainability as co-benefits to the core adaptation results expected from its implementation: Economic, 
Environment and Social including consideration for gender equality, health, safety and wellbeing. 
 
Economic co-benefits: Proven a central factor in the productivity of firms, the wellbeing of local population, 
and thus the resilience of entire economies, resilient infrastructures are a key enabler of economic 
development. ICRF will provide a substantial contribution to the economic development and sustainable 
growth in participating countries. Economic growth is highly dependent on the quality, quantity, and 
accessibility of a country’s infrastructure and related services. As such inadequate infrastructure is an 
obstacle to achieving poverty reduction and sustainable development goals. By promoting climate-resilient 
infrastructure, ICRF provides clarity on long-term climate-resilient development strategies to avoid the lock-
in of risky fragile infrastructure and stranded assets, and a sustainable path to avoiding significant economic 
losses in the face of climate hazards. The Programme will also promote business development and create 
jobs in the countries of implementation and deliver constructive impact on multi- dimensional aspects of 
society. At least 572,364 new direct jobs are expected from the implementation of the ICRF in the beneficiary 
countries with additional 786,585 indirect jobs (conservative estimates) 
 
Environmental co-benefits: ICRF aims to generate substantial environmental returns. To achieve this; 
ICRF will evaluate all transactions with respect to the environmental and social impacts that might result 
from the implementation of individual sub-projects. Project level environmental assessments and associated 
action plans will be transparently reported to GCF for all category B and C projects. Effective implementation 
of action plan with necessary safeguards will create a blueprint for the market wider adoption as positive 
evidence of environmentally friendly practices are becoming clearer. In order to ensure all projects, generate 
substantial environmental performance, project sponsors will be encouraged to incorporate environmental 
and biodiversity objectives in line with the Paris Agreement, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 
and other national environmental requirements. For example, all sub-projects shall integrate application of 
environmental factors in infrastructure construction, improving the sustainability and management of key 
ecosystems and vital natural infrastructure, mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and ensure biodiversity 
and ecosystem services preservation, consistent with the ICRF Environmental and Social Framework with 
accompanying specific Biodiversity Framework. These two frameworks will promote consistency throughout 
the investment process with regards to taking environmental considerations into account including through 
engagement with portfolio companies and lead sponsors throughout the investment process: during due 
diligence, at the onset of the post-investment phase and as part of asset management and monitoring. The 
programme targets to integrate resilience measures through nature-based solutions in at least three (3) 
subprojects.   
 
Social co-benefits: Infrastructure disruptions frequently cause or exacerbate many types of social impacts 
in particular those related to health, safety and wellbeing. In addition to the ensuing losses that are often 
substantial and disproportionately large, when an infrastructure breakdown it can cause injuries, loss of 
proprieties and even result in human fatality. ICRF will increase safety by deploying climate resilient 
infrastructure assets, like robust bridges, all-weather roads, elevated ports that will be able to withstand 
climate change disasters and prevent losses protecting local populations. ICRF interventions will enable to 
prevent events collapse of infrastructure and the avoidance of disruptions for the local population. These will 
in turn result in improving people safety and wellbeing and raising the quality of life of the populations of the 
targeted countries and regions. 
 
Gender and Social Inclusion: Promotion of gender equality: ICRF will be implemented in a gender 
responsive manner. The preparation of an in-depth and comprehensive gender assessment and associated 
action plan was part of the Programme design to ensure the delivery of each investment can gender and 
social inclusion returns as co-benefits. ICRF implementation will effectively support reduction of gender 
inequality through the invested portfolio. ICRF will tackle gender inequalities by increasing women’s access 
to labor, decision making process and climate resilient infrastructure services. ICRF -to the extent possible- 
will customize its gender action plans to the local context of each project and systematically advocate and 
raise awareness around women’s empowerment at different levels of engagement. ICRF gender action plan 
encourages the inclusion of women through all activities and will ensure that women are benefitting  in each

=== PAGE 92 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
investment project. The gender analysis is part of the standard due diligence process for each sub-project. 
The Programme implementation will monitor the implementation of the Gender Action Plan, reporting on 
gender-disaggregated data and assessing how they performed against the appropriate indicators to 
measure enhanced access for women to climate resilient infrastructure services. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
ICRF targets [19] African countries of which [11] LDCs under this Programme are all highly vulnerable to 
climate change and exhibit a high deficit on infrastructure and related services. The infrastructure deficit of 
the target countries is massive within a context of increasing limited fiscal space. Hence, African countries 
deal with humongous needs to build new climate resilient infrastructure while climate proofing existing ones. 
ICRF responds to the needs of its beneficiaries countries and their population on several fronts: the need to 
build the resilience of infrastructure; the need to mobilize the necessary capital , the need to strengthen 
institution and capacity for systematic integration of climate risks assessments in infrastructure planning, 
financing and management etc. 
 
Need to reduce vulnerability by integrating risks assessment and management, promoting long 
lasting infrastructures and services: Resilient infrastructures result into resilient infrastructure services, 
which in turn lead to resilient infrastructures’ users.  
 
ICRF will address the need to integrate site-specific infrastructure climate risks assessment methodology 
and address barriers related to lack of data, methodology and technical skills for infrastructure; absence of 
standards and metrics on climate-resilient infrastructure; no technical assistance for projects design and 
implementation. 
 
Need to provide appropriate financing and addressing the absence of alternative sources of finance: 
At the center of the challenge to unlocking Africa’s climate resilient infrastructure, is the need to overcome 
the mismatch between investor expectations and the actual risk/return profile of climate resilient 
infrastructure programmes and projects. In this mismatch, many useful projects are regarded as simply not 
attractive, either as short-term returns are too low, or the risks are too high and resilience measures not 
easily quantified and costed. ICRF will address this need by providing concessional equity to cover the 
additional cost of adaptation measures and thus improving the risk profiles of these investment with the view 
to de-risk them and attract long term investors. By providing equity, ICRF further contribute to address the 
recurrent issue related to limited fiscal space and debt burden of many African countries that needs to finance 
resilience infrastructures among multiple other priorities.  
 
Need to build strong institutions and enabling factors, including fiscal incentives and other 
regulatory incentives. ICRF will address the need to build capacity and Improve access to climate 
information and enhance technical and institutional capacity for financing climate resilient infrastructure. 
ICRF will further address the need to update the existing codes and practices incorporating state-of the-art 
technology options and provisions to address climate change. Through analytics based on the latest 
scientific climate knowledge, existing climate thresholds would be revised and incorporated in the 
infrastructure development standards, codes, and practices. As climate change impacts on infrastructure 
vary across different locations across the ICRF participating countries, the revisions should integrate design 
parameters considering projected climate change, particularly frequency and intensity of extreme events 
precise to each infrastructure location. Finally, ICRF will facilitate an environment to mainstream climate 
change concerns in planning and approval processes for infrastructure development.

=== PAGE 93 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/program.  
 
Country ownership is pivotal to the ICRF design and implementation. Considering the innovative approach 
undertaken by ICRF to make infrastructure climate resilient, engagement with a wide range of stakeholders 
is central to the sustainability and success plan of ICRF and in line with AFC investment strategy. Over the 
15 past years, AFC has built strong relationships with its members states and their national stakeholders. 
AFC due diligence process always provides due consideration to engagement at national level as illustrated 
by the establishment of an investors and countries relations division within AFC. Hence, the AFC/ACP 
commit to ensure the design and implementation of ICRF follows an open, inclusive, and comprehensive 
process. In their testimony, the National Designated Authority (NDA) of the beneficiaries’ countries 
acknowledge the ICRF approach is a first of its kind when it comes to ensure regular consultations and 
engagement with NDAs and providing them with the opportunity to lead the engagement with key national 
stakeholders relevant for the ICRF while ensuring that AFC has each country within its pipeline/prospective 
pipeline.  
 
ICRF responds to pan-African, regional, and national priorities. It is consistent with the Africa 2063 vision, 
the African Union Program of Infrastructure Development (PIDA) and is consistent with Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) thematic areas, themes and priorities identified by the participating countries 
as part of the NDC adaptation components. ICRF provides urgently needed concessional financing and 
technical assistance to make African countries’ infrastructure master plan resilient to climate change. Most 
African countries have enshrined the need for infrastructural development in the laws and national 
documents. Two illustrative examples from Kenya and Ghana. Kenya plans to mobilize funds from local 
(10%) and external (90%) sources to upscale roads to systematically reduce flooding risks and promote 
appropriate designs and building materials to enhance the resilience of roads to climate risk. Ghana has 
developed a climate resilient infrastructure roadmap, well aligned with the ICRF programme, in recognition 
of the increasing risks posed by a changing climate to the country’s infrastructure and development 
prospect41.  
 
AFC engaged collaboratively with all participating countries during the origination and development phase 
of this funding proposal. AFC engages with NDA and wider stakeholders of the target countries to enable 
them to understand the structure of the ICRF programme, the choice of the financial instruments, confirm 
with them how the programme aligns with their NDCs, their national development plans, policies, strategies, 
and programmes. The 19 countries that have delivered their non-objection letters (NOLs) have duly followed 
their respective no-objection procedures as established by the country. Most of the countries have 
established and documented their respective NOL issuance procedures, and the delivery of the NOL is the 
achievement of a constructive engagement and collaboration with the countries, setting a foundation for 
effective implementation of the ICRF programme which has been designed to support the countries’ national 
efforts to embed climate resilient at the core of infrastructure financing. AFC’s infrastructure projects are 
largely designed as Public-Private Partnerships, which enables a strong country ownership and engagement 
with governments across the project life cycle. In the context of the ICRF, AFC will work with relevant national 
government and the project sponsors to integrate climate resilience into the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
project framework (as described in section B3.2). 
 
The ICRF has developed a comprehensive country engagement strategy that goes well beyond the issuing 
of non-objection letters from targeted NDAs. ICRF has launched a stakeholders’ engagement consultation 
process as part of the PPF implementation that is targeting a wide spectrum of stakeholders in each country 
from both private and public sector. More than 500 institutions have been targeted and received the project 
summary, the presentation of ICRF, the recording of the consultations as well as the script of the Q&A 
resulting from the stakeholders engagement (please see stakeholder consultation report as part of the FP 
package). The stakeholder consultations were aimed at creating awareness about the Programme, providing 
 
41 https://content.unops.org/publications/Ghana-roadmap-web.pdf

=== PAGE 94 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
an opportunity for the various actors to provide their views, clarifying the roles of key stakeholders in its 
development and implementation, and ensuring that Programme concepts demonstrate country-ownership 
and support from stakeholders and host communities, amongst other objectives were identified from various 
categories of actors including; relevant national ministries, regulatory agencies, relevant research 
institutions, Non-governmental Organisations (NGOs), Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), meteorological 
agencies, indigenous peoples' organisations, accredited GCF Observers, etc. 
 
These efforts complemented regular collaboration with GCF national designated authorities and UNFCCC 
focal points using various channels including online meetings, meetings in the margin of international for a.  
 
Virtual engagements as part of the programme development: AFC and ACP have conducted 4 virtual 
conferences with the targeted countries to present the ICRF and integrate their feedback into the design of 
the programme. The discussions focused on the ICRF concept note and the understanding of how ICRF will 
deploy concessional finance into each respective beneficiary countries. AFC Capital Partners (ACP) in these 
discussions delved into AFC pipeline spanning across ICRF core sectors: climate Resilient transport, port 
and logistics, roads and bridges airports, railways; climate resilient energy systems; climate resilient 
economic zones, and telecommunication infrastructure. 
 
Meetings in the margin of COP 26, COP 27 and within the wider climate network: AFC took opportunity 
of participating in COP 26 and COP 27 to engage NDA, UNFCCC focal points and other national relevant 
delegation members to provide information and updates on the programme development. These interactions 
were extremely progressive and confirm the relevance of the programme and its full alignment with countries 
priorities. ACP met with other key stakeholders within the climate network, including high-level officials from 
several governments. These meetings enabled ACP to explain and establish its relationship with its Parent 
Company, Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) which has invested US$10 billion in 35 African countries and 
has 33 African member states where it has special immunities and privileges. ACP team presented its 
strategy to leverage the strong relationships between AFC and its member states in order to enhance the 
quality of built infrastructure on the continent through the systematic integration of climate resilience.  
 
In-country visits and missions: AFC engaged in several country missions (i.e., Ghana, Namibia, Cote 
d’Ivoire, Gabon, Sierra Leone, Senegal (on-going NOL process), etc..) to meet various stakeholders among 
which NDAs and other several national stakeholders such as government ministries involved in target 
sectors such as transport, energy, industry, ITC, as well as Ministries of economy and finance, and Ministry 
of Environment, and the NDA/NOL national committee members.  
 
Engagement of NDA in the national wider consultations NDAs of target countries distributed online 
surveys to gather inputs form key relevant stakeholders involved in the financing of infrastructure in their 
countries to collect the views of the wider national stakeholders on the priorities of ICRF. These 
engagements have resulted in the better understanding of the views of a variety of stakeholders as far 
priorities of infrastructure resilience in their context.  
 
As of November 2022, ICRF received 19 NOLs from [Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, 
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, Zambia]. AFC is in advanced discussions with several other countries, 
including (without limitation): South Africa, Egypt, Senegal, Tanzania, Uganda. These countries, amongst 
others, all expressed significant interest in the ICRF but are still working to complete their internal sign-off 
processes. Nevertheless, we expect to receive NOLs from most, if not all, of these countries before the 
publication deadline. Additional countries may be added to the programme after initial Board approval, 
provided they submit an NOL, compliant with the GCF's no objection procedures, and such addition is 
approved by the GCF Board.

=== PAGE 95 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The ICRF programme will promote climate resilient infrastructure investments in targeted African countries 
through adopting de-risking mechanisms and integration of data-driven climate risk analysis into investment 
decisions, regulations, and technical assistance (TA) for infrastructure projects. The programme will increase 
institutional and market capacity, regulatory framework through TA for CRI planning and implementation. 
GCF concessional financing allows to tackle existing barriers including the lack and high cost of private and 
other public capital, regulatory standards, policies and tools for building climate resilient infrastructure.  
 
• 
Transitional requirements for CRI through standards and policies, TA for public and private sector and, 
innovative climate insurance products for CRI will be supported by the GCF grant and create a paradigm 
shift effect. The Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) analysis shows that without GCF concessionality, the 
program implementation IRR is below market rates, and as a result cannot attract commercial investors 
to invest in climate resilient infrastructure (CRI) in the program countries due to the high upfront 
incremental costs (see Annex 3 demonstration cases with IRR change due to GCF concessional funding 
covering incremental cost). GCF intervention in sub-projects equity helps to cover the incremental 
costs for de-risking CRI investments, which makes the projects climate-resilient, and bankable for 
mobilizing private sector capital. ICRF investments in CRI will seek the application of best technologies 
and practices to maximize sub-project results, increase efficiency and financial sustainability. This will 
serve as a proof of concept that can easily be replicated and upscaled by the private sector. 
• 
Incremental cost for CRI will be covered by GCF concessional junior Equity and will deliver the following 
intended benefits:  
 
a) higher quality of the desired infrastructure result (less costly operation and maintenance (O&M), less 
revenue disruptions due to the ability to withstand disastrous climate-related weather events etc.), 
b) better sustainability (assets longevity and avoidance of stranded assets risk),  
c) additional socio-economic benefits (increased safety for vulnerable people and communities, 
increased productivity). 
 
By incorporating upfront incremental cost, the sub-projects will avoid financial losses from infrastructure 
disruptions causing revenues losses, higher O&M, and additional capital expenditures in the future as 
reflected in the demonstration cases.  
 
• 
Mobilization at the sub-project level by GCF : ICRF equity and mezzanine investments will unlock 
financing at scale targeting ~1:2.6 – 1:3 leverage ratio at the sub-project level, equivalent to $US 1.155 
– 1.485 billion additional debt financing, bringing the total pipeline value up to US$2.0 bln. This will lead 
to an average mobilization ratio at the sub-project level by GCF to 5.2x: ($US1.155 + $US1.485)/2 = 
$US 1.32 bln average mobilization at the sub-project level) → $US 1.32 bln / US 254.1 mln total GCF 
funding = ~5.2x.  
• 
Total mobilization ratio at the ICRF fund and sub-project levels is envisaged as ~7.2x to be 
achieved by catalytic junior equity by the GCF, a very strong mobilization ratio for a private sector 
adaptation programme: (US$ 510mln on the Fund level + 1.32 bln on the sub-project level) / 
US$ 254.1mln total GCF funding = 7.2x.  
 
ICRF’s use of proceeds will ensure maximum cost efficiency based on the practices and policies of the 
executing entities. All contracts will be awarded in competitive bidding procedures covered by AFC 
procurement procedures to ensure they remain consistent with market prices, independent of the cost 
estimates provided in this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/program’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which 
the project/program contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Program Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/program. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/program monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in 
section D.2 above by applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability. Accordingly, for each assessment dimension 
(see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario (target) and 
rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the 
project/program will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing 
so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of change).  
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/program will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Climate change 
poses significant risks 
on infrastructure in 
Africa, increasing 
climate change 
disaster events 
adversely affecting 
the most vulnerable 
population and 
communities. Due to 
lack of integration of 
data-driven climate 
risk analyses into 
investment decisions, 
regulations, technical 
Low 
Paradigm shift will be achieved by 
integrating data-driven climate risk 
tools for investment decisions, 
regulations, technical assistance and 
de-risking financial mechanisms 
including innovative climate 
insurance product for investing in 
climate resilient infrastructure assets 
in Africa. This will allow to move away 
from infrastructure assets built with 
minimum cost to climate-proofed 
infrastructure assets with direct 
physical and socio-economic impacts 
using innovative climate parametric 
insurance product. Private capital will 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
or resulting outcomes relevant to 
increasing (scaling up) quantifiable 
results within and beyond the scope 
of the intervention. 
The program target is to invest in 20-
40 infrastructure assets and the value 
made resilient to climate hazards 
reducing climate disaster events for 
the most vulnerable population and 
communities with 50,365,031 direct 
and 144,115,769 indirect 
beneficiaries reached. This will serve 
as a proof of concept that can easily

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
assistance, and de-
risking financial 
mechanism there is 
no capacity of making 
infrastructure assets 
climate proof at sale 
in Africa.  
be catalyzed into climate-resilient 
infrastructure in Africa by integration 
of a state-of-the-art climate 
assessment tools into infrastructure 
planning, implementation, and 
maintenance with decreased O&M 
cost, increased longevity, and climate 
change losses risk transferred.  
 
 
be replicated and upscaled by the 
private sector. 
Also, the program will develop 
knowledge, standards, metrics, and 
data collection tools for climate-
resilient infrastructure analytics to be 
shared with public, private sectors 
and civil societies. Climate data 
analytics will give access to 
parametric climate risk insurance 
tailored solutions. GCF concessional 
funding will mobilize private capital 
with [6-7X] times. .  
Replicability 
There is limited 
appetite from 
investors to finance 
the incremental cost 
for climate proofing. 
This is exacerbated 
by the lack of data 
and capacity and 
enabling environment. 
The program 
countries do not have 
access to tailored 
climate data analytics 
and de-risked 
financial mechanisms 
for climate-proofed 
infrastructure, 
therefore replication is 
not yet possible. 
Low 
Solutions for systematic de-risking 
climate-proofed infrastructure in 
program countries will be captured for 
replicating across the continent and 
internationally. De-risking 
mechanisms and lessons learned 
from ICRF program will support 
making climate-proofed infrastructure 
investments sustainable even without 
concessional financing. 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be 
replicated to other sectors, markets, 
geographical regions, or countries 
The program climate assessment 
tools with climate data analytics and 
standards for infrastructure design 
and parametric insurance will have 
demonstrative affect for replicability 
for other developers and investors of 
infrastructure assets in Africa and 
even internationally. Introduced 
innovative climate resilient parametric 
insurance can be replicated in other 
sectors with vulnerable assets to 
climate change risk.  
Sustainability 
AFC and ACP 
received indicative 
interest of the 
programme potential 
Low 
 
Successful ICRF infrastructure  
investments, a more favorable 
regulatory framework, and knowledge 
sharing  will attract commercial 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be 
sustained beyond the project/program 
period.

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
to scaling up CRI 
investments in Africa 
through de-risking 
financial mechanisms, 
which creates 
foundation for future 
support of climate-
resilient infrastructure 
in Africa; and 
demonstration of 
systematic resilience 
measures embedded 
in    infrastructure 
investments 
supported by 
standards and 
policies are not in 
place to scale up 
investments in Africa. 
finance for climate-proofed 
infrastructure development using 
climate data analysis and climate 
resilient parametric insurance  . The 
infrastructure assets and the value 
will be made resilient to climate 
hazards with sustainable financial 
result due to robust projects 
assessment tools used for ICRF 
investments. Population will have 
access to safe infrastructure with 
increased potential of the economic 
development of the region.  
It is expected that after deploying 
ICRF investments, GCF de-risking 
financing will not be required at the 
fund level due as investors being 
more comfortable deploying capital in 
Africa at scale. The program creates 
favorable investment climate for 
infrastructure development in Africa 
due to capacity building, standards 
and data analytics transfer for 
resilient infrastructure development. 
The projects results will be shared 
with the private and public sector to 
demonstrate benefits on a long-term 
basis and making climate parametric 
insurance and the climate 
assessment for decision making and  
climate resilient design a common 
practice in the industry.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/program progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) 
indicators may be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/program outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF 
indicators are unable to measure any given project/program outcomes, project/program-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 
(project/program specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final42 
 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built 
environment 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
Sources of information 
and methods used to 
collect and report data 
/information to 
The starting 
point or current 
value of the 
indicators 
The 
estimated 
value of the 
indicator at 
The 
estimated 
value of the 
indicator at 
Externalities and factors 
outside project 
management's control that 
may impact the outcomes 
 
42 The final target means the target at the end of project/program implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also 
provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment 
are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
measure progress 
against targets 
 
Ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses (conducted 
by an independent 
verification company) 
before the 
implementation 
of the project 
 
 
 
Value of 
assets:  
0 
 
 
Number of CRI 
Asset Classes 
made more 
resilient: 0 
 
I 
the mid-point 
of the 
implementatio
n 
 
 
132 million 
USD targeted 
CRI assets 
value  
  
 
1  from 15 / / 
6.7% sub-
projects 
 
the 
completion of 
the 
implementatio
n 
 
2.0bln USD 
targeted CRI 
assets value  
 
 
15 / 100% 
sub-projects  
Data sources and 
methodologies applied for 
estimating baseline and 
targets 
 
The value estimation is a 
subject to change and 
suggested based on the 
assumption of 15 sub-
projects. Size and 
number of projects will 
depend on eligibility 
criteria, ICRF 
participation % and 
project assessment.  
Insurance companies are 
not disrupted by external 
risks and support the 
programme for CRPI  
 
No delays in 
implementation  
 
If there are no market 
disruptions for ICRF 
capital raising on the fund 
and project level, 
investors’ appetite is high 
for de-risked CRI 
investments, and there 
are no delays in the 
implementation, ICRF will 
raise 750 million USD on 
the fund level by Yr 5 and 
invest in the targeted CRI 
pipeline with targeted CRI 
asset value estimated as

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
2.0bln USD total. Co-
investors are willing to 
invest on the project 
level. 
 
132 million USD is an 
average weighted value 
estimation for the first 
subproject implemented 
by Yr 5 and will be 
adjusted as per actual 
value (2 bln USD / 15).    
 
The defining 
characteristic of climate-
resilient infrastructure is 
that it is planned, 
designed, built and 
operated in a way that 
anticipates, prepares for, 
and adapts to changing 
climate conditions. It can 
also withstand, respond 
to, and recover rapidly 
from disruptions caused 
by these climate 
conditions. Ensuring 
climate resilience is a 
continual process 
throughout the life of the 
asset. Efforts to achieve 
climate resilience can be 
mutually reinforcing with 
efforts to increase 
resilience to natural 
hazards. Climate-resilient 
infrastructure reduces,

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
but may not fully 
eliminate, the risk of 
climate-related 
disruptions. The extent to 
which climate change 
translates into risks for 
infrastructure depends 
upon the interaction of 
changing climate hazards 
with exposure (the 
location of assets) and 
vulnerability (“the 
propensity or 
predisposition to be 
adversely affected”) 
OECD policy brief page 4 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built 
environment 
 
Supplementary 3.1: 
Change in expected 
losses of economic 
assets due to the 
impact of extreme 
climate-related 
disasters in te 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention 
Independent 
verification of cost-
benefit analysis of 
incremental cost 
compared to climate 
impact on subprojects  
 
Quality assessed by 
AE and EE 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USD 
11,880,001 
USD 
178,200,015 
Incremental costs are 
required at the level of 9-
27% to make infrastructure 
resilient, and incremental 
costs will not exceed 
expected losses from 
climate change impact on 
subprojects. Therefore, this 
indicator refers to minimum 
incremental cost - 9% 
+USD1 as avoided losses of 
subproject assets.  
 
Expected losses of 
economic assets due to the 
impact of extreme climate-
related disasters of the 
subprojects can be 
estimated in USD, and 
exceeds 9% of incremental 
costs required.

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
The following assumptions 
apply: 
The value estimation is a 
subject to change and 
suggested based on the 
assumption of 15 sub-
projects. Size and number 
of projects will depend on 
eligibility criteria, ICRF 
participation % and project 
assessment.  
 
No delays in implementation  
 
If there are no market 
disruptions for ICRF capital 
raising on the fund and 
project level, investors’ 
appetite is high for de-risked 
CRI investments, and there 
are no delays in the 
implementation, ICRF will 
raise 750 million USD on 
the fund level by Yr 5 and 
invest in the targeted CRI 
pipeline with targeted CRI 
asset value estimated as 
2.0bl USD total; Co-
investors are willing to 
invest on the project level. 
 
132 million USD is an 
average weighted value 
estimation for the first sub-
project implemented by Yr 5 
and will be adjusted as per 
actual value (2 bln USD / 
15).

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Statistical data on the 
population of the 
country/region, Project 
Documents, Project 
Impact Assessment 
Document 
 
 
0 
3,357,669 –  
1/15th from 
targeted direct 
beneficiaries, of 
which 
per country   
Benin 32,564  
Cameroon 
15,350  
Chad 42,267  
Djibouti 714  
DRC 632,891  
Gabon 9,248  
Gambia 246  
Ghana 7,513  
Guinea 91  
Ivory Coast 
303,084  
Kenya 96,175  
Mali 52,035  
Mauritania 9,780  
Namibia 18,284  
Nigeria 
1,803,077  
Rwanda  60,783  
Sierra Leone 
172,521  
Togo 1,462  
Zambia 99,583 
 
 
and 9,607,918 - 
1/15th from total 
targeted indirect 
beneficiaries, of 
which per 
country 
Benin 111,167  
Cameroon 
129,477  
Chad  264,021  
Djibouti  59,751  
DRC  1,621,374  
Gabon  58,653  
Gambia  2,137  
50,365,031 / 
100% of 
targeted direct 
beneficiaries, of 
which per 
country:  
Benin 488,454  
Cameroon 
230,254  
Chad 634,011  
Djibouti 10,707  
DRC 9,493,360  
Gabon 138,727  
Gambia 3,692  
Ghana 112,701  
Guinea 1,358  
Ivory Coast 
4,546,257  
Kenya 
1,442,618  
Mali 780,528  
Mauritania 
146,707  
Namibia 
274,258  
Nigeria 
27,046,158  
Rwanda  
911,745  
Sierra Leone 
2,587,813 
Togo 21,936 
Zambia 
1,493,747 
 
144,115,769 / 
100% targeted 
indirect 
beneficiaries,  
of which per 
country  
Benin 1,667,509  
Cameroon  
1,942,154  
Adaptation outcome:  
1) direct beneficiaries - 
immediately affected by 
ICRF investments, 
participants in the various 
programme activities, 
temporary and 
permanent employees;  
2) indirect beneficiaries – 
people impacted in the 
long term by the 
production and/or other 
changes stimulated 
through ICRF 
investments.  
 
Data can be provided by 
project entities, CSOs 
and municipalities. 
Statistical population 
data is available.  
 
There are no major 
unfavorable externalities 
and market disruptions 
for the programme 
implementation 
 
One project becomes 
operational by Yr 10 
reaching to 1/15th of the 
targeted beneficiaries on 
an average weighted 
basis, and the number is 
a subject to change 
applicable to each 
specific project

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
 
Ghana  62,148  
Guinea  
232,101  
Ivory Coast 
474,914  
Kenya 343,480  
Mali  379,614  
Mauritania 
83,235  
Namibia 
154,292  
Nigeria  
4,361,047  
Rwanda  
332,184  
Sierra Leone 
355,216  
Togo 17,258  
Zambia  
565,648 
 
of which 
1,678,834 direct 
beneficiaries  
50% women, per 
country  
Benin 16,282  
Cameroon 7,675  
Chad 21,134  
Djibouti  357  
DRC 316,445  
Gabon 4,624  
Gambia 123  
Ghana 3,757  
Guinea 45  
Ivory Coast 
151,542  
Kenya 48,087  
Mali 26,018  
Mauritania 4,890  
Namibia 9,142  
Nigeria 901,539  
Rwanda  30,392  
Sierra Leone 
86,260  
Chad 
 
3,960,310  
Djibouti  
896,264  
DRC 
 
24,320,611  
Gabon  
879,799  
Gambia  32,049  
Ghana  
932,215  
Guinea  
3,481,519  
Ivory Coast 
7,123,717  
Kenya 
 
5,152,207  
Mali  5,694,215  
Mauritania 
1,248,530  
Namibia 
2,314,384  
Nigeria  
65,415,703  
Rwanda  
4,982,754  
Sierra Leone 
5,328,233  
Togo 
 
258,870  
Zambia  
8,484,726 
 
of which  
25,182,515 
direct 
beneficiaries 
50% women, per 
country  
Benin 244,227  
Cameroon 
115,127  
Chad 317,006  
Djibouti  5,354  
DRC 4,746,680

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
 
Togo 731  
Zambia 49,792 
 
and 4,803,859 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
50%women, per 
country   
Benin 
 55,584  
Cameroon  
64,738  
Chad 132,010  
Djibouti  29,875  
DRC 810,687  
Gabon  29,327  
Gambia  1,068  
Ghana  31,074  
Guinea  
116,051  
Ivory Coast 
237,457  
Kenya 171,740  
Mali  189,807  
Mauritania  
41,618  
Namibia 77,146  
Nigeria  
2,180,523  
Rwanda  
166,092  
Sierra Leon 
177,608  
Togo 8,629  
Zambia  
282,824 
 
 
Gabon 69,363  
Gambia 1,846  
Ghana 56,351  
Guinea 679  
Ivory Coast 
2,273,129  
Kenya 721,309  
Mali 390,264  
Mauritania 
73,354  
Namibia 
137,129  
Nigeria 
13,523,079  
Rwanda  
455,873  
Sierra Leone 
1,293,907  
Togo 10,968  
Zambia 746,874 
 
and   
72,057,884 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
50% women, per 
country  
Benin 
 
833,755  
Cameroon 
971,077  
Chad 
 
1,980,155  
Djibouti  
448,132  
DRC 
 
12,160,306  
Gabon  
439,900  
Gambia  16,025  
Ghana  
466,108  
Guinea  
1,740,760

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
 
Ivory Coast 
3,561,858  
Kenya 
 
2,576,104  
Mali  
 
2,847,108  
Mauritania 
624,265  
Namibia  
1,157,192  
Nigeria  
32,707,851  
Rwanda  
2,491,377  
Sierra 
Leone2,664,117  
Togo 
 
129,435  
Zambia  
4,242,363 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/program’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe 
how the project/program will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
Climate Resilient 
Infrastructure (CRI) 
Asset Classes in 
construction codes and 
standards do not exist in 
the programme 
countries, which would 
allow to systematize 
adaptation measures for 
infrastructure assets by 
engineers and investors.  
low 
CRI Asset Classes in 
the construction codes 
and standards are 
endorsed by the 
programme countries 
and ensures paradigm 
shift for greener 
alternatives for 
infrastructure assets 
beyond the programme. 
Such change will require 
construction, 
investment, asset 
Component 3 is 
dedicated to 
endorse CRI Asset 
Classes in the 
construction codes and 
standards by the 
programme countries 
and it will support 
institutional 
development. Project 
outputs will include 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
 
management, and 
financial organizations 
having permanent 
institutional capacity in 
place for the effective 
development, 
procurement, oversight 
and 
management of green 
infrastructure. 
development and 
implementation of a 
capacity 
development strategy, 
and the development 
and 
implementation of a 
comprehensive 
performance 
and monitoring systems 
beyond the programme 
implementation.  
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
As stated in the 
programme package a 
robust climate risk 
assessment 
methodology for 
adaptation measures for 
infrastructure is missing 
to guide investments 
and avoid 
maladaptation. Existing 
projects are dominated 
by conventional design 
focused on minimizing 
cost with virtually no 
green alternatives.  
low 
Application of a science 
backed climate risk 
assessment 
methodology is made 
systematic for the 
programme and beyond 
investments in 
infrastructure to ensure 
its sustainability through 
resilience solutions 
implemented during 
early design, 
construction and O&M 
stages. 
. 
The programme will 
introduce a robust state-
of-the-art Climate risk 
assessment 
methodology science 
backed with dynamic 
modeling, pathway and 
system approach, and 
prevention of 
maladaptation 
integrated. Due to 
ongoing evolution of the 
climate science, this 
methodology will have 
revisions aligned with 
IPCC cycles to ensure 
its robustness for 
investments in the CRI 
Asset Classes (roads, 
ports, bridges, airports, 
utilities etc.) 
Multi-countries 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
Climate resilient 
parametric insurance 
(CRPI) products are not 
available in Africa. 
Hence safety of 
infrastructure assets 
cannot be guaranteed 
low 
Use of CRPI is made 
systematic for 
infrastructure 
investments to enable 
the direct beneficiaries 
swiftly recover from 
climate risk 
AFC in close 
collaboration with the 
Coalition for climate 
resilient investments 
(CCRI) and global 
insurance companies 
will support access and 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
 
through climate change 
adaptation design fully 
due to complex nature 
and uncertainties of the 
climate change 
scenarios.  
 
consequences, which 
cannot be entirely 
prevented by resilience 
solutions in 
infrastructure design. 
For this market is 
created and CRPI 
products are made 
accessible and 
affordable. 
affordability of CRPI 
products to tackle 
climate risk which 
cannot be entirely 
mitigated by resilience 
measures in design and 
O&M. Further 
engagement with the 
programme countries 
authorities will allow to 
endorse systematic use 
of the CRPI in the 
interest of the 
beneficiaries including 
the most vulnerable 
people and communities 
to ensure their access to 
safe CRI assets and its 
services.    
 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Due to lack of a robust 
climate risk assessment 
methodology for 
infrastructure in Africa, 
there is no sufficient 
information for 
knowledge sharing and 
raising awareness about 
the tools and 
vulnerability 
management for CRI 
assets in Africa. 
low 
Private and public sector 
players have access to 
global knowledge stock 
sharing about climate 
risk assessment 
methodology and tools 
and CRPI in Africa to 
become a stimulus for 
mobilizing blended 
finance for CRI in the 
Continent. National 
authorities and Union 
groups representing 
infrastructure users in 
sub-project country have 
capacity for climate 
change disaster risk 
prevention and 
management in 
subproject location (for 
The programme’s 
knowledge management 
strategy will capture 
lessons learned from the 
Climate Risk 
Assessment 
Methodology, its tools, 
and CRPI applied in the 
ICRF investments to be 
shared publicly. ICRF 
will target to submit 
publications to COP on 
a voluntary basis for the 
global stock take. 
Knowledge and 
technical skills will be 
built for national 
authorities and Union 
groups representing 
infrastructure users in 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
 
vulnerable people safety 
and resilience). 
sub-project country for 
climate change disaster 
risk prevention and 
management in 
subproject location (for 
vulnerable people safety 
and resilience). 
 
 
   
Project/program-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4).  
Project/program 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/program 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
 
Sources of information 
and methods used to 
collect and report 
data/information to 
measure progress against 
targets 
The starting point 
or current value of 
the indicators 
before the 
implementation of 
the project 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
mid-point of the 
implementation 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
completion of 
the 
implementation 
Externalities and factors 
outside project 
management's control 
that may impact on the 
Component 
 
Data sources and 
methodologies applied for 
estimating baseline and 
targets 
 
Output 1.1  
ICRF is fully operational  
Fund legal structure is 
established.  
Amount (USD) of 
capital commitments 
released by investors    
Legal structure is 
complete as per FAA 
verified by legal 
documents review;  
Audited accounts  
0 
100%; 
637 million 
USD 
 
100%; 
750 million 
USD 
 
If there are no market 
disruptions for ICRF 
capital raising on the fund 
and project level, 
investors’ appetite is high 
for de-risked CRI 
investments, and there 
are no delays in the 
implementation, ICRF will 
raise 750 million USD on 
the fund level by Yr 5

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
 
(indicated amount refers 
to disbursement plan by 
Yr 10) and invest in the 
targeted CRI pipeline with 
targeted CRI asset value 
estimated as 2.0bln USD 
total (see the budget 
estimate the capital 
flowing into the CRI 
investments) 
 
Output 2.1  
Strengthened climate 
risk assessment and 
adaptation solutions for 
ICRF investments in 
CRI 
Climate risk 
assessment 
Methodology reviews 
according to the IPCC 
cycle 
ICRF Climate risk 
assessment 
methodology’s   
reviews completed based 
on baseline research 
 
0 
1; 
1 
1; 
3 
Periodic review of the 
climate risk assessment 
Methodology for ICRF 
based on latest climate 
available information 
aligned with IPCC cycles 
AR6, AR7 and AR8 
Output 2.2   
Improved capacity for 
scaling up investments 
in CRI in Africa 
Number of 
representatives from 
national authorities 
and Union groups 
representing 
infrastructure users  
trained for improved 
capacity and greater 
technical knowledge 
on climate change 
disaster risk 
prevention and 
management in 
subproject location 
(for vulnerable people 
safety and climate 
resilience). 
Training reports including  
registration, participants 
knowledge evaluations, 
and summary as part of 
monitoring report 
package 
 
0 
5 
75 
Training will be held for 
minimum 2 national 
authority representative 
and Union groups 
representing 
infrastructure users for 
each subproject, 
assuming 15 subprojects 
for the programme total. 
Number of subprojects 
will be adjusted as per 
actual investments 
incurred based on 
eligibility criteria, size, 
and other factors.  
 
Output 3.1  
 
Baseline research;  
Survey/questionnaire 
0 
0%; 
0%  
 
100%; 
100% 
 
The programme 
Countries have law- and 
policy making pace to

=== PAGE 111 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
 
Standards and 
construction codes are 
enacted and applied 
Proportion of 
construction codes 
adopted; 
Proportion of 
recommendation 
reports for 
strengthening 
regulatory framework 
endorsed 
allow endorsement of the 
recommendations during 
the implementation.   
Such recommendations 
are in the interest and 
need of the programme 
Countries. 
Output 3.2  
Strengthening fiscal 
incentives for CRI are 
supported 
Proportion of 
recommendation 
reports endorsed for 
CRI fiscal incentives 
Baseline research;  
Survey/questionnaire  
 
0 
0% 
100% 
The programme 
Countries have law- and 
policy making pace to 
allow endorsement of 
fiscal incentives (tax 
holidays, tax and customs 
duty waivers or reduction 
etc.) during the 
implementation.   
Such fiscal incentives are 
in interest and need of 
the programme 
Countries.    
Output 3.3 
Innovative CRPI is 
designed for the long-
term viability of 
infrastructure 
investments in Africa 
Number of  feasibility 
studies complete for 
design and 
development of CRPI 
tailored for CRI in 
Africa; Number of CRI 
projects with climate 
risk parametric 
insurance in Africa 
Feasibility study and 
Insurance policy/contract; 
feasibility study for 
projects completed – 
documents review 
0 
1;1 
1;15 
There are no major 
adverse externalities and 
market disruptions for 
insurance companies to 
adopt tailored CRPI 
products for CRI in Africa. 
 
Data is available for 
developing accessible 
CRPI for CRI in Africa. 
  
There are no market 
disruptions for ICRF 
capital raising on the fund 
and project level for ICRF 
investments. 1 project by 
year 5 and 15 projects by 
year 10.

=== PAGE 112 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donors are willing to 
sponsor CRPI for ICRF 
projects for CRPI market 
creation. 
Project/program co-benefit indicators 
Increased productivity 
of climate resilient 
assets  
 
Number of 
infrastructure assets 
with increased 
lifespan, reduced cost 
of O&M, reduced 
outages and 
downtime triggered by 
climate related event 
achieved through 
resilience measures 
in ICRF investments    
Ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses   
0 
1 
15 
Increased productivity of 
the CRI assets means  
- increased longevity, 
- reduced 
repair/maintenance costs 
because of climate event 
induced damages to 
physical infrastructure 
assets,  
- reduced number of 
infrastructure asset 
outages due to climate 
related events (e.g., road 
blockages, power outage, 
port disruption, etc.),  
- reduced duration or 
downtime of infrastructure 
asset outages due to 
climate related events 
(e.g., road blockages, 
power outage, port 
disruption etc.).  
of the underlying assets 
of ICRF investments as 
compared to the average 
sector baseline 
depending on the asset 
type, location 
vulnerabilities, and 
climate change scenario 
applied - the change 
demonstrated by the 
programme through a

=== PAGE 113 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
 
robust state-of-the-art  
climate risk assessment 
for proper resilience 
measures in the 
programme assets 
design.  
 
Such information should 
be included in the list of 
the deliverables from the 
CRI design 
documentation. The 
number of projects can 
be changed due to 
eligibility criteria and 
results of project 
assessment.   
Jobs created 
Number of direct and 
indirect jobs created 
through ICRF 
investments 
Statistical data in sub-
project location, project 
impact assessment 
documentation   
0 
38,158 / 1/15th 
direct jobs, of 
which  
Benin 24,133  
Cameroon  -    
Chad 
 3,000  
Djibouti  47  
DRC 
 -    
Gabon  2,353  
Gambia -    
Ghana  200  
Guinea  -    
Ivory Coast 
3,433  
Kenya  -    
Mali  
 34  
Mauritania 83  
Namibia
 
 -    
Nigeria  3,533  
Rwanda
 
 113  
572,367 / 
100% direct 
jobs, of which  
Benin
 
36200
0 
Cameroon - 
Chad 
45000 
Djibouti 700 
DRC - 
Gabon 35300 
Gambia - 
Ghana 3000 
Guinea - 
Ivory Coast 
51500 
Kenya - 
Mali  514 
Mauritania 
1250 
Namibia - 
Nigeria 53000 
Statistical data on 
employment is published 
in subproject location. 
Estimation of 
beneficiaries 
disaggregation by gender 
is average weighted 
assuming 50% women, 
and will be adjusted as 
per actual project type. 
 
Gender plan can be 
implemented successfully 
without adverse 
externalities. 
 
Employment data by Yr 5 
is estimated on an 
average weighted basis 
for 1/15th projects from 
total employment 
beneficiaries plan and will

=== PAGE 114 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
 
Sierra Leone 
160  
Togo 
 1,067  
Zambia  -    
 
 
and  
52,439 indirect 
jobs, of which 
per country   
Benin  
12,067  
Cameroon  13  
Chad 
 2,613  
Djibouti  20  
DRC 
 147  
Gabon  1,200  
Gambia 61  
Ghana  467  
Guinea  21  
Ivory Coast 
1,200  
Kenya  200  
Mali  
 14  
Mauritania1,26
7  
Namibia
 
 87  
Nigeria  
31,898  
Rwanda
 
 271  
Sierra Leone 
127  
Togo 
 533  
Zambia  233 
 
of which 
19,079 direct 
Rwanda
 
1700 
Sierra Leone 
2400 
Togo 
16000 
Zambia - 
 
and  
786,585 
indirect jobs, of 
which per 
country   
Benin  
181,000  
Cameroon  200  
Chad 
 
39,200  
Djibouti  300  
DRC 
 2,200  
Gabon  
18,000  
Gambia 913  
Ghana  7,000  
Guinea  319  
Ivory Coast 
18,000  
Kenya  3,000  
Mali  
 215  
Mauritania 
19,000  
Namibia
 
 1,300  
Nigeria  
478,477  
Rwanda
 
 4,061  
Sierra Leone 
1,900  
Togo 
 8,000  
Zambia  3,500 
change as per actual 
project.

=== PAGE 115 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
 
jobs for women 
per country 
Benin  
12,067  
Cameroon  -    
Chad 
 1,500  
Djibouti  23  
DRC 
 -    
Gabon  1,177  
Gambia -    
Ghana  100  
Guinea  -    
Ivory Coast 
1,717  
Kenya  -    
Mali  
 17  
Mauritania 42  
Namibia
 
 -    
Nigeria  1,767  
Rwanda
 
 57  
Sierra Leone 
80  
Togo 
 533  
Zambia  -    
 
 
 
 
of which 
26,220 indirect 
jobs for 
women, per 
country  
Benin  6,033  
Cameroon  7  
Chad 
 1,307  
Djibouti  10  
DRC 
 73  
 
of which 
286,182 direct 
jobs for women 
per country  
Benin  
181,000  
Cameroon  -    
Chad 
 
22,500  
Djibouti  350  
DRC 
 -    
Gabon  
17,650  
Gambia -    
Ghana  1,500  
Guinea  -    
Ivory Coast 
25,750  
Kenya  -    
Mali  
 257  
Mauritania 625  
Namibia
 
 -    
Nigeria  
26,500  
Rwanda
 
 850  
Sierra Leone 
1,200  
Togo 
 8,000  
Zambia  -    
 
of which 
393,293  
indirect jobs for 
women, per 
country 
Benin  
90,500

=== PAGE 116 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 
 
 
Gabon  600  
Gambia 30  
Ghana  233  
Guinea  11  
Ivory Coast 
600  
Kenya  100  
Mali  
 7  
Mauritania 633  
Namibia
 
 43  
Nigeria  
15,949  
Rwanda
 
 135  
Sierra Leone 
63  
Togo 
 267  
Zambia  117 
Cameroon  100  
Chad 
 
19,600  
Djibouti  150  
DRC 
 1,100  
Gabon  9,000  
Gambia 457  
Ghana  3,500  
Guinea  160  
Ivory Coast 
9,000  
Kenya  1,500  
Mali  
 108  
Mauritania 
9,500  
Namibia
 
 650  
Nigeria  
239,239  
Rwanda
 
 2,031  
Sierra 
Leone950  
Togo 
 4,000  
Zambia  1,750 
Increased safety 
through resilient 
infrastructure assets 
Number of accidents 
from disaster weather 
events prevented due 
to resilience 
measures integrated 
in ICRF sub-projects 
Ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses by a third-party 
      
0 
0 
10 
This indicator refers to 
accidents avoided from 
extreme weather events 
during sub-project useful 
life due to resilience 
measures in the sub-
project assets. Due to 
uncertainty of future 
disaster weather events, 
the estimation suggest at 
least 2/3 of sub-projects 
preventing  infrastructure 
damage and impact on 
vulnerable people and 
communities.

=== PAGE 117 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
 
GHG emission 
mitigation  
GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided in 
million tCO2 
Ex-ante and ex-post 
Analyses; independent 
verification / assurance of 
the GHG emission 
mitigation  
0 
0 
9.7 million 
tCO2 
Current estimation is 
based on mitigation from 
500MW solar PV power 
plant in Nigeria as the 
biggest subproject from 
total 864MW solar PV 
power plants ICRF 
pipeline (see Annex 16).   
The GHG emission 
mitigation uses  
ACM0002: Grid-
connected electricity 
generation from 
renewable sources --- 
Version 17.0 .  
 
The programme has 
potential to achieve GHG 
emission mitigation 
through clean technology 
and practices, and 
nature-based solutions in 
all CRI asset classes: 
- energy (use of 
renewables etc.)  
- transport & logistic 
(mangrove forests along 
coastlines, rain gardens, 
green roofs, constructed 
wetlands, energy efficient 
technologies, use of 
clean transport, green 
value chain etc.) 
- economic zones (energy 
efficient buildings, 
renewable energy, green 
roofs, constructed 
wetlands etc.) 
- IT & telecom (renewable 
energy etc.). GHG

=== PAGE 118 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
 
emission mitigation. 
Methodology for 
accounting GHG 
emission mitigation will 
be chosen for each 
alternative source . 
Nature-based solutions 
integrated as part of 
resilience measures  
Number of ICRF 
subprojects with 
nature-based 
solutions integrated 
as part of resilience 
measures 
Independent verification / 
assurance of number of 
projects with natural 
based solutions as 
resilience measures in 
ICRF subprojects  
0 
0 
3 
It is assumed that at least 
3 subprojects (20% of 
total 15 estimated ICRF 
subprojects) will have 
nature-based solutions 
integrated as part of the 
‘resilience measures’ and 
may include: 
- reduced damage and 
flooding risk due to 
increased afforestation or 
restoration of natural 
vegetation as flood 
control (greening and tree 
planting) to increase the 
absorption capacity of 
soils across the 
watershed, lessening 
runoff and decreasing 
flood flows which can 
damage infrastructure 
assets [number of trees 
planted as flood control 
resilience measures / and 
reduced damage as a 
result], 
- increased afforestation 
to create green spaces 
along rivers to reduce 
riverine flooding risk and 
safeguard exposed roads 
and rails, airports, 
economic zones, other 
vulnerable infrastructure

=== PAGE 119 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 
 
 
assets in the 
surroundings, 
- restoration of coral reefs 
to buffer shorelines 
against waves, storms, 
and floods, helping to 
prevent loss of life and 
erosion, 
- reinforced natural buffer 
(forest or mangrove) to 
reduce storm surge which 
can impact coastal 
transport assets, 
including roads, rail, 
airport structures, ports. 
E.6. Project/program activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
1.1.1 Implement the legal structure of, 
and form, the ICRF and related 
entities. Consummate first closing with 
the GCF. 
AFC and ACP work with legal  
service providers for ICRF structure 
and registration  
GCF executes binding subscription  
agreement and disburses USD 240M 
1.1.1.1 Procure international and 
local legal services for underlying 
documentation – ACP. Launching an 
RFP process with AFC 
1.1.1.2 Implement legal structure for 
the ICRF and related entities  
1.1.1.3 Finalize the Term Sheet, draft 
formation documents and related 
Agreements for ICRF entities 
1.1.1.4 Consummate Initial Closing 
of the ICRF with GCF as anchor 
investor – the GCF enters a capital 
commitment to the ICRF of US$240 
million at the initial closing of the 
ICRF. Also at the initial closing, the 
Accredited Entity or one or more of 
its affiliates will make a capital 
commitment to the ICRF in an 
amount equal to US$[50] million. 
Legal report; 
Formation documents; 
Initial closing

=== PAGE 120 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1.2: Fundraise US$510 million of 
additional capital for the junior and 
senior tranches. 
 
Capital raising materials (teaser, IM, 
Fund evaluation report) with 
presentations,  
team track record, pipeline  
Meeting with pension funds, insurance 
companies, other FIs, philanthropies 
and foundations to raise capital at the 
Fund level. Some networking has 
already been done on the PPF level 
Negotiate T&C; conduct KYC;  
Sign commitments  
 
1.1.2.1 Prepare and adjust fundraising 
and marketing materials; ACP has 
extensive fundraising experience, and 
may engage one or more third party 
consultants to assist in the fundraise 
1.1.2.2 Draft Private Placement 
Memorandum and other fundraising 
and marketing materials. Continue to 
market the ICRF to other investors. 
The Private Placement Memorandum 
and other fundraising and marketing 
materials will be prepared by ACP; the 
selected external counsel with review 
the PPM from a legal perspective 
(disclaimer, disclosure requirements, 
risks factors, etc.) 
1.1.2.3 Negotiate with potential 
investors and close on additional 
commitments to the ICRF – It is 
expected that the ICRF would hold 
several closings over the course of up 
to 24 months after the initial closing 
with GCF 
Contract with fundraising advisor  
Marketing Plan and List of Priority 
Investors 
Teaser, Investment (PP) 
Memorandum, other fundraising and 
marketing materials  
Letter of interest and other 
communication 
Binding commitments 
1.2.1  Deal origination, due diligence 
and execution of investments in sub-
projects 
Preliminary climate assessment of 
infrastructure investment opportunities 
for ICRF pipeline -   - AFC/ ACP 
Origination & Deal Screening Stage;  
Deal screening;  
Project development;  
Due diligence and evaluation  
T&C negotiation; 
Financial closure  
 
1.2.1.1 Selection of projects by ACP 
in cooperation with AFC 
1.2.1.2 Entering into a support 
services 
agreement 
and 
a 
co-
investment agreement with AFC by 
ACP and the ICRF 
1.2.1.3 Project climate pre-screening 
and 
assessment: 
test 
the 
characteristics of originated projects 
against the investment strategy and 
restrictions of ICRF and the eligibility 
criteria by ACP  
1.2.1.4 Project development, credit 
evaluation, 
due 
diligence 
and 
approval procedures in appraising 
potential Fund Investments  
Support services agreement AFC – 
ACP - ICRF 
Co-investment agreement AFC – ACP 
- ICRF 
Project pre-screening, assessment 
documentation  
Project development documentation  
Due diligence for subprojects 
Teaser, Investment memorandum, 
and other capital raising materials for 
subprojects  
Sub-project package for investment 
committee  
Decisions of investment committee  
Subproject investment agreements 
ICRF pipeline overview

=== PAGE 121 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2.1.5 Execution of a project term-
sheet  
Investment package preparation by 
ACP and approval by the investment 
committee 
1.2.1.6 Drafting, negotiation and 
execution of the final investment 
agreements. 
1.2.2   Portfolio management 
Climate and disaster risk screening 
and  Integrating Resilience in Project 
Development  -  Scientific background 
of projects climate problem, solutions 
and incremental cost estimation  
1.2.2.1 
Managing 
investment 
disbursements 
according 
to 
investment agreements  
1.2.2.2 
Reporting 
on 
investment 
disbursement into sub-projects  
1.2.2.3 Subprojects data collection, 
analysis, and reporting 
1.2.2.4 Representative role in a 
subproject’s board of directors or 
similar governing body. 
1.2.2.5 
Tracking 
development, 
construction, and operations of the 
portfolio companies; decision making 
for ensuring sub-projects sustainability 
and climate resilience. 
1.2.2.6 Review of subprojects reports 
and compliance with investment T&C. 
1.2.2.7 Portfolio valuation and 
adjusting ICRF strategy  
Pipeline annual overview 
Pipeline financing progress report   
Subprojects reports according to 
investment agreement (annual audit, 
management report, operating 
reporting etc.) 
Board of directors or similar governing 
body meeting decisions 
1.2.3 Reporting to investors and GCF 
Portfolio reporting function   
1.2.3.1 Defining and refining reporting 
on ICRF activities to shareholders 
and other stakeholders (unaudited 
financial information, audited fiscal-
year financial statements, and a 
management report). 
1.2.3.2 Interim ICRF reports to 
shareholders and other stakeholder  
1.2.3.3 Annual audit, and other 
external verification of ICRF reporting 
data  
Interim and annual reports to 
shareholders  
Annual audit  
Annual shareholders’ meeting 
documentation

=== PAGE 122 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2.3.4 Remittance of reporting data 
and documentation to the GCF by 
AFC. 
1.2.3.5 Holding annual meetings with 
shareholders on ICRF results and 
dividends distribution  
1.2.4  Exit assets, return capital plus 
profit to investors, close out the ICRF 
Initial evaluation of pipeline 
opportunities,  structuring  
1.2.4.1 AFC and ACP engages with 
existing and potential investment 
network for exit opportunities.  
1.2.4.2 Investment committee 
assesses the proposed exit strategies, 
timing and exit projections on a 
quarterly basis.  
1.2.4.3 Discussions of proposed exit 
options, approval by the investment 
committee. 
1.2.4.4 Repayment of capital with 
profit to investors by exiting sub-
projects 
1.2.4.5 Liquidate the ICRF 
  
Marketing materials for subprojects 
sale 
Investment committee decisions on 
subproject exit 
Reporting on repayments to investors  
ICRF liquidation documentation 
2.1.1 Procurement of technical firms 
for detailed climate risk assessments, 
CRPI recommendations, engineering 
assessments of climate adaptation 
solutions for each ICRF projects 
Open tender for technical firms on 
climate risk assessment, adaption 
solutions, CRPI recommendations, 
engineering assessments of climate 
adaptation solutions for each ICRF 
projects 
2.1.1.1 Identify potential pool of expert 
firms and publish RFP for the open 
tender according to AFC in line with 
GCF procurement policy  
2.1.1.2 Hold extensive consultation 
with AFC on technical firms evaluation  
2.1.1.3 Select and nominate experts 
firms. 
RFP, documented evaluation, 
contracts with the technical firms 
2.1.2 Climate risk assessment of sub-
projects pipeline for ICRF investments  
Projects are undergoing climate risk 
assessments and eligibility criteria 
screening according to the adopted 
and refined technical framework  
2.1.2.1 Preliminary climate risk 
assessment based on the Climate risk 
assessment Methodology and 
Approach 
2.1.2.2 Screening of subprojects for 
ICRF investments eligibility criteria 
compliance 
2.1.2.3 Recommendations and 
estimation of adaptation solutions for 
subproject 
2.1.2.4 Preliminary economic and 
Project assessment documentation  
System-dynamic model results  
Preliminary economic and financial 
analysis  
Communication with insurance 
companies for CRPI quotation 
Project package and recommendation 
by experts for investment committee 
about project adoption for 
development and resilience measures 
integration

=== PAGE 123 ===
E
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119 
financial analysis of subprojects, 
conduct cost-benefit analysis of 
integrating upfront incremental costs 
2.1.2.5 Identification of residual 
climate risk for CRPI application and 
engaging with insurance companies  
2.1.2.6 Preparation of project package 
and recommendations for ICRF 
investment committee project 
selection for development and 
investment  
2.1.3 Enhancing climate adaptation 
measures in ICRF’s investments with 
the integration of climate resilience 
options 
AFC project manager coordinates 
project team from the technical firms 
for feasibility studies, economic and 
financial analysis, CRPI T&C 
recommendations 
2.1.2.1 Climate risk assessment for 
ICRF projects  
2.1.2.2 Adaptation solutions for CRI 
Asset Classes 
2.1.2.3 Feasibility studies – technical, 
financial, legal  
2.1.2.4 Project design with adaptation 
solution, modeling, running cost 
benefit analysis for incremental cost 
vs. projected losses 
2.1.2.5 Support of project 
documentation and capital raising 
activities for incremental cost 
justification  
2.1.2.6 Support of sub-project 
documentation for investment 
committee review at every stage of 
the sub-project 
Project documentation incl. 
System dynamic model results 
Financial model 
Design documentation   
2.1.4 Support of EPC and project 
sponsors in the tender process of 
specialized firms/consultants to 
support the implementation of 
adaptation measures to enhance the 
climate resilience of the sub-projects 
Ensure adaptation solutions are 
integrated in design of ICRF projects 
2.1.4.1 Technical firms contribute to 
RFP for EPCs for ICRF projects 
2.1.4.2 Evaluation of EPC proposals 
2.1.4.3 Nominating EPC for sub-
project based on technical capacity for 
resilience measure implementation 
and cost-benefit analysis 
2.1.4.4 Overseeing and reporting on 
EPC design development for 
integration of adaptation and 
environmental solutions  
EPCs response to RFP 
Procurement documentation  
Reporting on overseeing EPC design 
for integration of adaptation and 
environmental solutions

=== PAGE 124 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.5 Overseeing construction and 
implementation of ICRF projects to 
ensure adaptation solutions deployed 
(EPC Management of the adaptation 
elements) 
Technical firms are responsible for 
overseeing construction and 
completion phases acceptance  
2.1.5.1 Ensure EPC contracts include 
construction works acceptance by 
technical firms 
2.1.5.2 Conduct conduction works 
review and acceptation 
2.1.5.3 Lessons learned captured   
EPC documentation  
2.1.6 Refinement of the ICRF Climate 
Assessment Methodology and 
Approach 
Technical firms will be asked to refine 
the ICRF Climate Assessment 
Methodology and Approach as new 
models and tools evolve to ensure 
rigorous assessment and ensure 
socioeconomic and financial 
sustainability of ICRF projects.  
2.1.6.1 Review of the climate risk 
assessment methodology in line with 
IPCC cycles AR6, AR7 and AR8  
2.1.6.2 Support publication of the 
amended Methodology and engage 
with stakeholders for its 
implementation.  
Updated ICRF Climate Risk  
Assessment Methodology and 
Approach 
2.2.1 Capacity building event for ICRF 
programme incl. detailed climate risk 
assessment, adaptation solutions for 
CRI Asset Classes and technical 
knowledge for vulnerable people 
safety and resilience 
 
Knowledge dissemination and 
capacity building activities on climate 
risk assessment, adaptation solutions, 
increase of vulnerable people security 
and resilience  
2.2.1.1 Schedule and prepare 
capacity building activities for CRI 
proponents in NOL countries for 
scaling up investment in resilient 
infrastructure, and for national 
authorities and Union groups 
representing infrastructure users  on 
climate change disaster risk 
prevention and management in 
subproject location (for vulnerable 
people safety and climate resilience) 
2.2.1.2 Prepare training materials and 
evaluation surveys to assess the 
training results  
2.2.1.3 Procure logistics 
arrangements  
2.2.1.4.Hold trainings with evaluation 
survey for trainings results 
assessment  
2.2.1.5 Conduct trainings and 
workshops for AFC and ICRF 
designated teams;  
2.2.1.6 Publish training materials.    
Training and workshop materials 
Training and workshop evaluation 
survey 
Detailed invitation and registration list 
of participants  
2.2.2 Lessons learned are captured 
from ICRF CRI investments and 
roadmap is created for replication 
across the Continent 
Report on the results of the of the 
ICRF climate risk assessment and 
adaptation options, lessons learned 
2.2.2.1 Design a process of capturing 
lessons learned at each project / 
program phase for knowledge sharing; 
Report on Lessons learned on climate 
risk assessment and integrating 
resilience measures

=== PAGE 125 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 
 
 
and recommendations for replication 
of the programme 
2.2.2.2 Catalogue process and data 
on climate risk assessments and 
adaptation solutions  
2.2.2.3 Report on ICRF CRI 
investments for replication  
Roadmap for promoting resilience 
measures in CRI in Africa 
2.2.3 Issue publication - knowledge 
sharing about de-risking 
methodologies for CRI Asset Classes 
based on ICRF programme 
Knowledge dissemination and 
capacity building activities 
2.2.3.1 Issue publication on de-risking 
methodologies for ICRF programme 
for scaling up private investment in 
CRI in Africa.   
2.2.3.2 Publish a designated webpage 
for knowledge sharing and feedback  
2.2.3.3 Publications are made 
available and voluntary submission to 
COP for the global stock take on Yrs 
5, 10, 15, 20.     
Publication on de-risking 
methodologies for ICRF programme 
Designated webpage 
3.1.1 Procure consortium of legal, 
policymaking, and climate expert firms 
for improving regulatory framework for 
CRI, CRPI, and capacity building in 
the programme States 
Open tender for legal and 
policymaking firms consortium for CRI 
Asset Classes, and capacity building 
in the programme States 
3.1.1.1 Identify potential pool of expert 
firms and publish RFP for the open 
tender according to AFC in line with 
GCF procurement policy  
3.1.1.2 Hold extensive consultation 
with AFC on technical firms evaluation  
3.1.1.3 Select and nominate experts 
firms. 
RFP  
Evaluation documentation 
Contracts with the expert firms 
3.1.2 Capacity building and 
engagement with key proponents, 
public and private sector participants, 
civil societies to identify the regulatory 
gaps for investments in CRI Asset 
Classes 
Hold consultations and trainings with 
CRI Asset Classes proponents to 
identify the regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI Asset Classes for 
recommendations report 
3.1.2.1 Identify stakeholders groups to 
hold consultations on gaps and 
opportunities for CRI Asset Classes 
regulatory framework improvement 
per country;  
3.1.2.2 Hold consultations with the  
objective of strengthening regulatory 
framework for CRI Asset Classes;  
3.1.2.3 Further explore opportunities 
for strengthening regulatory 
framework for CRI Asset Classes 
based on best practices;  
3.1.2.4 Reporting results of the 
engagements.   
Consultations and meetings plan per 
country  
Reports on the outcomes  
Training and workshop materials 
Training and workshop evaluation 
survey 
Invitation and Registration of 
participants 
3.1.3 Create a work group from the 
consortium of legal and policymaking 
Create and operationalize working 
group from the 3.1.1 consortium of 
3.1.3.1 Working group created from 
the 3.1.1 consortium of firms;  
Working group work plan  
Report on the working group activities

=== PAGE 126 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
 
 
 
firms for new CRI Asset Classes and 
construction codes implementation 
firms to promote and legalize CRI 
Asset Classes  
 
3.1.3.2 Recommendation report for 
CRI Asset Classes issued for 
integration in a regulatory framework, 
construction codes, and policies of the 
programme countries;  
3.1.3.3 Collaborate with NDAs and 
country office in support of 
recommendation report 
implementation 
3.1.4 Create and share 
recommendation reports for improving 
regulatory framework for CRI Asset 
Classes per country 
Based on 3.1.2 consultations and 
3.1.3 working group achievements 
issue a recommendation report to 
promote and scale up investments in 
CRI Asset Classes with risk transfer 
through adaptation solutions 
integrated in a regulatory framework 
and policies 
3.1.4.1 Issue recommendations report 
for   improving regulatory framework 
for CRI Asset Classes for programme 
countries;  
3.1.4.2 Hold consultations with the key 
proponents on the document draft;  
3.1.4.3 Finalize recommendation 
report for the programme countries.  
Recommendation report drafts  
Comments to the Recommendation 
report drafts  
Final recommendation reports 
 
3.1.5 Support regulatory, standards 
and policy making process for CRI 
Asset Classes to implement the 
recommendations according to each 
country needs 
Procure experts for regulatory 
framework for recommendation report 
for CRI per country; oversee and 
conclude the report  
3.1.5.1 Collaborate with NDAs and 
country offices in support of the 
regulatory framework improvement 
according to the recommendation 
report for CRI Asset Classes  
Engagement plan 
Report on engagement activities 
  
3.1.6 Report on regulatory framework 
support for CRI Asset Classes 
Ensure sustainability of the 
programme through knowledge 
captured and further roadmap in 
support of CRI Asset Classes on the 
Continent   
3.1.6.1 Hold consultations with NDAs, 
country offices and other key 
proponents on the Output 3.1 of the 
programme;  
3.1.6.2 Capture knowledge from 
Output 3.1 issue a road map for 
replication across the Continent.     
Report on lessons learned and further 
roadmap 
3.1.7 Issue publication - knowledge 
sharing about lessons learned and 
recommendations on strengthening 
regulatory framework for CRI Asset 
Classes in the programme countries 
Knowledge dissemination on the 
Output 3.1 - achievements and 
lessons learned for public sector and 
civil societies  
3.1.7.1 Identify targeted stakeholders 
for knowledge sharing within and 
beyond the programme countries;  
3.1.7.2 Hold workshops for lessons 
learned and further road map for CRI 
investments scale up in Africa.  
Publication on lessons learned and 
recommendations for strengthening 
regulatory framework  
Workshops materials  
3.2.1 Procure fiscal regulatory 
framework and policymaking firms for 
promoting fiscal incentives for CRI 
Asset Classes in the programme 
countries 
Open tender for fiscal framework and 
policymaking firms to strengthening 
regulatory framework for CRI Asset 
Classes in the programme countries  
3.2.1.1 Identify potential pool of expert 
firms and publish RFP for the open 
tender according to AFC in line with 
GCF procurement policy  
3.2.1.2 Hold extensive consultation 
RFP  
Evaluation documentation 
Contracts with the expert firms

=== PAGE 127 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123 
 
 
 
 
 
with AFC on technical firms evaluation  
3.2.1.3 Select and nominate experts 
firms. 
3.2.2 Capacity building and 
engagement with key proponents, 
public and private sector participants, 
civil societies for improving fiscal 
incentives (reduced tax, tax holidays, 
customs duty reduction or waiver, 
subsidies etc. as per the country 
priorities and needs) for investments 
in CRI  
Meetings with CRI Asset Classes 
proponents to identify gaps and 
opportunities in fiscal framework for 
each country for CRI Asset Classes 
investments, holding trainings on 
baseline assessment and 
recommendations  
3.2.2.1 Conduct baseline assessment  
3.2.2.2 Map opportunities for 
engagement per country  
3.2.2.3 Identifying policy gaps and 
economic barriers 
3.2.2.4 Explore regulatory changes to 
facilitate increased investment in CRI 
Asset Classes as per the country 
needs 
3.2.2.5 Hold consultations and 
trainings with key proponents to 
support strengthening regulatory 
framework on CRI 
Consultations and meetings plan per 
country  
Reports on engagement activities 
Training and workshop materials 
Training and workshop evaluation 
survey 
Invitation and Registration of 
participants 
3.2.3 Create and share 
recommendation reports for improving 
fiscal policy for CRI Asset Classes 
Procure experts for fiscal policy 
recommendation report for CRI per 
country; oversee and conclude the 
report  
3.2.3.1 Summarize result of the 
consultations.   
3.2.3.2 Baseline assessment and 
recommendation report for 
strengthening fiscal policies for 
catalyzing investments in CRI Asset 
Classes per Country 
Recommendation report per 
programme country  
3.2.4 Support legal regulatory and 
policy making process to implement 
the recommendations on fiscal policy 
according to each Country needs 
Promote actions according to the 
recommendation reports per 
programme Country  
3.2.4.1 Collaborate with NDAs and 
country offices in support of the fiscal 
policy recommendation report for CRI 
Asset Classes  
Plan of consultations and 
engagements  
Report on promoting fiscal incentives 
activities  
3.3.1 Feasibility study on the 
development of CRPI in Africa;  
Engage top tier consulting firms in 
feasibility study for CRPI products 
development for infrastructure in 
Africa, baseline market study  
3.3.1.1 Procure feasibility study on the 
baseline market study for CRPI 
development for infrastructure in 
Africa  
3.3.1.2 Hold series of consultation for 
market and product development of 
CRPI 
Procurement documentation  
Feasibility study  
Report on consultation activities 
3.3.2 CRPI design and development 
for CRI in Africa, stakeholder 
engagement;  
Design and develop CRPI based on 
the ICRF pipeline climate change 
residual risk;  
Engagements with key industry 
players to contribute to CRPI design 
and development, including insurance 
3.3.2.1 Identify the pool of 
stakeholders including insurance 
companies, private sector actors, 
government agencies in target 
countries, investors, industry groups 
such as the Insurance Development 
List of stakeholders for CRPI products 
development in Africa 
Requests for ICRF sub-projects and 
other CRI CRPI needs to insurance 
companies

=== PAGE 128 ===
E
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124 
companies, private sector actors, 
government agencies in target 
countries, investors, industry groups 
such as the Insurance Development 
Forum and the Coalition for Climate 
Resilient Investments (CCRI);  
Forum and the Coalition for Climate 
Resilient Investments (CCRI) for CRPI 
for infrastructure in Africa   
3.3.2.2 Organize series of 
consultations to identify challenges, 
opportunities, and gaps for CRPI 
design and development 
3.3.2.3 Share with insurance 
companies needs for ICRF pipeline 
residual risk coverage to suggest 
CRPI solutions 
3.3.2.4 Review draft of CRPI products 
suggested by insurance companies 
and hold series of consultations for 
product concept refinement to ensure 
economy and efficiency  
3.3.2.5 Engage stakeholders in review 
of CRPI products development  
3.3.2.6 Register all recommendations 
implemented  
Report on CRPI products 
development consultations with 
insurance companies and market 
proponents 
Register of implemented 
recommendations   
3.3.3 Engagement with donors to 
sponsor CRPI for ICRF projects; 
Engage other donors to mobilize 
funding on the best effort basis to 
implement innovative and 
transformational parametric risk 
insurance solutions as part of the 
ICRF programme, and provide a 
strong demonstration effect with 
paradigm shift potential 
3.3.3.1 Conduct cost-benefit analysis 
of CRPI for each ICRF sub-project, 
identify residual climate change risk to 
be covered by CRPI.   
3.3.3.2 Liaise with potential donors to 
sponsor CRPI for ICRF subprojects;  
3.3.3.3 Negotiate CRPI T&C with 
insurance companies;  
3.3.3.4 Sign CRPI policy for ICRF 
subprojects and review policies as 
climate change scenarios unfold for 
additional residual risks 
Plan and report on activities for CRPI 
sponsor engagements  
CRPI policies / contracts for ICRF 
sub-projects 
3.3.4 Support capacity building 
activities (training) for key 
stakeholders of CRPI 
Raising awareness and capacity 
building about benefits of CRPI 
products   
3.3.4.1 Identify proponents of CRI in 
Africa  
3.3.4.2 Organize training and 
workshops to raise awareness on 
climate-risk parametric insurance 
(CRPI) 
Training and workshop materials 
Training and workshop evaluation 
survey 
Invitation and Registration of 
participants

=== PAGE 129 ===
E
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125 
3.3.4.3 Conduct survey on 
effectiveness of trainings and 
feedback on CRPI market creation 
3.3.4.4 Create list of contacts of 
interested parties for CRPI in Africa 
and share information on CRPI 
progress 
3.3.4.5 Publish information on 
capacity building activities for CRPI 
market creation in Africa. 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
•
ICRF programme-level monitoring, reporting, and evaluation will be conducted by ACP in compliance with the GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework,
the GCF Evaluation Policy, and the AFC internal evaluation policies and in accordance with the arrangements and policies agreed in Annex 11: Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E) Plan. The ICRF Program Manager will be appointed by ACP, who will be in charge of programme implementation plan, monitoring, 
reporting, and evaluation. The ICRF Program Manager will develop annual and quarterly work plans to ensure the efficient and optimal implementation of the 
programme, working in coordination with ACP’ Senior Management Team. ‘ 
•
In case of encountering any delays or non-systematic events, ICRF Program Manager will inform ACP Senior Management Team, programme countries
NDAs, and the appropriate GCF division about its effect and remedial plan within 90 calendar days. Primary responsibility of the ICRF Program Manager will 
be to implement M&E Plan through coordination of stakeholders to ensure that appropriate support, interventions, and corrective measures can be 
undertaken. The ICRF Program Manager will oversee that all programme staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility, and accountability 
throughout the programme’s monitoring, reporting, and  evaluation  of the programme’s results. 
•
ACP will support the ICRF Program Manager by holding quarterly meetings and providing feedback on M&E plan implementation and annual reports. ACP
have internal regulations and policies including those based on EMSF, Gender Action plan for M&E for programme implementation and compliance. ACP and 
ICRF have annual external audit reports of financial reporting according to IFRS, which will be included in the annual M&E report package. ICRF Program 
Manager will coordinate with the NDAs for any additional recommendations to the M&E, implementation quality assurance, troubleshooting support, and 
oversight guidance, as needed. The programme’s target communities, beneficiaries, and participants, as well as key the stakeholders such as the NDA will be 
involved as much as possible in the M&E on the ICRF programme level. 
•
The programme M&E reports will be prepared by ACP for AFC review before submission to GCF for each year of the programme lifespan: five years for
Outcomes 2 and 3 and twenty years for Outcome 1. The methodologies of M&E vary for each programme output and will be standardized according to the 
best practices for quantification including principles of conservativeness to avoid double counting or over-estimating. The ICRF Program Manager, ACP 
Senior Management Team, and the NDAs, as appropriate, will provide objective input to the annual APR report for GCF. The ICRF Program Manager will 
ensure compliance of the APR with the M&E plan in the Annex 11 and meeting the reporting deadlines.

=== PAGE 130 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Category of risks 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Failure to deliver on the ICRF impact potential 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Due to climate change uncertainties, there is a risk of lower results associated to ICRF impact potential, e.g., 
providing access to resilient infrastructure and protect the most vulnerable groups, lower technical and 
financial performance of the assets, and decline of its value. This might delay replication and decrease 
investors’ confidence.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
•
Robust ICRF Climate Assessment Methodology, technical and climate change risk due diligence will
ensure thorough projects development to ensure socioeconomic and financial success of ICRF
investments. Parametric climate risk insurance, adaptation pathways approach, and science-based
assessment will provide a holistic approach to risks and opportunities, allowing to ensure targeted
impact.
•
Ongoing M&E of the projects will focus on identifying red flags and providing remedial solutions
including technical expertise.
•
Physical climate risks are mitigated by incorporating climate change data into project design and risk
transfer through innovative parametric insurance products.
•
Financial sustainability of the ICRF pipeline is ensured by ongoing projects assessment supported by
climate science, tailored investment criteria, and portfolio management framework.
•
Representation at the investees’ board will allow ICRF to identify risks at an early stage and provide
remedial solutions.
Selected Risk Factor 2 Limited access to financing at the fund and project levels 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Delays in raising capital at the fund and project level and not meeting Fund commitments due to complex 
negotiations or low appetite from the private sector  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
•
Concessional funding from GCF and parametric insurance scheme will unlock private capital for ICRF
projects. ICRF financing of the full project cycle (from development to operations) allows to optimize
transactional cost and negotiation process.
•
Unique nature of the Fund ensured soft commitments from a confidential list of investors even at the
early stage.
•
AFC team with solid track record in infrastructure financing provides access to even greater network of
investors on a regional and sectoral levels.
•
Liquidity risks will be mitigated by five years cash flow planning and ongoing liquidity test
Selected Risk Factor 3 Risk of maladaptation 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 131 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 127 
Due to unprecedented climate change, there is a risk of the programme attempts leading to increased risk 
of adverse climate-related outcomes, increased vulnerability to climate change, or diminished welfare’43 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Due to climate change uncertainties, the adaptation measures will follow an adaptation ‘pathways’ 
approach scheduling adaptation in the future in addition to short term and no regret actions. This decision-
making approach will allow ICRF to prioritize science-based adaptation measures at the project design 
stage and to plan potential adaptation options as climate change scenarios unfold. Broad stakeholders 
engagement through communication and consultation will allow to prioritize and verify adaptation plan. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Operational risk due to errors and construction delays 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Risks of financial losses due to operations errors, omissions, and construction delays (as a result of 
human, adequate processes and policies factors) 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Operationalizing of ICRF will start from putting adequate policies and procedures in place supported by 
ongoing trainings and compliance review. Both will allow to minimize the risk by segregation of duties and 
control processes. Robust risk management governance and policies will be implemented in line with AFC 
governance while highly experienced Chief Officer will be appointed. Effective project execution plan and 
monitoring will ensure management of execution timelines.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 Legal risk of adverse legal framework and permits cancellation 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Legal 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk of changing regulatory framework with adverse effect on the programme or permits cancellation 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The programme is supported on the country level through engagement with NDAs. The programme has 
stakeholders' engagement plan to obtain ICRF investments support on the local, national and regional 
level. Engagement with authorities and NGOs including policy making and capacity building will alleviate 
the risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 ML/FT and other prohibited practices 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk of ICRF counterparties being involved in activities that violate GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
ACP and ICRF will have zero tolerance to ML/FT and prohibited practices in line with GCF’s Policy on 
Prohibited Practices. Both will have mandatory comprehensive KYC requirements and extensive pre-
investment due diligence of the investee company and its key personnel. All GCF compliance 
requirements are factored in the programme documentation. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Capital Risk 
Probability 
Impact 
43 Emerging issues of environmental concerns UNEP, 2019: 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27545/Frontiers1819_ch5.pdf

=== PAGE 132 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 128 
Other 
Medium 
High 
        
Description 
The ICRF is an infrastructure equity fund which will invest in climate resilient infrastructure projects. These 
projects are subject to various projects risks which may result in capital losses for investors in the fund. 
GCF is taking a high risk by providing a junior equity position in the ICRF fund to catalyze the participation 
of institutional investors in climate resilient infrastructure projects in the selected African countries. 
Therefore, the capital commitment of GCF has a high-risk profile may not be returned in full in case of 
underperformance in the portfolio companies.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
AFC has developed a solid track record as a pre-eminent infrastructure solutions provider in Africa with 
unrivalled experience in identifying, developing, executing, and delivering transformational infrastructure 
projects on the continent. To date, the Corporation has deployed over US$ 10billion in high quality 
infrastructure in over 35 African countries. ACP, the Asset Management subsidiary of AFC, will co-invest 
ICRF funds alongside AFC. ACP will leverage the scale and breath of AFC’s investment track record and 
provide institutional investors. AFC has the second highest credit rating in the African financial sector (A3 
by Moody’s) and has been profitable since inception 15 years ago. This reflects the robustness of its 
investment appraisal process, risk management and proactive portfolio management. The ICRF fund will 
co-investment with AFC in eligible projects, therefore, will apply the same rigor in its investment process to 
mitigate potential risks.

=== PAGE 133 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 129 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
The Executing Entity has adopted a comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) for the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund. The ESMF has been designed in compliance with 
the AE’s ESMF and IFC Performance Standards and GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The Executing 
Entity and Accredited Entity has prepared Resettlement Policy Framework and Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework, and Biodiversity Management Framework in line with GCF ESS requirements, as 
well as updated its information disclosure requirement to match requirements of GCF for Category I-1 
programmes. Please refer to Annex 6 for details. 
The ESMF is presented under Annex 6 of this Funding Proposal and developed to ensure that the projects 
to be financed by the Programme will be designed and implemented in a sustainable manner. It also 
ensures that GCF ESS policies are passed down from Accredited Entity (AFC) to ICRF (Fund level) and 
to the projects financed by the ICRF (Investee level). The ESMF consists of following key parts: the ESMF 
and specific frameworks to address as appropriate : Resettlement, Indigenous People Rights, Biodiversity, 
Stakeholders consultations, gender and social inclusion.  
The main objective ICRF ESMF is to identify potential environmental and social governance risks prior to 
investment disbursement and to institutionalize the monitoring mechanisms at an Investee level to 
supervise ESG performance during the term of the ICRF’s investment. As per ESMF document, the 
following procedures are incorporated in ICRF’s investment process to ensure that ESS risks are assessed 
and mitigated: 
ESG Integration in Investment Process 
Screening of project 
eligibility to ICRF’s 
ESG Policy 
The projects in the ICRF pipeline will be screened for “eligibility” to the AE and 
EE Policies. In particular, project activities will be screened against ICRF 
exclusion list to ensure that no activities under this list is financed. During this 
stage, the Executing Entity’s team shall assess proposed investment activates to 
determine the environmental and social impacts and classify project 
environmental and social governance risk as per “high”, “medium” and “low” risk 
categories. The resulting category for a project (s) to be financed by the ICRF 
shall further inform the level of E&S due diligence to be implemented in the 
subsequent stage below. 
Conduct 
environmental and 
social due diligence 
of    projects that 
passed   initial 
screening stage 
During ESS due diligence stage, the Executing Entity’s team shall assess 
potential E&S risks of proposed project prior to the ICRF’s investment.  
ICRF shall identify appropriate mitigation measures (if any required) in 
Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP); by also specifying Investee 
companies’ responsibilities and timeline for implementing preventive, mitigation 
and compensation measures in ESAP. 
Incorporating 
Investee   
company’s 
obligation to comply 
with the AE and EE 
Environmental and 
Social guidelines 
and policies  
The ESAP developed during the due-diligence stage will be part of shareholder 
agreement between ICRF and the respective investee company, therefore the 
investee will be legally required to implement ESAP. 
The ICRF programme will invest in category I1, I2 and I3 projects. Therefore, the stakeholder engagement 
plan (SEP) Framework in Annex 6 also reflects an importance of fully and effectively engaging with 
indigenous peoples affected in the design, development and implementation of the strategies and activities

=== PAGE 134 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 130 
to be financed by the programme, while respecting their rights. The Executing Entity will disclose on its 
website appropriate E&S information for each sub-project under the programme as per GCF Information 
Disclosure Policy. 
In case, where projects to be financed under the programme will involve land acquisition-the projects will 
be guided by the Resettlement Policy Framework which has been developed as per GCF ESS Policy 
Requirement and is included in Annex 6. This will ensure compliance to national laws and international 
best practices. The Executing Entity will report on an annual basis on ESG performance of the fund and 
its portfolio companies to investors, including GCF. For additional details on environmental and social 
management framework, please refer to Annex 6.   
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be developed for each project, to ensure transparency and 
meaningful consultation with the project-affected and interested parties. Stakeholder engagement and 
consultations will be conducted throughout the project cycle. This will include discussions of project design 
and impacts as well as multi-stakeholder discussions on these issues during the preparation phase. The 
SEP, along with other E&S instruments, will be subject to public consultation and disclosure per 
requirements of the AE and GCF and will be treated as a living document to be regularly updated as 
needed during project implementation.  
SEAH Considerations 
In compliance with the GCF Board decision B.BM-2021/18 adopted in September 2021, the ICRF ESMS 
incorporates the risk assessment and management on sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual 
harassment (SEAH) as part of the E&S due diligence for the proposed programme and sub-programme 
and/or projects, namely as part of: 
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts  
As part of the social risks, issues of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA)/sexual harassment (SH) may arise 
in the context of infrastructure projects in all the sectors targeted by the ICRF Fund that involve major civil 
works. Gender-based violence: women routinely experience sexual harassment and intimate partner 
violence in target countries, and the risk of gender-based violence may increase during the realization of 
infrastructure projects in target sectors. This risk will be assessed and mitigated through implementing 
mitigation and response approaches and the adoption of internal prevention and response mechanisms in 
compliance with the AE and GCF policies and practices. SEAH considerations will be an integral part of the 
ES screening and risk categories, due diligence, assessment, and management plan. 
At project level, in case where substantial risks have been identified, the project sponsors would typically 
prepare, adopt, and implement a stand-alone Gender-Based Violence Action Plan (GBV Action Plan), to 
assess, manage, and monitor the risks of gender-based violence (GBV) and sexual exploitation, abuse and 
harassment (SEAH). The Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM) will also address any complaint related 
to the sexual abuses, sexual exploitation, and sexual harassment issues in ensuring labour and working 
conditions effectiveness and safeguarding against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment 
(SEAH). These interventions are expected to efficiently complement the gender action plan, empowering 
local women and men and aim to create a safe environment at the project site and in communities. 
PS 2: Labour and Working Conditions - The PS 2 seeks to protect the fundamental human rights of workers. 
It is applicable to the direct project workers, project contract and subcontract workers as well as project 
supply-chain workers. The compliance requirement will include provision of clear information and 
documentation regarding the workers’ rights, wages, and conditions of employment amongst others.  The 
PS 2 in the contexts of ICRF will also seek to strengthen the Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM) to 
address any complaint related to the sexual abuses and sexual exploitation, and sexual harassment issues 
in ensuring labour and working conditions effectiveness. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse (SA), sexual 
harassment (SH) including sexual exploitation of children are included in the list of “Designated Categories 
of Offences”.

=== PAGE 135 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 131 
PS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security - The PS 4 addresses the health, safety and security risks 
and impacts on project affected communities and the corresponding responsibility of clients to avoid or 
minimize such risks and impacts with particular attention to people who because of their particular 
circumstances, may be vulnerable. In this regard, the requirement amongst others is for the project sponsor 
to establish guidelines to safeguard against Sexual Abuse, Sexual Harassment, and Sexual Exploitation, 
formulate measures to address infrastructure and equipment design and safety, hazardous materials 
management and safety, Ecosystem services as well as emergency preparedness and response amongst 
others. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Summary of the gender assessment and project/program-level gender action plan that is aligned with the 
objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy.  
The Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund will mainstream gender considerations in its investment 
process with the aim to enhance female economic participation in the target sectors and create 
income- generating opportunities for women in project countries. Proposed interventions under the 
Gender Action Plan will promote: (i) advancing equality between men and women through climate change 
mitigation and adaptation actions, and (ii) minimizing gender-related risks in climate change actions. 
Employment opportunities created by climate resilient infrastructure projects often benefit men more than 
women, resulting in a significant employment gap in the target sectors, namely climate resilient transport 
and logistics, climate resilient energy systems, climate resilient economic zones, telecommunication and 
digital infrastructure. Under the ICRF approach, issues related to female employment and access to climate 
resilient infrastructure services will be effectively embedded across the implementation of sub-projects. At 
project level, the EE will implement a gender-sensitive approach including baseline surveys, indicators and 
methodologies for continuous project monitoring and impact assessments, collect and present sex-
disaggregated statistics to measure enhanced access for women to climate resilient infrastructure services, 
an ensure consultations process engage both men and woman actors. 
The initial programme level gender assessment outlined several issues faced by women outlined below. 
These issues will be tackled in a sustainable manner, raising awareness, improving gender policies, 
building capacities and generating knowledge on the program’s differentiated impact on men and 
women. The AE undertook an initial gender assessment of the ICRF programme and elaborated a gender 
action plan.  
i.
Female employment and skill gaps in the target sectors: the main barriers to women’s participation
in the target sector include social norms that confine women to unpaid household and care work,
occupational gender segregation, limited capacities and skills, as well as discriminatory work
environments. This gap will be addressed through skills building and, outreach efforts, as well as the
promotion of equal opportunities practices in the implementation of sub-projects.
ii.
Female employment in the areas of implementation of target projects: Women, if employed, are
more exposed to lower-paid, lower-quality employment in the informal sector. Under the ICRF approach,
the socio-economic needs of the local communities will be assessed, and actions empowering women
prioritized. Those may include the promotion of activities targeting skill-building. Special attention will be
paid to the promotion of local women-run businesses along the project development cycle, from
procurement to project implementation.
iii. Gender-based violence: women routinely experience sexual harassment and intimate partner violence
in target countries, and the risk of gender-based violence may increase during the realization of
infrastructure projects in target sectors. This risk will be mitigated through implementing mitigation and
response approaches and the adoption of internal prevention and response mechanisms in compliance
with the AE policies and practices. These interventions are expected to efficiently complement actions
empowering local women and men and aim to create a safe environment at the project site and in
communities.
iv. Women access to climate resilience infrastructure services in target sectors : among project
countries with lower electrification rates and under-developed grids, women suffer from time-poverty and

=== PAGE 136 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 132 
increased health-issues, as they bear the responsibility of food preparation, as well as fuel and water 
collection. Climate hazards disrupt and damage transmission lines limiting access to electricity among 
poor households, including female-headed households (FHH). Improving access to climate resilient 
energy services may reduce the time and labor burden of women, generate health and education 
benefits, increase female labor participation and incomes. Similarly, climate stressors such as flooding, 
sea level rise, high temperatures, strong winds, increased precipitations can damage economic zones, 
transportation links such as ports, roads, and ports, leading severe economic losses that may 
significantly higher adverse impact on communities and vulnerable populations, particularly on women. 
For these reasons, the EE will (i) pay attention to women and men’s differentiated needs in the design 
of climate resilient infrastructure projects, (ii) conduct inclusive stakeholders’ consultations to ensure 
women’s voice is heard and included in decision-making processes, (iii) undertake outreach and 
capacity-building initiatives to increase women’s knowledge about climate resilience in target sectors, 
and (iv) and promote equal access to climate resilient infrastructure services. 
The ICRF will follow a systematic approach and provide cross-support to projects interventions with 
a focus on data collection, policy engagement, project level actions and capacity-building activities. 
At the project and program level, the following approach will be followed:  
1. Data collection and initial assessments:
o
Build upon existing country gender diagnostics and action plans;
o
Document the baseline situation and identify gaps through collection of sex-disaggregated data;
o
Conduct stakeholders’ consultations involving female participants, to understand men and
women differentiated needs; and
o
Include an analysis of the differentiated impact of the ICRF project on men and women in initial
assessments, through the involvement of gender and sector experts (Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment, Resettlement Action Plans etc.).
2. Identifying and implementing relevant actions:
o
Identify and implement relevant interventions to narrow gaps in terms of employment and climate
resilient infrastructure access, based on the initial diagnosis and inclusive stakeholders’
consultations; and
o
Promote female employment including capacity building and programs for women to gain hands-
on experience in the target sectors
o
Implementation of prevention measures to mitigate gender violence or sexual harassment in the
implementation of the sub-projects
3. M&E and Knowledge management:
o
Monitor results throughout the project cycle to assess impact on men and women and allow for
real-time adjustments;
o
Expand the knowledge base by documenting lessons learnt from prior projects, knowledge
production and exchange.
4. Strengthening female participation and voice during Stakeholders Consultations:
o
Organize stakeholders’ consultations throughout the project cycle. Ensure effective participation
of women while conducting consultations to gain knowledge about their specific concerns during
project preparation, and to monitor impacts and allow for real-time correction during
implementation;
o
Use local dialects and involve female facilitators/local women leaders, as well as women
representatives from the utility company whenever possible,
o
Organize women-only discussion groups if appropriate; organize consultations and focus groups
at a convenient time for women; and create partnerships with women’s groups and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to assist in the process and ensure the projects’
sustainability.
The full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan is provided in annex 8.

=== PAGE 137 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 133 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Project/program’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial accounting, 
auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements, 
as necessary. 
-
Due Diligence: ACP will be responsible for establishing KYC, due diligence process including anti-money
laundering and other evaluations of sponsors according to each respective institution’s internal policy 
requirements at ICRF. ACP will be responsible for the financial management of all funds of the ICRF 
program. The eventual application of the funds to each of the projects, will be based on the guidelines of 
its investments team and the implementation of the financial operations team. 
-
Disbursement: All disbursements will be consistent with a pre-agreed mechanism to be set out in the
financing agreements. These will be subject to the fulfillment of all conditions precedent as agreed by 
the ACP and ICRF risk management team and financial operations team. 
-
Supervision and Portfolio Management: ACP will onboard a dedicated portfolio management team for
ICRF, both of whom are primarily responsible for the monitoring and supervision of portfolio projects. 
There are a set of stipulated quarterly, semiannual, and annual reporting requirements, part of which 
also require site visits on a case-by-case basis. ACP and AFC will ensure each of the projects is 
compliant with all the monitoring and reporting requirements as stipulated in the AMA and to be agreed 
in the Funding Agreement. AFC will ensure that all the reporting requirements to GCF are fulfilled. 
-
Procurement: The procurement of Goods and Services for Funded Activities, whether by the Accredited
Entity (AFC), the implementing agency (ACP), or by a third party, shall be done in accordance with AFC’s 
procurement rules, policies, and procedures which is consistent with international procurement 
standards. The procurement manual outlines the processes and procedures for each procurement 
method, as well as their applicable thresholds. The manual addresses i) the procurement of goods and 
services for general use, ii) the procurement of specialized services that support investment operations 
and project development activities, the management and oversight of procurement through a data bank 
of suppliers, contractors, consultants and standards of conduct. ACP has access to AFC Vendor Data 
Base which is constantly updated. AFC currently shortlists preregistered vendors based on their core 
Product or Service, relative to the Corporation’s individual business requirements. Potential 
vendors/consultants are required to register on the AFC vendor Management System. All new entrants 
and existing vendors must comply with the following standards: Anti-Bribery/Anti-Corruption and Anti-
money Laundering. Thereafter, ACP will undertake a systematic pre-qualification to assess the suitability 
of the firm, for inclusion in AFC’s database of consultants and service providers. 
-
Audit: The framework will be subject to AFC’s and ACP’ audit policies and will be audited by external
auditors on an annual basis. AFC’s and ACP’ internal audit team monitor transaction activities relating 
to disbursements of funds for each investment as well as repayments following best international 
standards. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
☐No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes: 
•
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly,
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
•
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.

=== PAGE 138 ===
H 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING 
PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 134 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable
supporting documents.
44 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects. 
ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☐ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/program milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3): 
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☐Others (please specify – e.g., Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan 
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/program-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) 
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/program information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22 
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)44 
☒ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 139 ===
Page 135

=== PAGE 140 ===
Page 136

=== PAGE 141 ===
This document is classified as: DC2 Confidential - Approved Distribution to  External parties
 
Page 137

=== PAGE 142 ===
This document is classified as: DC2 Confidential - Approved Distribution to  External parties
Page 138

=== PAGE 143 ===
RepueLreue oe DJreourr
Ururrc-Écnlrrr-PArx
ltltNtsrrRr or t'ENvt RoNNEMENT
ET DU DrvrlopprMrNr DuRnslr
LE SECRÉTAIRE CÉruÉNAI
+si++L;+<*r
ù*^Jl -ËlJl-.',*ll -Ër-_5ll
âj-J+ll Ë,_.rlj_r
Ll$.^.,*ll 4!*^jillJ
MEDD
N',t{Ü
ptdt 6s.ïl
Djibouti, le
09ruetou
Rq Funding proposal for the GCF by the Africa Finance Corporation regarding the
Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)
Dear Madau-r, Sir,
we refer to the progranrnre titlec'l the lnfrcrstrucLure clirrtoLe l?esilient Funct (tcRt;) in Djibouti as
included in the funding proposal submitted by thc Africa Finance Corporation to us on 20 June
2022.
'l'he utldcrsigned rs thc «1Lrly authorizcd rcprL.scnrative ol'Mr. Dini Abdallah omar, the National
Designateci ALrthority oi Djibouti.
Pttrsuant to GCF cir.'cisiott Il.0u/10, the contcnt oI whrch we acknowleclge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the progranlre as inclLrcled in ihe funcling proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is irnplied that:
Ia] TIlc Sovcl'l)lllCllt ol DjiltoLt ti lt,ts iro olrlt,i:lion to tirc ll;ogr.aptntc;rs incluclecl i, the
fundrng propos;iI;
(b.) 'lhe i)l'ogl';ll)llllc as iili:lLitit'ti in tltc liririling ploltosal is in copfor-nrrty with the national
pnori lies, st r;lt r:gics ;rnd p lans oI' l); i Do rit r;
[cJ In accordance with the cClls environnrental and social safeguards, the prograrnrne as
included in the funding proposal is in conforrnity with relevant national laws ancl
regulations.
wc also confirtn tllat oLtt'tt:tlional proccss 1'or';rsccrtainrng no-objection to the programmeas
inclLrded in the lu.ciiug p.oposai has br:c. ilLrly iol1e1r,,(l
we also confirtn tltat oitr no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be irnplemented
within the scope of tl-re prograrnme
We acknowledgc that this letter will be nracle publicly available on the CCF website.
Kind regards,
Dini Abdallah Omar
GCF Focal Point-Djibouti
é-.,
-i. i ^',-
| +zsz 3s-Bs-22
1.,E +zs:35-l 6- I 8
BP 11
I@d i n i_omarrif; yahoo. fr
ii
Page 139

=== PAGE 144 ===
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kinshasa, 2 June 2022 
 
 
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Africa Finance Corporations  regarding Infrastructures 
Climate Resilient Funds (ICRF). 
 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
 
We refer to the programme titled Infrastructures Climate Resilient Funds (ICRF) in The 
Democratic Republic of Congo as included in the funding proposal submitted by Africa Finance 
Corporations to us on 2 June 2022. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Hans Andre Lohayo Djamba, the National 
Designated Authority of The Democratic Republic of Congo. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of the Democratic Republic of Congo has no-objection to the program as 
included in the funding proposal. 
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national 
priorities, strategies and plans of the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the program as included 
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the programme 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Kind regards, 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Dr. Hans André  Lohayo Djamba 
DRC Coordinator CDM and GCF 
National Coordination of GCF&CDM 
The Democratic Republic of Congo 
 
 
Page 140

=== PAGE 145 ===
Page 141

=== PAGE 146 ===
REPUBLIC OF
THE GAMBIA 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
THE QUADRANGLE, BANJUL, THE GAMBIA. 
ADM173/222/01(2)                                                                                  June 20th 2022 
 
The Executive Director 
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
Incheon, South Korea 
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) regarding the 
Infrastructure Climate Resilience Fund (ICRF)  
 
Dear Sir, 
 
We refer to the programme titled Infrastructure Climate Resilience Fund (ICRF) in The Gambia as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) to us on 29 
November 2021. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Mr Bai Madi Ceesay, the National Designated 
Authority of The Gambia. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of The Gambia has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, 
strategies and plans of The Gambia; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included 
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Kind regards, 
 
 
 
Bai Madi Ceesay 
NDA, The Gambia 
Page 142

=== PAGE 147 ===
Page 143

=== PAGE 148 ===
Page 144

=== PAGE 149 ===
Page 145

=== PAGE 150 ===
Page 146

=== PAGE 151 ===
Page 147

=== PAGE 152 ===
République Islamique de Mauritanie 
Honneur - Fraternité – Justice 
_____________ 
Ministère de l’Environnement et du 
Développement Durable 
 الجمهورية اإلسالمية الموريتانية
 شـــــرف– إخـــــــــــــاء – عــــــدل
 وزارة البيئة والتنمية المستدامة
Direction Climat et Economie Verte مديرية ال مناخ 
  واإلقتصاد األخض 
 
N° : 039/22 
Nouakchott, le 26/08/202
 أنواكشو /
2
 
Le Directeur     المدير 
To: The Green Climate Fund,  DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,  G24- 4 SANGDO DONG YEONSU GU - INCHEON CITY, 
REPUBLIC OF COREA  
Object : Funding proposal for the GCF by the Africa Finance Corporation regarding the Infrastructure 
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF)  
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the programme titled the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) in Mauritania as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by the Africa Finance Corporation to us on 21 March 2022. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Mr. Sidi Mohammed El Wavi , the National Designated 
Authority of Mauritania. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Mauritania has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, strategies
and plans of Mauritania;
(c)
In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the scope of the 
programme 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Sidi Mohamed EL WAVI 
PF/AND – Mauritania 
Copy : MEDD 
Page 148

=== PAGE 153 ===
Page 149

=== PAGE 154 ===
Page 150

=== PAGE 155 ===
Page 151

=== PAGE 156 ===
EPA-SL, Protecting our environment for a better future, website: www.epa.gov.sl, email: info@epa.gov.sl 
Ref: EPA-SL/GCF/NDA/AFC/FP/12/21  
  6th June 2022 
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”) 
Dear Sir/Madam 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by by Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) regarding Infrastructure 
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF). 
We refer to the programme titled Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) in Africa (including Sierra Leone 
as included in the funding proposal submitted by Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) to us on 12th October 2021. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Dr. Bondi Gevao, Executive Chairman of the 
Environment Protection Agency, Sierra Leone, the National Designated Authority/focal point of Sierra Leone. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Sierra Leone has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities,
strategies and plans of Sierra Leone
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the scope of 
the programme 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Yours sincerely, 
………………………………………. 
Dr. Bondi Gevao 
National Designated Authority 
Executive Chairman, EPA-SL 
GOVERNMENT OF SIERRA LEONE 
Environment Protection Agency  
Ministry of the Environment 
92 Dundas Street, Freetown 
Page 152

=== PAGE 157 ===
MINISTERE DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT
ET DES RESSOURCES FORESTIERES
.-..-
REPUBLIQUE TOGOLAISE
...:"
r:~
.
.
,-i
DIRECTION DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT
Travail
- Liberté
- Patrie
SECRETARIAT GENERAL
Point Focal National
du Fonds
Vert pour
le Climat
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Référence n° Oo.4PF jFVC -
Page: lfl
Lome, Togo, 22 June 2022
Re: Funding
proposai
for the GCF by the Africa Finance
Corporation
regarding
the Infrastructure
Climate
Resilient
Fund (ICRF)
.
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the programme
titled the Infrastructure
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) in Togo as included
in the
funding proposaI
submitted
by the Africa Finance Corporation
to us on 12 Oetober 2021.
The undersigned
is the duly authorized
representative
of AGRIGNAN Esso Sam Abdou Rassidou, the National
Designated
Authority
of Togo:
Pursuant
to GCF decision
B.08/10,
the
content
of which
we acknowledge
to have
reviewed,
we hereby
communicate
our no-objection
to the programme
as included
in the funding proposaI.
By communicating
our no-objection,
it is implied that:
(a) The government
of Togo has no-objection
to the programme
as included
in the fundingproposal;
(b) The programme
as included
in the funding
proposaI
is in conformity
with
the national
priorities,
strategies
and plans of Togo;
(c)
ln accordance
with the GCF's environmental
and social safeguards,
the programme
as included in the
funding proposaI
is in conformity
with relevant
national
laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national
process
for ascertaining
no-objection
to the programme
as included
in the
fundlng proposal
has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection
applies ta aIl projects
or activities
to be implemented
within the scope
of the programme
We acknowledge
that this letter will be made publicly available
on the GCFwebsite.
Mr. Esse-Sam
Abdou
Rassidou
AGRIGNAN
GCF Focal Point
Togo
B.P. : 4825 - Tél: (228) 22 21 3321 f 2221 51 97 - Fax (228) 22 21 0333/22
21 5197
247, Rue des Nîmes - E-mail: ragrignan80@yahoo.fr
ffondverttogo@gma/l.com
/ webhttp://www.fonds-vert-togo.org
Page 153

=== PAGE 158 ===
Page 154

=== PAGE 159 ===
Page 155
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-1 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Benin*, Cameroon, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Djibouti*, 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana*, 
Guinea, Kenya*, Mali, Mauritania*, Namibia, Nigeria, 
Rwanda*, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zambia*. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Tuesday, May 3, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and French 
Explanation on language 
English and French are the official languages, which are 
widely spoken in the countries targeted by the Programme. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/afc-
assets/afc/ACP-ICRF-ES-Framework-16-May-2022-
English-clean-VF.pdf 
French:  
https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/afc-
assets/afc/ACP-ICRF-ES-Framework-_Fr.pdf

=== PAGE 160 ===
Page 156 
Other link(s) 
https://www.africafc.org/our-impact/our-publications 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
1 programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management System”.* 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Tuesday, May 3, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and French 
Explanation on language 
English and French are the official languages which are 
widely spoken in the countries targeted by the Programme. 
Link to disclosure 
The ICRF Resettlement Framework, Indigenous Peoples 
Framework and Biodiversity Framework are annexed to the 
ESMS.  
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
Resettlement Framework, Indigenous Peoples Framework 
and Biodiversity Framework have been developed to help 
track progress and demonstrate the impact of the ICRF 
supported project. The frameworks are underpinned by the 
IFC Performance Standards, and World Bank ESS 
framework, and consistent with the GCF’s revised 
Environmental and Social Policy (2021).  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, May 6, 2022 
Place 
Africa Finance Corporation Head Office: 3a Osborne Road, 
Ikoyi, Lagos, Nigeria 
All National Designated Authorities in target countries have 
been informed and provided the link to the disclosure. 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD* 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, March 13, 2023* 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 10 June 2022,
the following updates have been made: The accredited entity has secured additional no-
objection letters from Benin, Djibouti, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, Rwanda, and Zambia.
Moreover, the Secretariat has confirmed that the ESMS is consistent with the requirements for a
Category I-1 programme. The accredited entity has updated the ESMS by incorporating due
diligence on sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment (SEAH), and clarifying the
procedures and requirements for managing environmental and social risks and impacts
pursuant to the ESS standards and the GCF Revised Environmental and Social Policy. The
accredited entity has also updated the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework to further align
with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. Lastly, the date of the AE Board meeting has been
adjusted, and the date of GCF Board meeting in which the funding proposal is to be considered
has been updated to B.35 date.

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 157 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP205 
Proposal name: 
Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) 
Accredited entity: 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) 
Project/Programme size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
                    Scale: High 
1. 
Project description. The funding proposal is for an adaptation programme that seeks to 
support the following 19 African countries, as identified in the proposal’s no-objection letter 
(NOL), by providing resilient priority infrastructure assets and services: Benin, Cameroon, Chad, 
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, 
Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo and Zambia. The project 
will establish a new fund called the Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF), which will invest 
in what the accredited entity (AE) calls “Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics (Ports, Roads, 
Bridges, Railways, Airports)” (~40–50 pre cent of the portfolio); “Climate-resilient Energy 
Systems” (~25–30 per cent); “Climate Resilient Economic zones”(~25–30 per cent), and “Climate 
resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures” (~5–10 per cent). The funding request 
from GCF is USD 254.091 million of a required USD 766.0186 million; USD 240.0 million will be 
invested as junior equity into ICRF, and USD 14.091 million will be used as grant finance split 
between developing a climate risk insurance feasibility study (USD 1.0 million), and the rest for 
project preparatory assistance, monitoring and evaluation, and project management costs.  
2. 
The ICRF programme will be dedicated to the development of and investment in new 
climate-resilient infrastructure asset classes (CRI asset classes) in selected African states; 75 per 
cent will be dedicated to new investments in CRI assets (including greenfield, expansion and 
growth investments), and up to 25 per cent of the ICRF portfolio can be invested in existing 
infrastructure assets to be made climate resilient through climate adaptation solutions. As a 
junior equity position, the GCF equity de-risks ICRF by taking as much as the first 30 per cent of 
any loss incurred by the ICRF during investment. The funding proposal targets 50,365,031 direct 
beneficiaries (8.8 per cent of the total population, of which 50 per cent are women), and 
144,115,769 indirect beneficiaries (25.18 per cent of total population, of which 50 per cent are 
women) of the selected NOL countries. Subprojects will be implemented over a period of 10 years 
with a total programme lifespan of 20 years, after which ICRF will cease involvement in the 
projects, as GCF de-risking at the fund level will no longer be required. ICRF will be managed by 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) Capital Partners (ACP), a 100 per cent subsidiary of AFC; the 
ACP team will be responsible for deal origination, due diligence and execution, and operational 
management and exit of ICRF portfolio companies.  
3. 
As per the funding proposal, African nations are currently suffering major losses and 
damages due to the impacts of climate change, variability and extreme events. The exposure of 
people, assets and infrastructure to climate hazards is increasing and is compounded by rapid 
urbanization, infrastructure deficit, and growing populations in informal settlements; thus, there 
is a need to increase the resilience of infrastructure assets/services and vulnerable people and 
communities. However, the biggest threats to assets differ significantly depending on the

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 158 
 
 
technical specifications of asset components and their degree of exposure to the changing climatic 
hazards. These varying specifications highlight the need to better understand these different 
characteristics for the successful design, planning, location, construction and maintenance of 
critical assets, including investing in them.  
4. 
As per the funding proposal, Africa’s spending on infrastructure is expected to increase, 
given a current infrastructure pipeline worth USD 2.3 trillion over the period 2020–2028, where 
over half of the pipeline of USD 1.3 trillion is in the “study or development” phase. The proposal 
presents GCF with a timely opportunity to be part of this early-stage development where the 
proposed ICRF can demonstrate how to de-risk the projects.   
5. 
Context of climate vulnerability – historical climate. Based on the feasibility study, 
climatologically, more precipitation has been recorded within the latitude bands of 20 °N and 20 °S 
for 1976–2005 as agreed in both gridded observation datasets from the Climate Research Unit1 
archive and an ensemble of three regional climate models (RCMs) from the Africa domain of the 
Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX).2,3 Relative to the Climate 
Research Unit, the RCM ensemble shows a good pattern correlation of 0.85, although with a root 
mean square error of 539 mm/year. Higher temperature values are observed and modelled 
around land areas, especially over the Saharan desert region. Although modelled minimum and 
maximum temperature have a root mean square error of 1.41 °C and 2 °C, respectively, there is 
good agreement compared to precipitation. Generally, all subregions show significant warming 
trends in observed and modelled mean surface temperature. Unlike precipitation, which exhibits 
a substantial spatial and temporal heterogeneity across subregions and between observation and 
model, where trends could be positive or negative depending on the subregion. Decreasing trends 
in precipitation were observed and modelled in some subregions, including South Africa – West 
(SAF-W), Central Africa – South (CAF-S), Horn of Africa (HRN), and East Africa (EAF). The 
decreasing trends are only significant in the observed precipitation in CAF-S and EAF subregions. 
6. 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report 
(AR6), 4  common regional characteristics exist in Africa. Some changes are that the mean 
temperatures and hot extremes have exceeded natural variability in all land regions relative to 
1850–1900. Equally, the rate of surface temperature increase has been more rapid on the 
continent compared to the global average. This increase is largely influenced by human-induced 
climate-change drivers, such as anthropogenic emission and land-surface modification. 
Furthermore, sea level around Africa has increased at a higher rate than global mean sea level 
over the last three decades. Sea-level rise is projected to continue around the continent, thereby 
contributing to increases in the frequency and severity of coastal flooding in low-lying areas, and 
to coastal erosion along most sandy coasts, with adverse consequences for seaports and other 
critical infrastructures situated around the coastline. 
7. 
Climate change projections. Models project precipitation and temperature in the future 
climate to change significantly in Africa. 5  According to AR6, additional increases in global 
warming will cause changes in hot and cold temperature extremes and an increase in mean 
maximum one-day precipitation. Projected minimum and maximum temperature change is 
expected to reach 5 °C in some land areas at 4 °C global warming level. The percentage change in 
annual total precipitation ranges between –40 per cent and 40 per cent. Regions around central 
 
1 https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/?_ga=2.98165404.204120138.1642344109-80085860.1642344109  
2 https://cordex.org/ 
3 See funding proposal, figure B.1.2. a & b. 
4 AR6, Regional fact sheet – Africa. Working Group I – The Physical Science Basis. Available at 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/factsheets/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Regional_Fact_Sheet_Africa.pdf   
5 World Bank. 2015. Enhancing the Climate Resilience of Africa’s Infrastructure: The Power and Water Sectors. World 
Bank: Washington. Available at https ://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Featureper 
cent20Story/Africa/Conferenceper cent20Editionper cent20Enhancingper cent20Africasper 
cent20Infrastructure.pdf

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 159 
 
 
West Africa and East Africa are expected to experience an increase in precipitation, while the 
western edge of West Africa and a larger area of South Africa are likely to record less annual total 
precipitation in the future. These signals are expected to intensify at 4 °C global warming. 
8. 
Goal statement/Impact: paradigm shift and Theory of Change. The ICRF is built on 
the premise that IF blended capital is mobilized at scale to de-risk and accelerate investments in 
CRI, and climate risk assessments and regulatory frameworks for CRI are strengthened and 
mainstreamed THEN Africa will be on a climate resilient and sustainable development pathway 
BECAUSE vital infrastructure will be more resilient to climate hazards, and vulnerable people 
and communities will have improved access to these infrastructures for livelihoods and other 
social services. ICRF design structure encompasses three outcomes:  
(i) 
Outcome 1 – Blended finance is mobilized at scale to accelerate CRI investments in the 
beneficiary African countries for infrastructure programme assets made resilient and 
able to withstand climate hazards and for improved access of vulnerable people and 
communities to climate-resilient infrastructure services (all-weather roads, bridges, 
power supply, ports and logistics, special economic zones, telecommunication, and 
digital infrastructure services). Outcome 1 will address the following financial barriers 
on limited capital flows to infrastructure investments in Africa due to investors’ 
perception of high risk (i.e. risk allocation and financial instruments mismatch, low 
return on investment of climate-proof assets due to incremental cost, limited benefit 
from climate risk insurance, low appetite from the private sector).   
(ii) 
Outcome 2 – Improved climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for CRI; 
improved capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa for infrastructure programme assets 
made resilient and able to withstand climate hazards and for improved access of 
vulnerable people and communities to climate-resilient infrastructure services. This 
component will help to overcome the technical barriers by using the GCF technical 
assistance  funding to create an enabling environment and scale up investments in CRI 
in Africa. The technical assistance will address the lack of reliable data, knowledge and 
capacity in countries on climate change to increase preparedness and risk management, 
led by AFC in collaboration with ACP. This component of the programme will also help 
to strengthen climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for ICRF investments in 
CRI asset classes, avoiding the risk of maladaptation and ensuring state-of-the-art 
climate assessment and decision-making tools for CRI investments. The programme will 
target increasing the longevity of infrastructure assets as compared to the sector 
average baseline achieved through resilience measures to the climate change physical 
risks.  
(iii) 
Outcome 3 – A strengthened regulatory framework and innovative climate risk 
parametric insurance (CRPI) is mainstreamed for the long-term viability of CRI 
investments in Africa. Outcome 3 will address regulatory barriers to ensure the 
programme’s paradigm shift effect in the programme countries and the region. This 
component will help to adopt new climate-resilient infrastructure asset classes, with 
favourable investment policies and fiscal incentives on country and regionals level 
based on regulatory gaps and country priorities. Improving the regulatory framework is 
a crucial milestone for attracting investments from the private sector in resilient 
infrastructure in the programme countries. A feasibility study on parametric insurance 
will be conducted. 
1.1.1 Adaptation impact 
9. 
Triple resilience dividends As per the funding proposal, ICRF, if established and able 
to invest according to its mandate, will aim to deliver robust critical infrastructures in the 
identified sectors of transportation, energy, ecozones and telecommunications; infrastructure

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 160 
 
 
projects that will deliver triple resilience dividends for the relevant country. The ﬁrst dividend 
is the avoidance of loss of life from disasters, minimization of disruptions, and promotion of 
eﬀective recovery. The second dividend is the unlocking of economic potential by investing in 
resilient infrastructure. The third is the shared positive co-benefits of increased resilience of 
interlinked communities, ecosystems, infrastructures and investments along the business value 
chains. 
10. 
For private sector stakeholders, ICRF, if established and managed effectively, could lead 
to the proper mainstreaming of climate adaptation in private sector investments; an important 
aspect of unlocking private sector investment in climate finance and investments. The inclusion 
of climate measures in the development of infrastructure projects will lead to the 
operationalization of climate risk management in commercial investments. It will lead to an 
increased awareness in the private sector of how the physical impacts of climate change will 
affect private investments’ revenues, costs, operations, assets and corporate valuations, thus 
leading to the integration of climate in the decision-making process. ICRF, like any other fund, 
will enable the private sector to diversify its investments in dedicated CRI asset classes; 
investments that will purposefully seek to transition towards a more climate resilient type of 
development of infrastructures that are climate sensitive and where climate-related risks are 
managed through the integration of climate-proofing measures, and via climate risk insurance 
to cover any residual risk.  
11. 
From the perspective of the financial or capital market sector, ICRF will lead to the 
creation of a new asset class: CRI assets. If ICRF is successful in delivering the establishment and 
operation of a true climate-resilient asset class (climate proofing (Type 1), and development 
projects with components or resilience contributions (Type 2a)), then it is possible that the 
experience of the ICRF will enable the following: 
(i) 
The emergence of a new financial mechanism linking the delivery of climate finance for 
adaptation commitments to developing countries and its replication for similar climate-
resilient investments (projects that only exist because of the need to address a climate 
vulnerability issue (Type 2b)).  
(ii) 
Reforms on fiscal incentives for investments in climate-resilient infrastructures by 
beneficiary governments; these could be in the form of tax holidays, faster regulatory 
clearances (customs, local government, agency), climate-focused domestic resource 
mobilization initiatives;  
(iii) 
Lessons learned from operationalizing climate measures to manage climate-related 
risks could be used as best practice among financial institutions and corporations in 
compliance with the mandatory recommendations under the Task Force on Climate 
Financial Related Disclosures. 
1.1.2 Risks to adaptation 
12. 
Weak baseline assessments. When this funding proposal was first submitted for 
consideration prior to the thirty-fourth meeting of the Board (B.34), the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel ( iTAP) raised the following issues in relation to the proposal’s weak country 
and sectoral baseline assessments:  
13. 
The proposal had not conducted an in-depth assessment of the four (4) identified target 
sectors (i.e. Transport and Logistics (Ports, Roads, Bridges, Railways, Airports); Energy Systems, 
Economic zones; and Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures). In addition, the funding 
proposal and its annexes (e.g. annex 2) had not properly assessed the target countries’ domestic 
and regional markets on finance, capital markets, insurance and climate finance markets. 
Moreover, the funding proposal had not clearly presented how climate change, variability, and 
extreme events had impacted each country included in the proposal and its key sectoral 
infrastructures; no evidence-based reports were presented showing the extent of losses and

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 161 
 
 
damages in terms of monetary cost, lives affected, property, infrastructure, businesses, 
livelihoods, climate-related budget expenditures, or as a percentage of gross domestic product, 
or even from a portfolio management perspective of infrastructure assets held by the major 
financial institutions in the region or in each country, including AFC. The funding proposal had 
also not provided a clear context on vulnerability covering each country’s vulnerable people and 
communities, and the critical ecosystems that were dependent on these target infrastructures; it 
did not show what their unique sectoral barriers, issues and challenges were, nor how the 
proposed climate-resilient infrastructures would address them. 
(i) 
Evidence-based reports of climate-impacting infrastructure assets were lacking. Various 
annexes and sections mentioned the impact of climate hazards on infrastructure assets, 
e.g. heatwaves, intense rainfall, and how these impact roads and construction activities. 
The country climate analysis, however, failed to establish at which climate thresholds 
these infrastructures begin to be adversely impacted. For example, in one of its 
examples on economic zones, the funding proposal stated that industrial parks were 
particularly vulnerable due to increasing temperatures, heatwaves, droughts, excessive 
or reduced rainfall, flooding, and so on; however, no sector assessment had been 
performed to show how climate parameters had impacted economic zones.6  
(ii) 
The annexes to the funding proposal (e.g. annex 3a, an assessment of the selected 
examples of climate-related events and their effects on infrastructures in ICRF 
countries) gave brief overviews per country of the supposed losses and damages due to 
climate change extreme events, which were based on literature reviews; no government 
data on actual losses and damages were provided or cited. For example, for Benin, the 
report only said that “damage and losses caused by the 2019 floods in the transport 
infrastructure sector are estimated at 193,000,000 FCFA (299,054 US dollars). Among 
whom [sic] were 92 km of roads and 06 structures (Bridge, collapse scuppers). The most 
affected departments are Borgou, Alibori, Atacora and Donga”.  
(iii) 
As to the baseline information providing the context on the vulnerability of the people, 
ecosystem resources, investments, or just how climate had impacted the sectors of the 
economy and people of the countries in question, similarly, little information or 
assessment was provided. Based on the same annex, annex 3, “The socio-economic 
impact of the country’s key infrastructure” report was also quite limited. On Gabon, for 
example, the assessment on climate was given in just two sentences (i.e. “However, with 
the extent of climate hazards on the African coast, the vulnerability of Libreville, as well 
as that of cities on the lower coast such as Port-Gentil, or Mayumba, is indisputable. The 
effects of these climatic hazards will also be observed on the port infrastructures, thus 
impacting the economy of the country and more particularly the populations of this 
region”).  
14. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE has made good efforts to 
address these issues. The wealth of information generated for the 19 countries has been 
provided in different parts of the proposal and relevant annexes (i.e. (i) Climate baseline 
showing how current and the future climate change will seriously exacerbate negative impacts 
on these NOL countries;7 (ii) Climate risks assessment baseline;8 (iii) Sector and 
infrastructure9). The i TAP observes that annex 23a now has information on observed and 
anticipated trends in key climate parameters for all 19 NOL countries, as well as a section for 
each country on “Climate change impacts on infrastructure type” and “Adaptation solutions” for 
each combination of major climate change hazard and infrastructure type. The quality of these 
sections varies between countries, but taken altogether, they provide a strong sense of the 
 
6 See funding proposal, annex 2a “ICRF FS”. 
7 See annex 23a “Country climate analysis of 19 ICRF NOL countries”. 
8 See annex 2b “Africa Infrastructure Climate Risk Mapping for all 19 ICRF NOL countries”. 
9 See annex 23b, summary table.

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 162 
 
 
potential for investment in specific technical solutions as part of building or retrofitting 
infrastructure to be durable and resilient to these hazards. Annex 23b summarizes the same 
information for each country. Annex 2b “Africa Infrastructure Climate Risk Mapping”, is an 
impressively detailed resource, providing continent-wide maps of existing assets of eight types 
– airports; roads; seaports; wireless infrastructure, including radio masts and towers; wind 
power plants; solar power plants; electricity towers, poles, lines, substations and transformers; 
and economic zones – and including 33 investment projects currently in AFC’s pipeline. The 
report analyses physical climate risk by hazard, and maps these hazard risks by asset type onto 
the assets’ locations, wherever data is available. It also provides summary information and 
maps per country on exposure to the main relevant climate-change-intensified hazards. 
15. 
In the first submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the i TAP raised the issue of a 
weak baseline analysis of the climate-related finance gap on infrastructure. As above, in general, 
the assessment lacked the depth needed to establish the amount of climate finance needed 
nominally, and/or as a percentage of the total cost of infrastructure, to help build climate-
resilient infrastructure. The climate-financing gap, even from the viewpoint of an infrastructure 
asset manager (e.g. AFC) was not mentioned. Namibia, citing its updated nationally determined 
contribution (NDC), identified its financing gap for mitigation, but the adaptation financing gap 
was not mentioned. Missing too was the approach or methodology by which to estimate the 
climate financing gap for adaptation. The funding proposal write-up had defined the 
incremental cost of climate adaptation. The estimate of incremental costs needed to make 
infrastructure climate resilient was based on the World Bank’s estimate.  
Making infrastructure assets climate-resilient requires incremental cost in the range of three (3) 
to seven (7) point percent resulting from frequency and magnitude of climate change hazard 
impact and depending on the asset, its location, and chosen resilient interventions. This 
represents an average of five (5) point percent consistent with the World Bank Group cost-
benefit analysis and works undertaken previously by the Global Commission on the new 
economy and climate estimating the incremental cost of financing infrastructure consistent with 
low emission and climate-resilient pathways below 10 per cent of the initial investment cost.10  
Whether this estimated range of incremental cost from the World Bank (which lacks the 
reference to the World Bank source) and Global Commission,11 was based on a global cost or is 
specific to the African Region, was not clear.  
16. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE addresses this issue, and 
has provided the climate finance flows for infrastructure within the funding proposal.12 These 
listed sections provide additional information on current finance flows for adaptation. The 
financial statement provides a useful table in annex 1 listing baseline investment in resilient 
infrastructure in NOL countries, using a variety of financial instruments (the same as used in 
Summary Table 7 in annex 3a). In annex 3a, a typology of financing types used in the energy, 
telecoms and transport sectors is provided and an analysis of needs, gaps and barriers is 
provided for these sectors. Current infrastructure investment trends and needs, and overall 
adaptation financing gaps, are briefly discussed for each of the 19 countries.  
17. 
Issue on coherence and consistency of Theory of Change (ToC) and funding 
proposal project design. In the first submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the 
 
10 See Funding proposal Annex 3A, page 46 
11 Bhattacharya et al., 2016; Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, 2014, The Sustainable Infrastructure 
Imperative: Financing for Better Growth and Development. Global Commission on the Economy and Climate. 
Available at: http://newclimateeconomy.report/2016/wp-
content/uploads/sites/4/2016/08/NCE_2016_Exec_summary.pdf (accessed 7 February 2023). 
12 See funding proposal: section B.1 “Climate context”; section 3.9 “Status of climate adaptation financing flows in the 
Feasibility study”; annex 2a and baseline data in annex 1 in the feasibility study; annex 3a, section V - see “Overview 
of instruments and financing mechanisms used in Africa in key sectors of the ICRF” and summary Table 7 “Baseline of 
Climate Finance in Infrastructure investments in ICRF countries”.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 163 
 
 
independent TAP raised the issue of non-coherence and consistency of the ToC and the funding 
proposal project design. The independent TAP was of the view that the proposed ICRF funding 
proposal needed to be revised.  
(i) 
The original ToC13 stated that Africa will be on a climate resilient and sustainable 
development pathway because vital infrastructures will be made climate resilient, and 
vulnerable people and communities will have improved access to the climate-resilient 
infrastructures which would presumably enhance their livelihoods and the social 
services available to them.  
(ii) 
However, one of the following paragraphs further expounded on the purpose of ICRF, 
but this time, the term ‘vulnerable’ was not used to describe the people/communities 
supposed to benefit from the CRI. “The overarching objective of the Infrastructure 
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF or ’the Fund’) is to support Africa climate resilient and 
sustainable development path by catalyzing blended finance at scale towards evidence-
based, climate-resilient infrastructure in Africa and ensuring that people in Africa will 
have access to these climate-resilient, reliable, and durable infrastructure assets.”14 
(iii) 
The independent TAP pointed out that the ToC mentioned that (i) vital infrastructure 
will be more resilient to climate hazards; and (ii) vulnerable people and communities 
will have improved access to these infrastructures for livelihoods and other social 
services. Yet, the Outcome 1 interventions only related to increasing the resilience of 
infrastructure rather than increasing the resilience of vulnerable people and 
communities. The independent TAP requested the AE to clarify whether the 
vulnerability of people and communities was addressed in their methodologies and the 
funding proposal, and if so, how this vulnerability was addressed. 
(iv) 
The AE responded that reference to vulnerable people and communities in Africa was: 
lost due to several reiterations. It will be inserted back as initially intended. … the 
narrative was lost and will be corrected. Outcome 1: Blended finance at scale and 
innovative climate risk insurance products are deployed for climate-resilient 
infrastructure (CRI); and vulnerable people and communities are made more resilient 
due to access to safe and climate-proof infrastructure assets (all-weather roads, bridges, 
power supply, ports, telecommunication, digital infrastructure, and others) and its 
services. Key (core) program success indicator is beneficiaries (47.8 mil direct and 132.4 
mil indirect) made more resilient due to access to safe and climate-proof infrastructure 
assets in 17 African States with 10 LDCs, which are the most affected by the climate 
changes risks. Most of the targeted infrastructures covered by this program are located 
in African urban areas. Targeted vulnerable populations are the segment of poor 
populations living in slums or informal settlements near built infrastructure. When 
infrastructure is damaged or disrupted, they are the one that suffers the most, not only 
from restricted access to services but also from collateral physical damages that could 
result from the catastrophes.15 
(v) 
While the independent TAP appreciated the response, it felt that more than a ‘quick fix’ 
by inserting the correct words into the ToC was required. The issue resulted from a 
design flaw of the funding proposal, which focused only on ICRF, and the infrastructure, 
 
13 The ToC as per the funding proposal submitted for B.34 is as follows: “The ICRF is built on the premise that IF 
blended capital and de-risking financial mechanisms with innovative climate risk insurance are deployed at scale and 
climate risk assessments and regulatory frameworks for investments in CRI asset classes are strengthened, THEN 
Africa will be on a climate resilient and sustainable development path BECAUSE vital infrastructure will be more 
resilient to climate hazards and vulnerable people and communities will have improved access to these 
infrastructures for livelihoods and other social services”.    
14 See the AE’s response on the independent TAP’s first batch of questions, dated 19 August 2022 
15 See the AE’s response to question 1 on the independent TAP’s first batch of questions, dated 19 August 2022.

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 164 
 
 
and the reference to people was also missing in other parts of the project design 
contained in the proposal. 
(vi) 
A case in point was the ICRF’s climate resilient impact assessment methodology 
(CRIAM). In a nutshell, CRIAM was ICRF’s guide on how to screen and identify climate 
risks, assess the context of vulnerabilities, and recommend the necessary adaptation 
measures based on these processes. As presented in figure 1 below, there was a “climate 
risk screening of projects and/or  
 
(vii) 
beneficiaries’ risk exposure” under part 1. But under part 2, the climate risk impact 
assessments simply focused then on the ‘asset’ for substeps 3a, 3b and 3c. Then under 
substep 3d, a quantification of impacts on the ‘asset ecosystem’ (which then included the 
beneficiaries, value chains, and other assets) appeared. If the terms ‘asset’ and ‘asset 
ecosystem’ were interchangeable, and people, communities, ecosystems, livelihoods, 
and hard infrastructure components were grouped in one such assessment, defining the 
context of vulnerability was too broad and would most likely be biased towards the 
physical asset at the expense of people, natural ecosystems and livelihoods. There was 
no granularity in the assessment of the localized and unique context of vulnerabilities of 
other subsets of the ‘asset-ecosystem’. Any adaptation recommendation would most 
likely be infrastructure asset-centric, and this did not clearly address the ToC 
component on “vulnerable people and communities”. The CRIAM methodology did not 
clearly elaborate how the vulnerability of people, as well as critical ecosystems, 
livelihoods and investments along the business value chains, were assessed, as 
highlighted in the examples (e.g. annex 2 “Feasibility Study”, narratives), computations 
(annex 3A “Illustrative Case_ICRF_SEA”). The methodology needed to be improved 
further to reflect what the funding proposal and annexes had presented. Not doing this 
would lead to weak climate risk assessments and poor identification or formulation of 
appropriate adaptation or resilience measures. The proposal’s single focus was on 
infrastructure and not vulnerable people and communities. When asked why mitigation, 
ecosystem and ecosystem services were not included in the ICRF programme when the 
targeted infrastructure projects would most likely impact ecosystems as well as 
ecosystem services, the AE responded as follows:

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 165 
 
 
The ICRF is designed as a fund to support investment in climate resilience of all the 
infrastructure it will finance. The aim and purpose of the ICRF are to de-risk and scale 
up investments in resilient infrastructure as all infrastructure types have a recognized 
vulnerability from a climate perspective. Taking resilience into account is crucial 
considering the lifespan of the infrastructure AFC invests in today. GCF and AFC have 
agreed on a set of eligibility criteria including an exclusion list to guide the selection of 
the sub-projects in which ICRF may consider investing. Climate risk screening to define 
the climate risk profile, as well as climate risk assessments informed by present-day and 
future climates are a central part of the eligibility criteria. GCF concessional funding will 
primarily cover incremental costs for adaptation measures to make infrastructure assets 
resilient. It will also support to a lesser extent the de-risking of investment portfolios to 
attract private sector investment in ICRF and thereby in climate change in line with 
Article 2(c) of the Paris Agreement. The success of the program will be measured by 
beneficiaries, number, and value of assets made resilient to climate change. During the 
origination and structuring phase (both at the concept note and funding proposal 
development stages), AFC worked in close collaboration with the GCF secretariat to 
identify the most relevant result areas and indicators based on the program’s objectives. 
With the goal of making infrastructure resilient to climate change, ICRF is a 100per cent 
adaptation program. None of the GCF mitigation result areas will apply to ICRF. ICRF 
investment in energy and economic zones are all meant to build climate-resilient 
infrastructures, with the GCF proceeds (8 to 11per cent of the total project costs) 
prioritized for incremental cost and de-risking to attract additional private sector 
capital. Therefore, mitigation and ecosystem are neither included in the ICRF program 
nor their indicators. 
(viii) 
While the funding proposal was mainly focused on the ICRF, its adaptation results areas 
also included the most vulnerable peoples and communities, as well as infrastructure 
and built environment. Vulnerable people and communities were not consistently 
focused on. Resulting in limited or general screening on infrastructure assets alone, 
neglecting the emphasis in the project objective and ToC on improving vulnerable 
people and communities’ access to the climate-resilient infrastructure, as discussed in 
paragraphs 16 to 20 of the previous iTAP assessement was one major difference 
between the independent TAP and ICRF approaches that needed to be addressed. As 
mentioned in paragraph 21 of the previous assessment the examples and narratives in 
the funding proposal showed how climate risk and vulnerability assessment included 
the whole range of people/communities, ecosystems, livelihoods, and built 
infrastructure which was quite promising; but the AE responses did not reflect its 
technical capacities on how to process potential climate-related investments in a 
manner which assessed their contribution to reducing communities’ vulnerability, or 
their potential ecological and mitigation co-benefits. 
18. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE addresses these issues. 
The AE has revised the ToC (see para. 8 above). It has also amended the operations manual 
where the methodology has been further detailed following a system approach, including 
impacts on vulnerable people, as well as critical ecosystems, business value chains and other 
interdependent built infrastructure. These two chapters of the operations manual clearly 
address the independent TAP’s recommendation.16 The updated methodology is also reflected 
in the funding proposal, section B3.4: ICRF Climate Risk and Impact Assessment Methodology: 
Guiding Principles. Furthermore, this has been reflected in annex 23c, Climate Assessment 
Methodology, section 3.3.2: Vulnerability assessment for people and communities at the 
infrastructure sites. The climate risk impact methodology is now set out in much more detail, 
with the operations manual (also summarized in the funding proposal, section B3.4, and 
 
16 See Chapters 6 and 7 of the operations manual, annex 21.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 166 
 
 
highlighted in annex 23c) outlining the Climate Risk and Impact Assessment Methodology, the 
principles through which climate resilience is integrated into the investment process, and the 
steps involved in deal screening – assessing the level of asset vulnerability to different hazards, 
and the expected current and future levels of exposure, with detailed hazard mapping for the 
planned location of the infrastructure, in order to derive an indicative level of climate risk for 
different assets, with processes for dealing with the different levels. A very brief assessment is 
provided in section 3.3.2 of how some climate hazards impact negatively on wider communities 
beyond users of the infrastructure. The vulnerability assessment and how this is incorporated 
into the risk assessment may need to be clarified some more. 
19. 
A revised figure 6.3a: ICRF Climate Risk Assessment Methodology is presented below for 
comparison with the original ICRF Climate Risk Assessment Methodology (see figure 1 above). 
 
 
20. 
Weak technical and operational capacity on climate. In the first submission of the 
funding proposal for B.34, the independent TAP assessed that the AFC and ICRF Team had weak 
institutional and operational experience on climate. The independent TAP sought clarification 
on the technical competency of the AE in climate issues, considering that AFC (i.e. AFC senior 
officers who will be assigned to APC) would be guiding APC in managing the ICRF. Reviewing 
the responses of the AE to the first batch of written questions from the independent TAP, 
familiarity with climate finance accounting was mentioned. Thus, the independent TAP followed 
through on this assessment by requesting that the AE demonstrate experience on (i) how 
climate finance accounting was performed in its AFC portfolio; and (ii) how climate change 
impacted AFC’s portfolio in terms of losses and damages of its assets, revenues and costs.  
21. 
The following AE verbal responses were provided during a question-and-answer call: 
“In the context of mitigation, we don’t call that climate finance. For us we call that power 
projects, whether we’re doing renewables, we look at it as energy projects…. For us, money that 
goes to Africa is predominantly climate oriented”.17 Another AFC representative added that as a 
multilateral financial institution, AFC followed best practice and more specifically, the 
 
17 Refer to the recording of the AE–independent TAP meeting, 14.03 to 15.05 minutes. Recordings available upon 
request from the independent TAP Secretariat.

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 167 
 
 
multilateral development bank (MDB) finance reporting guidelines18. As to the request for 
demonstration of, or documentation on, how climate had specifically impacted AFC’s portfolio 
through the years, AFC had still to provide credible evidence-based data; considering that AFC’s 
portfolio on transport and logistics, economic zones and telecommunications were also claimed 
to be the most impacted type of infrastructure, the independent TAP hoped that it would have 
been very feasible and easy to show this using AFC’s own portfolio, but no data or figures were 
provided to show this.  
22. 
Thus, in response to the question of climate finance accounting, whether AFC had been 
mainstreaming climate finance accounting or not, its answer was ambivalent but must be read 
as a ‘no’. AFC could have easily cited those of its energy projects that had involved 95 per cent 
mitigation finance, and that adaptation finance could had been made up to 5 per cent of the total 
project cost, and that this was reflected in the Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ 
Climate Finance,19 or another similar report, but it did not. The point of the question was to 
assess its basic level of working knowledge of climate finance accounting; an issue that is 
extremely important, as ICRF would be tasked with accounting for the climate-related finance 
and investments it would make. If approved, GCF would be investing in climate funds through 
the ICRF and the independent TAP needed to understand if ICRF was capable of differentiating 
climate finance from business-as-usual (BAU)-related costs and investments at the very least. 
Similarly, ICRF should be capable of accounting for climate-related finance costs for project 
components, for example, for a transmission line that both supports renewable energy (RE) and 
thermal power plants. To provide another example, in building an economic zone, would ICRF, 
under the guidance of AFC/APC, account for the purchase of real estate property, or an entire 
building as climate finance? AFC had mentioned that it was familiar with the MDB approach to 
climate finance, but it had not demonstrated how it has mainstreamed this in its operations. 
With AFC guiding APC in managing ICRF, the independent TAP found this to be a risk. The AE 
must ensure that proper skills, experience and technical capacities are available at the climate 
governance committee, investment committee and board levels to ensure that the climate-
related goals, objectives and strategic interventions of GCF were ensured and safeguarded. 
23. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B35, the AE addresses this issue. 
Upon the recommendation of the independent TAP, the AE used case studies to illustrate its 
technical and operational capacities in processing climate investments; the AE provided three 
illustrative case studies with financial models as part of the resubmitted funding proposal 
package highlighting that the same principles will be applied during the implementation. The AE 
also revised its operations manual (annex 21) to provide some illustrations on climate risk 
screening and resilience measures in sections 7.2 and 7.5. In terms of climate finance 
accounting, the AE clarified that the ICRF will invest in the development and construction of 
climate-resilient infrastructure, and will only count as adaptation finance the incremental cost 
of adaptation measures in the ICRF infra projects. The AE also emphasized that GCF 
concessional funding will only be used to de-risk investors at fund level and contribute to 
financing the cost of adaptation measures. 
24. 
One of the major changes that the resubmission of this funding proposal for B.35 has 
achieved is the formulation of a more comprehensive and innovative template on how to assess 
and monitor climate adaptation projects as presented in annex 3. The AE demonstrated how 
climate investment assessments can and should include climate-related positive and negative 
externalities showing differences between results under BAU, Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios; how these climate factors impact the infra project’s 
revenues, cost of operations, financial viability in the long run. (See annex 3 and the 
 
18 See the AE’s response on the independent TAP’s first batch of questions, dated 19 August 2022 
19 Grouping of multilateral development banks. 2020. Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate 
Finance. Available at: https://www.miga.org/sites/default/files/2021-08/2020-Joint-MDB-report-on-climate-
finance_Report_final-web.pdf (accessed 7 February 2023).

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 168 
 
 
presentation material used by the AE when responding to the independent TAP on 25 January 
2023.) Suffice it to say that this financial template has essentially raised the benchmark for 
climate investments and may very well be the current best practice that could be replicated by 
similar aspiring project proponents seeking GCF funding resources. 
25. 
Weak climate-resilience indicators. In the first submission of the funding proposal for 
B.34, the independent TAP assessed that it included weak climate-resilience indicators. As 
presented in annex 2b “ICRF Impact”, the tracking indicators were not climate-related, not 
clearly climate-linked or not clearly stated. Specifically, for airports, indicators that were not 
climate related included: number and percentage change of people residing in areas affected by 
noise, total amount of cargo tonnage, total number of passengers annually, broken down by 
passengers on international and domestic flights, and broken down by origin-and-destination 
and transfer passengers, including transit passengers). The indicators on insurance that were 
not clearly elaborated included: reduction in insurance premiums; current/expected impact on 
communities and local economies, including positive and negative impacts where and if 
relevant; downtime of telecom network infrastructure; and improved range and quality of 
warning systems. There was a need to explicitly state which climate-related risks or parameters 
led to a reduction in insurance premiums, or downtime of telecoms. While the following metrics 
were unclearly stated: “total number or length of sewerage and drainage networks at risk from 
flooding”. An appropriately specific indicator would be that the intervention led to reduced risk 
of flooding, instead of a dangling indicator. Another was “Widespread access to telecom 
infrastructure” – how did this relate to climate? These indicators which inadequately focused on 
climate change again point to the limited technical capacity on climate of the ICRF team. 
26. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE addresses this issue. The 
AE has revised its operations manual to include climate-resilience indicators. As per the 
operations manual, it states that in defining these indicators, the AE relied on a number of 
resources, in particular GCF's integrated results framework and draft results handbook, as well 
as similar indicator sets from a number of multilateral development banks, various industry and 
sector experts engaged by AFC, and proposed metrics for comparable purposes (e.g. from the 
climate-resilient bond initiative).20 The independent TAP observes that the AE has done well in 
this area (i.e. the inclusion of section 7.7, which has a set of generic indicators for Infrastructure 
assets, People & communities, and natural ecosystems). For infrastructure assets (90 per cent of 
the GCF investment) this includes the number and value of resilient assets, and reductions in 
repair costs, outages, downtimes and financial losses. For people and communities (10 per 
cent), this includes the number of beneficiaries, and mortality. There are areas for improvement 
too especially in the indicators for natural ecosystems, which just has “number of projects with 
nature-based solutions integrated” with examples of vegetation absorbing floodwaters or 
buffering storm surges.  
1.1.3 Mitigation co-benefits  
27. 
The funding proposal only considers mitigation to be a co-benefit, thus there are no 
mitigation impacts. It clearly indicates that “climate change is an emergency that demands rapid 
and far-reaching action to cut the global carbon footprint and build resilience to more extreme 
weather patterns”; however, it only considers reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to 
be a co-benefit and the cost of carbon reduced from these projects as an externality the value of 
which is useful in estimating the values of these externalities.  
28. 
As per the proposal, GHG emissions are assessed and monitored under environmental 
safeguards where GHGs are considered as environmental risks (i.e. pollution). However, the 
GHG emissions monitored are those attributable both directly and indirectly from purchased 
 
20 Please see the operations manual, annex 21, chapter 7.7: Climate Resilience Indicators.

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 169 
 
 
electricity exceeding 100,000 tons annually.21 The framework document, however, does not 
qualify if these GHGs include methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). It also 
does not mention which methodology will be used to assess, monitor, and report the GHGs as 
part of the disclosure of the ICRF investments. 
29. 
The independent TAP acknowledges that the funding proposal is an adaptation project. 
However, the risk of GHG emissions increases over the lifespan of an infrastructure project once 
the project is fully operational, especially in the case of road and transport projects. At the 
moment, the NOL countries may be contributing minimal GHG emissions compared to the global 
average but the transport sector, for example, is already a major source of GHG emissions as 
well in these NOL countries. Thus, the independent TAP recommends that an assessment should 
form part of the project risks to be mitigated so as to (i) prevent a carbon lock up or stranded 
assets in the future; (ii) align the infrastructure projects with the Paris Agreement objectives of 
the NOL countries, thus enabling them to meet their NDCs; and (iii) attract potential investors 
that seek projects that are aligned to the Paris Agreement, thus increasing the attractiveness of 
ICRF.  
30. 
By doing so, this assessment of GHG emissions will also promote transparency and 
enable potential strategic partners to address the risk of such emissions. The independent TAP 
also sees this as an opportunity for GCF, the countries and the private sector to enable the NOL 
countries to achieve their Paris Agreement commitments; and the AE to optimize the potential 
for mitigation; and, via this programme, allow the NOL countries to contribute to achieving their 
NDC mitigation commitments under the Paris Agreement no matter how small their GHG 
emissions are.  
31. 
Overall, based on the above, the impact potential is mainly high depending on how the 
above-mentioned issues are addressed. 
1.2  
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
         Scale: High 
32. 
As per the funding proposal, if the ICRF mandate is implemented correctly, the ICRF will 
support a structural paradigm shift in the African infrastructure space through the systematic 
integration of climate change adaptation into infrastructure planning, implementation and 
maintenance to strengthen resilience to climate change. However, building climate-resilient 
infrastructures is not new; other regions and countries globally have responded through 
autonomous adaptation measures and may call it a ‘build back better’ scheme. For countries 
that have mainstreamed climate in their policies, plans, strategies, and budgets and 
expenditures, the reference to climate-resilient infrastructure state-owned assets may already 
exist, as countries have begun climate-proofing their critical infrastructure based on available 
resources; climate-proofing measures can involve a combination of engineering, bio-
engineering, non-engineering or management measures to manage the most critical risks in 
their priority infrastructures.  
33. 
In the case of Africa, “where most of the infrastructure is yet to be built”,22 the timely 
entry of ICRF to introduce the development of climate-resilient infrastructure does offer a good 
opportunity to leapfrog and introduce a paradigm shift. In the first submission of the funding 
proposal for B.34, the independent TAP found it hard to determine that degree of paradigm shift 
that this project would bring, given that an evidence-based report was not included in the 
funding proposal to describe the baselines of each of these infrastructures. However, as 
discussed above, with the addition of new baseline assessments as part of the resubmitted 
 
21 See the environment and social management systems embedded in the funding proposal, annex 6 “Form ESS 
disclosure report final”.  
22 Funding proposal, annex 2, executive summary, paragraph 2.

=== PAGE 174 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 170 
documents for B.35 (e.g. annexes 2b and 23b), much greater clarity is provided on the potential 
paradigm shift. 
34.
Within the framework of the climate finance and investments, the independent TAP
finds that the proposed creation of a dedicated funding mechanism for climate resilience and
adaptation, such as ICRF, can lead to a paradigm shift on how climate-dedicated investments or
finance can be safely categorized as climate resilience or adaptation investments, separate and
distinct from the BAU finance resources (e.g. official development assistance (ODA) funds or
generic green bonds). There is the potential for ICRF to squarely address the issues of BAU
investments being relabelled as social/green/sustainable or general ODA simply being labelled
as adaptation. The ICRF will provide clarity on the definition of a climate-resilient asset class, as
differentiated from ODA, from green/social/sustainable bonds, and from socially responsible or
impact investments. If successfully managed and implemented, ICRF could be the first vehicle of
its kind to completely redefine the way climate adaptation investments will be funded and
implemented. As mentioned under section 1.1 above, ICRF has the potential to become the
model financial mechanism facilitating the delivery of private sector climate finance for
adaptation commitments among developing countries, in relation to resilient infrastructure.
The innovative financial model formulated under ICRF will also enable the much needed
transformation of BAU investment assessments into a more climate oriented one; the financial
model adopted demystifies how investments should take into account the impacts of climate.
The ability to replicate ICRF’s approach by leveraging other funding for NOL countries’ NDC
needs is promising.
35.
Within the framework of climate risk management, the initiatives to conduct a feasibility
study on the introduction of first parametric insurance for infrastructure may enable the first
step towards a paradigm shift on climate infrastructure risk management as per the funding
proposal. If done correctly, the programme will introduce an innovative risk management tool
for managing the risk of climate extreme events in the infrastructure sector. While there is a
parametric insurance scheme for the agriculture market by the Africa Risk Corporation, there is
no parametric insurance for infrastructure on the African continent. The ICRF is important from
that perspective, and it can be assumed that infrastructure offers the next opportunity to
diversify and expand the use of parametric climate risk insurance in Africa.
36.
In the first submission for B.34, the AE stated that the:
insurance component of the ICRF program will be a pioneering pilot in the private sector 
dedicated to climate-resilient infrastructure in the targeted African countries. Therefore, we are 
not crowding out the other industry players, but rather i) providing a demonstration effect 
supporting the use of parametric insurance to enable climate-resilient infrastructure 
development through the pilots, and ii) convening and engaging key stakeholders and market 
participants to support the development climate insurance in the African infrastructure market. 
If correctly instituted, the ICRF parametric insurance may eventually cause a paradigm shift in 
the finance industry as this will de-risk the climate-sensitive components of the targeted 
infrastructures. As per the funding proposal, “Climate risk insurance will shift the paradigm for 
investments in the targeted countries based on the integration of science-based data, metrics 
and standards, as well as adequate legal frameworks. Also, the introduction of new construction 
codes for climate resilience infrastructure assets will have a transformational impact in 
establishing CRI as a new distinctive asset class”.23 
37.
However, under the resubmission for B.35, the insurance component has been scaled
down to conducting a feasibility study. The AE has stated that:
After extensive consultation with GCF, the AE decided that the insurance activities under 
the programme will only consist of US$ 1 million in technical assistance to undertake a 
23 See the funding proposal submitted for B.34, section B.2.

=== PAGE 175 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 171 
 
 
feasibility study that will support the development of potential parametric climate risk 
insurance products (fit-for-purpose for African infrastructure) in collaboration with 
insurance companies and various stakeholders. Therefore, the insurance premium 
finance is no longer included as part of the GCF funding under the proposed programme. 
That said, the AE is planning to partner with other donors (on a best effort basis) to 
mobilize funding to support the implementation of parametric climate risk insurance 
after the study and design phase.24  
Nonetheless, the enabling initiative on climate risk insurance will still contribute to the 
derisking of investment in infrastructure projects. 
1.2.1 Risk to paradigm shift 
38. 
The success of ICRF as a game changer will greatly depend on:  
(i) 
how judiciously it screens potential subprojects for true climate-resilience components 
using methodologies and evidence-based data that not only focus on assets, but also on 
the vulnerable people, communities, critical ecosystems, climate-sensitive livelihoods 
and investments along the business value chains; 
(ii) 
how prudently it will account for the climate-related finance for each project; 
(iii) 
how it will mitigate the GHG emissions that may arise, including from the development 
and operations of these ICRF infrastructure assets. 
39. 
Overall, based on the above, and the additional information and demonstration of 
technical capacities of the AE on climate investment assessment, the paradigm shift potential 
can be assessed as high. 
1.3  
Sustainable development potential  
         Scale: High 
40. 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG).25 The funding proposal cuts across several 
SDGs because of the climate co-benefits from resilient infrastructure investment. These are as 
follows:  
 
(i) 
SDG 1 (No poverty): ICRF will build resilient infrastructure that improves quality of life, 
creates economic opportunity and strengthens the resilience of vulnerable communities 
and their livelihoods to climate shocks, thereby helping to reduce poverty. Such 
infrastructure projects reduce the costs of rebuilding after a climate shock, leaving more 
money for other necessities, such as food, water, accommodation and education; 
 
(ii) 
SDG 7 (Affordable and clean energy) & 3 (Good health and well-being): ICRF clean 
energy projects contribute to positive health co-benefits; 
 
(iii) 
SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth) & 5 (Gender equality): ICRF will support job 
creation in project development, construction and operation (estimated at 90,000 jobs). 
This will facilitate wider economic benefits in the project supply chain and induced 
employment opportunities;  
 
 
24 Taken from the document entitled “Addressing iTAP remarks in V9”. 
24 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 2b “ICRF Impact tracking document”.

=== PAGE 176 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 172 
 
 
(iv) 
SDG 9 (Industry, innovation and infrastructure): ICRF projects will provide a direct 
contribution to sustainable, resilient, and inclusive infrastructures – thereby recognizing 
the centrality of investing in resilient infrastructure and innovation as crucial drivers of 
economic growth and development. The implementation of this project will have 
positive economic, social and environmental benefits; 
 
(v) 
SDG 11 (Sustainable cities and communities): ICRF will contribute to climate-resilient 
cities and communities through adaptation measures for resilience; and 
 
(vi) 
SDG 13 (Climate action): ICRF is all about catalysing investments in climate-resilient 
infrastructure and de-risking the mobilization of climate finance at scale through an 
innovative blended finance structure. The ICRF will support the NDCs of target countries 
in its core sectors. 
41. 
Economic development. Infrastructure development sits at the heart of all 
development pathways and is closely linked to economic growth, environmental outcomes, and 
well-being. It is well known as one of the most promising means of generating economic growth 
and development because of its constructive impact on multidimensional aspects of society. By 
promoting climate-resilient infrastructure, ICRF provides clarity on long-term climate-resilient 
development strategies to avoid the lock-in of risky fragile infrastructure and stranded assets.26 
42. 
Social, gender-sensitive development, and environment. By promoting climate-
resilient infrastructure, ICRF will play a key role in strengthening social sustainability by 
helping to generate jobs, facilitating access to employment opportunities and contributing to the 
development of national economies. ICRF will avoid negative impacts on the health, safety, 
livelihoods, and well-being of workers; and protect the interests of displaced individuals and 
communities, as well as vulnerable and underprivileged groups, including women and 
indigenous peoples (IPs). The beneﬁts of the infrastructure to be promoted by ICRF will be that 
it will be inclusive and accessible to everyone, particularly underserved groups, such as women 
and children, the elderly and people with disabilities.27  
43. 
The funding proposal has also prepared an indigenous peoples management framework 
(IPMF) to complement the environmental and social management framework on IPs' issues. The 
IPMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures for properly identifying and 
assessing the potential positive and negative impacts of the programme’s activities on IPs. It 
identifies a set of standards, frameworks and guidelines whose requirements related to 
managing impacts on IPs will be met by the programme. The IPMF further recommends impact 
mitigation and avoidance mechanisms, along with institutional capacities, monitoring 
arrangements and approximate costs.28 
44. 
A gender and social inclusion assessment and action plan has been prepared. It is 
noteworthy that the gender action plan seeks 40 to 50 per cent representation of women in 
senior positions in ICRF and ACP (i.e. at board and committee levels).29 
45. 
Environmental considerations are a core component of ICRF which recognizes a clear 
economic case for promoting environmental principles in infrastructure investment. In addition, 
ICRF will support low-carbon investments, hence contributing to reducing CO2 emissions. ICRF 
only submitted a one-and-a-half-page document entitled “Environmental and social safeguards 
 
26 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 2b “ICRF Impact tracking document”. 
27 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 2b “ICRF impact tracking document”. 
28 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 6 “ICRF Indigenous Peoples Management Framework”. 
29 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 8 “ICRF Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action Plan”.

=== PAGE 177 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 173 
 
 
report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP”.30 The form has a link to an environmental and 
social management system document and the document is complete. In the first submissions for 
B.34, the independent TAP raised the issue that the process for assessment and mitigation of 
GHG emissions needs to be clear and must ensure that ICRF subproject investments have a 
robust process by which to monitor, report and verify emissions during the life of the project. 
1.3.1 Risk to sustainable development  
46. 
In the first submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the independent TAP was faced 
with the issue of the limited screening process of ICRF which could potentially have led to, for 
example, an unintended negative impact on critical ecosystems. This one-track focus on 
infrastructure assets could miss the potential risk of accelerating deforestation in critical 
watershed hotspots due to new road clearing, industrial park creation, or carving high-voltage 
transmission lines through the forests; forests which vulnerable forest-based communities may 
rely on for their livelihood.  
47. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE addresses these issues 
(see the discussion under para 18 above, and revised annex 6a).  
48. 
Overall, based on the above, the sustainable development potential is high depending on 
how the ICRF will handle the GHG assessment, and risk screening for each project. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
        Scale: High 
49. 
Infrastructures, which ICRF intends to deliver, are in general always needed by African 
countries. In the first submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the independent TAP raised 
the question whether or not these needs were the priority needs of the NOL countries.  
(i) 
Needs of the country. AFC stated upon receipt of the funding proposal for B.34 that its 
portfolio, which mirrors the ICRF target portfolio, had the implicit approval of the NOL 
countries, as the same NOL countries are shareholders in the AFC. While this may be 
arguably true, this assertion was weakened by the absence of a specific statement of 
concurrence from the NOL countries indicating that these needs matched their priority 
needs. Thus, given the absence of a baseline assessment on the impact of climate on each 
country, and of documentary evidence that the NOL countries do needed this 
infrastructure, whether these were indeed the priority needs of the NOL countries could 
not be ascertained at that stage. 
(ii) 
Needs of the vulnerable people and communities. Similarly, infrastructures to be 
delivered by ICRF, depending on where these will be built, may be, directly or indirectly, 
needed by the countries’ vulnerable people and communities. An example would be a 
rural community which lacked a bridge connecting it to schools and markets, where loss 
of life sometimes occurred when community members attempt to cross rivers swollen 
by heavy rains intensified by climate change. It could be that there could be positive co-
benefits from an infrastructure investment, or negative impacts, or even maladaptation 
that unintentionally worsens communities’ situations. As to the extent to which these 
infrastructures would be needed, or the extent to which they would be able to address 
the vulnerabilities of the people and communities involved, would depend on each of 
their local and specific contexts. Given then the weak baseline assessments on each of 
the countries, it could not be ascertained then if and how these infrastructures would 
enhance the resilience of the people and communities.  
(iii) 
Needs of the private sector investors. There is always a need for an investment 
vehicle like ICRF to meet investors’ needs for investment capital safety, liquidity and 
 
30 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 6 “Form ESS disclosure report final”.

=== PAGE 178 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 174 
 
 
yield or returns. From this perspective, ICRF is clearly needed and important to the 
private sector investors in the infrastructure space as led by AFC. As discussed in the 
first submission of the funding proposal under section 1.2 (i.e. paras 10 and 11), ICRF 
benefits private sector investors looking to invest in new climate-resilient asset classes, 
based on this funding proposal submission. The combined package of grant financing for 
project preparation, climate risk insurance, and tier 1 investment with first loss buffer 
for the tier 2 investors seemed like a good deal for private sector investors. 
(iv) 
Need for climate risk insurance by infra stakeholders. In the first submission for 
B.34, the independent TAP raised the issue of CRPI. While CRPI was always a welcome 
risk management tool, especially for the residual risks of the proposed infrastructure 
projects, the independent TAP asked whether the CRPI was the type of insurance 
needed in the target region where the NOL countries were located; in the absence of an 
in-depth market assessment of the insurance sector, the answer was unknown as were 
the needs of the NOL countries. When asked by the independent TAP to give a quick 
overview as to the penetration rate of insurance in the target countries, the AE 
responded as follows: 
Insurance penetration is very low in Africa, with an observed downtrend over the recent 
past years. In 2020, Africa’s average insurance penetration was around 2per cent (from 
a 2.78per cent rate in 2019), while the global average penetration rate was 7.40per cent 
and 9.4per cent in OECD countries. As an illustration, see Figure 2 on insurance 
penetration in 13 countries (10 of which are among the countries targeted by ICRF) – 
Deloitte Africa Insurance Outlook (2022); penetration rates ranged from as low as 
0.02per cent to a high of 1.59per cent.31 
(v) 
This response gave the independent TAP a glimpse of the insurance market in the target 
countries and confirmed then that there was more to evaluate. Due to the lack of an in-
depth assessment of the 
insurance sector, it remained 
to be seen if the CRPI was 
indeed the solution needed. 
This was difficult to ascertain 
without knowing and 
understanding which climate 
risk management solutions 
were currently available and 
planned by regional or 
international insurers or 
reinsurers. Based on the AE’s 
responses, Africa Risk 
Capacity (parametric cyclone 
insurance), Swire RE, and the 
World Bank have experience 
in this area and could share 
potential lessons or best 
practices. 
1.4.1 Risk in relation to needs of the recipients  
50. 
The key question on the B.34 submission was if the needs presented in the funding 
proposal were indeed the priority infrastructure needs of each of the NOL countries. The AE had 
 
31 Deloitte. 2022. Africa Insurance Outlook 2022. Available at: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/financial-services/za-Africa-Insurance-Outlook-
2022-publication.pdf (accessed 7 February 2023).

=== PAGE 179 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 175 
 
 
not clearly demonstrated in the funding proposal how the targeted infrastructure sector 
interventions had been selected. Nor was it clear in the baseline assessment how the ICRF 
portfolio would align with each of the NOL country’s needs and NDC commitments.  
51. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, the AE addresses these issues. 
(See paras 13, 15, 33, 35 above on related discussions, and submitted documents (i.e. annexes 2 
and 23).) 
52. 
Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are assessed as high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
  
 
 
          Scale: High 
53. 
The funding proposal indicates that the NOL countries are somewhat aligned with the 
four target infrastructure portfolios of the ICRF.32  
54. 
Close collaboration between AFC and the NOL countries. In the case of AFC, the 
targeted NOL countries are shareholders in AFC. Thus, it can be said that the NOL countries are 
aligned with the AFC target portfolios by virtue of their ownership of AFC, and their 
participation as NOL countries under the ICRF. Whatever AFC does for an NOL country, there is 
always a close collaboration between the two within the existing AFC structure. Paraphrasing 
the AE, in terms of the design of the ICRF, AFC examined its own expertise and the needs of the 
NOL countries; thus both are systemically integrated into the fund’s design. AFC further added 
that all their projects are public–private partnerships in nature.  
55. 
As per the B.34 funding proposal, AFC had engaged with the NOL countries in the design 
of the ICRF and of the ICRF target portfolio:  
The NDAs of these NOL countries have been consulted by the ACP team during the COP 
26 where the AFC and AFC Capital Partners met with 11 NDAs at COP 26 in Glasgow, 
Scotland. The team met representatives from Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, 
Mali, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Gambia, Angola, Tanzania, Kenya and DRC. The interactions 
with the NDAs were extremely progressive and we have been able to secure 12 NOLs 
from the following countries at several follow-up meetings with the NDAs and national 
stakeholders: Benin, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, DRC, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, 
Kenya, Mail, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Togo and Namibia. Furthermore, AFC and ACP have 
conducted 4 virtual conferences with the target countries to present the ICRF and 
integrate their feedback into the design of the programme. As part of the process to 
secure the non-objection letters, AFC and ACP have conducted in-country visits to meet 
NDAs, engaged with several national stakeholders such as government ministries 
involved in target sectors such as transport, energy, industry, ITC, as well as Ministries 
of economy and finance, and Ministry of Environment, and the NDA/NOL national 
committee members. The NDAs of the 12 countries also distributed online surveys to 
gather inputs form [sic] key relevant stakeholders involved in the financing of 
infrastructure in their countries as well as the views of the wider national stakeholders 
on the priorities of ICRF. These engagements have resulted in securing the NOLs from 
12 countries that have expressed strong support for the ICRF programme and the 
alignment with their respective Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and 
National Adaptation plans.   
56. 
A strong AE partner. AFC is a multilateral financial institution, based in Lagos, Nigeria, 
created by African sovereign states to provide pragmatic solutions to Africa’s infrastructure 
deficit and challenging operating environment. To date, AFC has disbursed over USD 10 billion 
to support transformative sustainable infrastructure projects in 35 African countries. AFC is a 
regional entity, accredited by GCF, with the core focus on innovative homegrown solutions to 
 
32 See funding proposal, annex 2A ,’ICRF Feasibility Study_v.5’.

=== PAGE 180 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 176 
 
 
Africa’s development and climate-change challenges as these relate to infrastructure. AFC is also 
an executing entity exercising certain rights and obligations in respect of GCF funding for the 
implementation of the ICRF programme in a co-investment approach with ACP.33 
57. 
ACP is a limited liability company incorporated on 8 July 2021 under the laws of 
Mauritius. It is the asset management subsidiary of AFC and is 100 per cent owned by its parent 
company. ACP was created to mobilize capital at scale from institutional investors, and offer 
them the opportunity to invest, alongside AFC, in low-carbon and climate resilient 
infrastructure projects across Africa. ACP will be the fund manager of the ICRF. ACP was granted 
a global business licence by the Financial Services Commission, Mauritius, on 8 July 2021. ACP 
has applied for a collective investment scheme manager licence from the Financial Services 
Commission to be able to operate as a fund investment manager. 
58. 
Capacity of the accredited entity and the executing entity to deliver. AFC is a strong 
partner in infrastructure development. As per a Senior Director at AFC and Chief Executive 
Officer of APC (100 per cent-owned subsidiary of AFC) during the AE–independent TAP 
question-and-answer call, AFC provides critical infrastructure in the African continent; does 
project development, project construction, financing; is known as a premiere infrastructure 
developer in Africa; covers infrastructure on power, transport, natural resources (transitional 
metal), and all types of support for developing and climate proofing these projects; has been 
doing this for the last 15 years; has deployed over USD 10 billion in high-quality infrastructure 
projects in 35 African countries; and has membership of 39 African countries that also provide 
equity to AFC. In terms of mitigation, AFC has initiated projects on its own by developing the 
largest RE projects in Africa, totalling around 1.4 GW of green energy. This also includes 
transmission financing of green assets – mainly wind farms. AFC has also worked with small 
island developing States, such as Djibouti and Cape Verde, in collaboration with other strategic 
investors such as Climate Investor One, which it has outsourced to AFC the development of a 
wind farm, in a project that is also financed by GCF.  
59. 
A strong awareness, understanding and sense of commitment can be seen from the APC 
team. The Chief Executive Officer of APC also stated that climate change has affected natural 
ecosystems and more so the built infrastructure. It is envisioned under this USD 750 million 
ICRF facility, that such infrastructure will be built under a better standard to withstand the 
impacts of climate change. The fund will be focused on the sectors that are hardest hit by the 
impacts of climate (i.e. transport and logistics (roads, ports, railways, airports, power systems, 
special economic zones, telecommunications and digital infrastructure)). Infrastructure assets 
are increasingly threatened by climate stressors such as high temperatures, intense rainfall 
events, droughts, floods and rising sea levels. ICRF will be the response to these problems given 
that AFC has observed these climate stressors first hand.34 
1.5.1 Risk to country ownership 
60. 
In the previous submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the independent TAP raised 
the issue of weak country ownership. The AE was not able to provide documentary evidence 
that each NOL country’s investment needs and plans were truly aligned with the ICRF portfolio 
strategy. Securing NOLs did not equate to strong country ownership. It only signified a starting 
point and did not exclude the need to have closer collaboration with the NOL countries’ relevant 
stakeholders – to enable them to understand the purpose of the project, how it aligned with 
their NDCs/intended nationally determined contributions, their national development plans, 
policies, strategies, programmes, and hopefully have a strong input into and sense of ownership 
of the proposed projects beforehand.   
 
33 See B35 funding proposal, section A. 
34 Refer to the recording of the AE–independent TAP interview, beginning at 11:22. Recordings available upon 
request from the independent TAP Secretariat.

=== PAGE 181 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 177 
 
 
61. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B.35, ICRF satisfactorily addresses 
this issue.  
(i) 
The AE states that:  
AFC strongly engaged with the NOL countries’ relevant stakeholders – who have 
expressed tremendous support for the ICRF programme and confirmed that it aligns 
with their NDCs/intended nationally determined contributions, their national 
development plans, policies, strategies, and programmes. ALL countries have delivered 
their NOLs following their respective no-objection procedures including extensive 
consultations with relevant government ministries and authorities as established by the 
NDA and national stakeholders. Also, we elaborated on the Public Private Partnership 
approach of AFC as we work hand in hand with countries and governments authorities 
in developing and financing infrastructure.  
(See section B3.2: Guiding principles on climate resilience integration in ICRF investment 
process.) 
(ii) 
AFC further reiterates that each country has its own distinctive procedures and 
requirements established as part of the implementation of the GCF Readiness and 
Preparatory Support grants. However, as these requirements vary per NOL country, not 
all countries requested AFC to secure the support letters. In various cases, AFC has been 
requested to supply the concept note and the funding proposal, or to make a 
presentation to a multi-stakeholder committee and respond to questions, or (in the case 
of Côte d’Ivoire) to meet the national designated authority (NDA) in person to present 
the project, or to provide information on national counterparts and collaborating 
partners in countries to enable the NDA office to undertake its due diligence, or to 
present to representatives of designated non-governmental organizations and civil 
society organizations in few countries, or to secure support letters by a line ministry or 
relevant government authority for issuance of the NOL (e.g. Ghana and Rwanda letters 
of support).35  
62. 
Overall, based on the above, the country ownership is assessed as high.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
        Scale: High 
63. 
Leveraging GCF capital to de-risk investments. The GCF’s USD 240.0 million funding 
will be used primarily to fund the incremental costs of adaptation and resilience and de-risk 
investors, with this amount representing about 11.4 per cent of the total funding required at the 
project level. The USD 240.0 million will be matched by USD 510 million coming from AFC (USD 
50 million), and other institutional investors (e.g. pension, sovereign wealth funds, insurance 
companies) (USD 460.0 million). 
64. 
Through the GCF catalytic first-loss capital position, the ICRF investment objective is to 
leverage private and institutional capital at the fund level and at the project level to accelerate 
investments into climate-resilient infrastructure projects in Africa. ICRF’s approach in de-
risking investments is detailed in the operations manual (annex 21 of the funding proposal). 
Among the three key features of the ICRF operations manual is the revised climate risk and 
impact assessment methodology (see paras 17 and 18 above), the innovative climate 
investment model (see paras 23 and 33 above), and the technical assistance component for the 
conduct of a feasibility study on climate insurance, and other policy dialogue and frameworks 
development in the ICRF targeted sectors.  
 
35 See AFC responses to the independent TAP question on AFC ICRF dated 16 January 2023.

=== PAGE 182 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 178 
 
 
65. 
With regard to the current financial problems (e.g. currency depreciation versus the 
USD, inflation) arising from the ongoing conflict in Eastern Europe and the impacts of Covid 
lockdowns, the independent TAP also sought some elaboration on how AFC or the ICRF will be 
managing such risks when applicable. From the perspective of AFC, it has a strong dollar 
balance and foreign exchange risk management is one of its core areas of expertise; essentially, 
AFC is very capable of managing potential foreign exchange risks in the investments using 
appropriate risk management strategies.36  
66. 
Mobilization at the subproject level by GCF. ICRF equity and mezzanine investments 
will unlock financing at scale, targeting ~1:2.6 – 1:3 leverage ratio at the subproject level, 
equivalent to USD 1.155 – 1.485 billion additional debt financing, bringing the total pipeline 
value up to USD 2.0 billion. This will lead to an average mobilization ratio at the subproject level 
by GCF of 5.2x: (USD 1.155 + USD 1.485)/2 = USD 1.32 billion average mobilization at the 
subproject level) → USD 1.32 billion / USD 254.1 million total GCF funding = ~5.2x.  
67. 
Total mobilization ratio at the ICRF fund and subproject levels is envisaged as ~7.2x to 
be achieved by catalytic junior equity by GCF – a very strong mobilization ratio for a private 
sector adaptation programme: (USD 510 million on the fund level + USD 1.32 billion on the 
subproject level) / USD 254.1million total GCF funding = 7.2x.  
68. 
Incremental cost of the CRI will be covered by the GCF concessional junior equity (with a 
3 per cent internal rate of return) thus allowing private sector capital to hit target hurdle rates 
of 12.5per cent. Incremental cost for CRI projects may appear to be high at first glance 
compared to standard infrastructure investment projects (the demonstration cases suggest 5.2–
14.9 per cent for RCP 4.5 and 14.8–23.7 per cent for RCP 8.5 scenarios to the Capex without 
resilience measures); the higher costs will deliver the following intended benefits: (i) higher 
quality of the desired infrastructure result (less costly operation and maintenance); (ii) less 
revenue disruptions due to the ability to withstand disastrous climate-related weather 
events, etc.; (iii) better sustainability (assets longevity and avoidance of stranded assets risk); 
(iv) additional socioeconomic benefits (increased safety for vulnerable people and communities, 
increased productivity). 
69. 
If done right, the integrated approach of providing technical assistance for project 
preparation (e.g. climate risk, vulnerability and adaptation options assessment), doing a 
feasibility study on a climate risk parametric insurance in support of managing residual climate-
related risk, standards and policies, and GCF concessional equity (with 30 per cent first-loss 
protection for investors) can effectively de-risk the investments among institutional private 
sector investors (pension funds, insurance companies, sovereign wealth funds, development 
financial institutions and foundations), and enhance the development of climate resilient 
infrastructure projects. 
70. 
Cost-effectiveness and cost-efficiency 
71. 
The ICRF will be invested in a total of 15 projects, at an average of USD 32.72 million per 
project. Expected internal rate of return is 13.5 per cent for a period of 10 years. GCF cost of 
funds is at 3 per cent (for Tier 1) while Tier 2 investors’ (AFC, other investors) hurdle rates are 
at 12.5 per cent. GCF investment of USD 240 million will be matched by USD 510 million, for a 
leverage factor of 2.125x. Of the USD 510 million, AFC will contribute USD 50.0 million. Equity 
multiple, the value of the equity that investment holdings for 10 years will have generated in 
ICRF is estimated at 3.55x. 
a. 
Risk to efficiency and effectiveness 
72. 
In the previous submission of the funding proposal for B.34, the independent TAP raised 
the issue of the weak baseline assessments and technical capacities of the ICRF team in 
 
36 See video recording of call between the AE and the independent TAP on 25 January 2023.

=== PAGE 183 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 179 
 
 
processing climate investment projects which may put at risk the overall efficiency and 
effectiveness of the funding proposal.  
73. 
With the resubmission of the funding proposal for B35, the AE addresses these issues. 
74. 
As to the technical capacities, the AE has more than adequately demonstrated its 
technical capacity in performing assessments of climate investment projects. The AE provided 
three illustrative case studies with financial models as part of the funding proposal package 
where the same principles will be applied during the project preparation, assessment and 
implementation. The model showcases how to demonstrate the impacts of climate in the 
infrastructure investments (i.e. on the assets, cost of operations, and revenue stream under five 
scenarios, specifically BAU with no adaptation, and with and without adaptation under the RCP 
4.5 and 8.5 scenarios). Data for the models included information from the socioeconomic 
analysis as well as a review of energy and infrastructure models from actual projects. In each 
case, the models demonstrated that investment in climate-resilient infrastructure generated a 
higher return over the long term than BAU infrastructure investment. The operations manual 
(annex 21) also provides some illustrations on climate risk screening and resilience measures in 
sections 7.2 and 7.5. The AE submitted an innovative model on the financial and economic 
assessment of the ICRF’s targeted infrastructure projects.  
75. 
The impact assessment was made by evaluating projects’ equity IRR for cases with and 
without climate adaptation under different climate impact assumptions. (Externalities were not 
included in the financial modelling impacts.)  
76. 
In terms of climate accounting, the ICRF will invest in the development and construction 
of climate resilient infrastructure. Only the incremental cost of adaptation measures will be 
counted as ‘adaptation finance’ for climate accounting. GCF concessional funding will only be 
used to de-risk investors at fund level and contribute to financing the cost of adaptation 
measures. 
77. 
Overall, based on the above, the efficiency and effectiveness is assessed to be high.  
 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
78. 
In the first submission for B.34, the independent TAP recommended the AE to undertake 
the following actions to further strengthen the funding proposal: 
79. 
Update the funding proposal37 and relevant annexes to include the following: 
(i) 
Baseline assessments of the following items: 
i. 
The priority sectors of the NOL countries, showing how current and the future 
climate change will seriously exacerbate negative impacts on these NOL countries and 
their priority sectors especially in the areas of infrastructure, as well as 
people/communities, critical ecosystems, business value chains, and other built 
infrastructures that are interdependent on these identified priority infrastructures. 
Studies should describe and provide evidence of (a) the specific context of vulnerability 
of each of the NOL countries; (b) a clear statement of intent that these are the 
infrastructures of each of the NOL countries that they want to prioritize and address; 
and (c) most recent data and information on losses and damages as well as budget 
expenditures, or donor funds spent in recent years. 38 
 
37 Refer to comments on paragraph 16. 
38 Refer to comments on paragraph 12 under section 1.1.2, ‘Risks to adaptation’ above; to be part of annex 2 FS.

=== PAGE 184 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 180 
 
 
 
ii. 
The capital and financial market sector, describing the available financial and 
capital market products/services (e.g. loans, equity, funds), investors, private and public 
asset managers that operate in the infrastructure space in the target African region 
where the NOL countries are situated. The study should show how climate change has 
impacted their lending or investment portfolio over a period of time in terms of return, 
yield, revenues, operational costs, liquidity, and what industry barriers, issues, 
challenges and opportunities these actors identify.39 
 
iii. 
The insurance companies (public and private, insurers, reinsurers) and their 
available insurance products and services (e.g. parametric, indemnity, catastrophe 
bonds) catering to the target infrastructure sector. The study should show how climate 
change has impacted the insurance business and what current issues, barriers, 
challenges and opportunities the industry is facing. The study should also show the roles 
or potential roles of the national hydrometeorological agencies, insurance commission 
and other regulatory agencies, in the formulation of the parametric insurance product.40 
(ii) 
A revised ICRF climate risk impact assessment methodology, and other similar 
screening and assessment processes, to reflect the assessment of impacts on vulnerable 
people, as well as critical ecosystems, investments/micro-, small- and medium-sized 
enterprise business value chains and other interdependent built infrastructure.41 
(iii) 
The AE should provide additional theoretical or mock case studies to demonstrate its 
knowledge, experience and capability to undertake climate change related investment 
processing activities. These should specifically use as case studies the infrastructure 
types that AFC has identified as priority infrastructures in transport and logistics (e.g. 
roads, rail); clean energy (e.g. transmission and distribution lines catering to both RE 
and thermal power); ICT and telecommunications; and economic zones. These mock 
case studies should be made part of the funding proposal annexes and should include 
demonstrations of the following: 
i. 
climate finance accounting know-how;42 
 
ii. 
climate investment assessment that includes climate-related positive and 
negative externalities43 showing differences between results under the BAU, RCP 4.5 and 
RCP 8.5 scenarios; 
 
iii. 
how to assess the GHG emission baselines and projections, and suggested 
mitigation measures;44 and 
iv. 
the use of the revised ICRF Climate Risk Impact Assessment methodology to 
reflect the assessment of impacts on vulnerable people, as well as critical ecosystems, 
 
39 Refer to comments on paragraph 14 under section 1.1.2, ‘Risks to adaptation’ above. 
40 Refer to comments on paragraph 48 (iv and v) under section 1.6, ‘Needs of the recipient’. 
41 Refer to comments on paragraph 16 (vi and vii) on the CRIAM. 
42 Refer to the comments on paragraphs 19-21 under section 1.1.2: “Risks to adaptation” above. The AE must be 
guided by the MDB climate finance reporting principles which will cover potential Type 1, 2a, 2b projects as cited by 
the AE in its responses to the AE–independent TAP questionnaires and meeting, and as mentioned in annex 14 “ICRF 
Draft Term Sheet”. 
43 See B.34 funding proposal, annex 3A “KTMR project financial analysis example” where ‘health cost of accidents’ is 
used as one of the externalities on transport projects; traffic road safety externalities are not clearly climate linked. 
44 Refer to comments on paragraphs 26– 29 and 44.

=== PAGE 185 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 181 
 
 
investments/micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprise business value chains and 
other interdependent built infrastructure.45 
(iv) 
The AE shall prepare a set of climate change-related taxonomies for ICRF stakeholders 
to ensure clarity and consistency of terminologies used within the ICRF project, thus, 
avoiding the risk of multiple meanings being used for the same terms within the project 
that will create confusion.46 
(v) 
The AE should prepare a complete set of climate change-related indicators for each of 
the targeted sectors, covering infrastructure, people/communities, ecosystem resources 
and investments/livelihoods.47 
(vi) 
The AE should prepare a set of resilience indicators for the identified target sectoral 
infrastructure (arising from the high-level framework and generic methodology) that 
will enable a reviewer to assess a specific set of climate change-related indicators at the 
project level.48 
(vii) 
The AE should identify the scope of work, terms of reference and professional 
background of climate-change experts49 who will form part of the following: 
i. 
the Climate Governance Committee; 
ii. 
the ICRF investment and advisory committee, audit committee (i.e. for climate 
finance accounting) and board of directors; and 
iii. 
AFC Capital Partners. 
80. 
In response to the independent TAP recommendations above, the AE, in its funding 
proposal resubmission for B.35, has adequately addressed the above-mentioned issues.50  
81. 
Lessons learned. It is also worth noting that the post-discussion on non-endorsed 
funding proposals between the AE and the independent TAP during the meeting in Incheon last 
October 2022, also facilitated a much better clarification of how the AE needs to address the 
issues raised in the non-endorsed funding proposals. 
82. 
Based on the assessment above, this funding proposal is fully endorsed by the  
independent TAP with one recommendation: 
 
The independent TAP, acknowledging that this is an adaptation programme, recommends that 
an assessment of the GHG emissions of its subprojects during the whole 20-year lifespan of the 
GCF programme (not just during the construction and development stages) also be conducted. 
This assessment will promote transparency and address the risk of increase in GHG emissions 
arising from infrastructure projects such as roads and ports once fully operational. The 
assessment should form part of the project risks to be mitigated so as to (i) prevent a carbon 
lock-up or stranded assets in the future, (ii) align the infrastructure projects with the Paris 
Agreement objectives of the NOL countries, thus enabling NOL countries to meet their NDCs; 
and (iii) attract potential investors that seek projects that are aligned to the Paris Agreement, 
thus increasing the attractiveness of the ICRF. 
 
45 See footnote 38 on CRIAM. 
46 Refer to the comments on paragraphs 16 (vi and vii), 19, 20, 24 and 27. 
47 Refer to the comments on paragraphs 16 (vi and vii), 21 and 24. 
48 Refer to the comments on paragraph 24 and footnote 37. 
49 Refer to the comments on paragraph 21. 
50 See document entitled “Addressing iTAP remarks V.9 FP” where the AE responds to the assessment findings.

=== PAGE 186 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page182 
  
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel Assessment 
Findings 
Proposal name: 
Infrastructure Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) 
Accredited entity: 
Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) 
 
Impact potential 
AFC is committed to mobilizing blended finance at a scale and accelerating investments in high-
impact climate-resilient infrastructure projects to reduce the risks associated with projected climate 
change impacts. This program will bring significant adaptation impact potential to direct and indirect 
beneficiaries on the African continent. The ICRF is targeting 50,365,061 direct beneficiaries and 
144,115,769 indirect beneficiaries. We appreciate and concur with the ITAP assessment which ranks 
the impact potential High.  
 
Paradigm shift potential 
The program will champion and mainstream a novel approach to integrating physical climate risks 
in the development of climate-resilient infrastructure assets which are planned, designed, built and 
operated in a way that anticipates, prepares for, and adapts to changing climate conditions. Resilient 
assets can withstand, respond, and recover rapidly from disruptions caused by climate change 
conditions. By enabling the mobilization of blended capital at scale, ICRF will on one hand invest in 
the resilience measures needed for long-lasting infrastructures to withstand current and future climate 
risks, but on the second hand, to de-risk and enhance the bankability of investments in climate 
resilient infrastructure. GCF concessionality will be crucial to enable the financing of adaptation 
measures, and to mobilize capital at scale for climate resilient infrastructure through the participation 
of institutional investors such as pension funds, insurance companies, and sovereign wealth funds in 
Africa and globally. 
The AE appreciates and concurs with ITAPs assessment of ICRF’s paradigm shift potential.  
 
Sustainable development potential 
We are in agreement with the ITAPs assessment regarding the sustainable development potential.  
ICRF presents a real potential to contribute to sustainable development with impacts on all the 
dimensions of sustainability as co-benefits to the core adaptation results expected from its 
implementation: Economic, Environment and Social including consideration for gender equality, 
health, safety and wellbeing. AFC is committed to developing projects that will contribute to the 
following SDGs: 7,8,10,11,13 and 16.  
 
Needs of the recipient 
AFC agrees with ITAP’s assessment regarding the needs of the recipient. The origination and 
development of ICRF have been informed by an in-depth analysis and understanding of the needs of 
the participating countries. The baseline assessments on the impact of climate on each country have 
been reinforced by the demonstrated evidence of the critical need for resilient infrastructure on the

=== PAGE 187 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page183 
  
 
continent. ICRF responds to the needs of its beneficiaries' countries and their population on several 
fronts: the need to build the resilience of infrastructure; the need to mobilize the necessary capital, 
the need to strengthen institutions and capacity for systematic integration of climate risks assessments 
in infrastructure planning, financing and their management etc. 
 
Country ownership 
Country ownership is pivotal to the ICRF design and implementation. We agree with the ITAP 
assessment on country ownership as we believe that the NOL countries are very much aligned with 
the target sectors of the ICRF. AFC engaged collaboratively with all participating countries during 
the origination and development phase of this funding proposal. AFC engages with NDA and wider 
stakeholders of the target countries to enable them to understand the structure of the ICRF program, 
the choice of the financial instruments, confirm with them how the program aligns with their NDCs, 
their national development plans, policies, strategies, and programs. 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
We are in agreement with the ITAP assessment of efficiency and effectiveness. AFC has 
demonstrated technical capacity in performing assessments of climate investment projects by 
providing robust case studies with financial models incorporating effects on climate change under 
different climate scenarios. We will ensure that the GCF financing is effectively deployed across the 
various target sectors of the ICRF.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:

=== PAGE 188 ===
1 
MAKING 
AFRICAN 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
RESILIENT TO CLIMATE CHANGE  
ACP ICRF 
GENDER & SOCIAL INCLUSION 
ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN 
Page 184

=== PAGE 189 ===
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 185

=== PAGE 190 ===
3 
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
TABLE OF CONTENT .................................................................................................................................................... 3 
I. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................................................... 5 
II. 
ACP INFRASTRUCTURE CLIMATE RESILIENT FUND (ICRF) ...................................................................................... 7 
2.1 
Investment Objective ...................................................................................................... 7 
2.2 
Investment Themes .......................................................................................................... 7 
2.3 
Investment Strategy ......................................................................................................... 7 
 ........................................................................................................................................................ 9 
III. 
CONNECTION BETWEEN CLIMATE-RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE AND GENDER CONSIDERATIONS ................... 10 
IV. 
AN IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF GENDER AND SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATORS AT COUNTRY-LEVEL ....................... 15 
4.1 
Benin ................................................................................................................................. 15 
4.2 
Cameroon ....................................................................................................................... 20 
4.3 
Chad ................................................................................................................................ 26 
4.4 
Côte d’Ivoire ................................................................................................................... 30 
4.5 
Djibouti ............................................................................................................................. 34 
4.6 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) ........................................................................ 39 
4.7 
Gabon .............................................................................................................................. 43 
4.8 
Gambia ............................................................................................................................ 47 
4.9 
Ghana .............................................................................................................................. 52 
4.10 
Guinea ............................................................................................................................. 58 
4.11 
Kenya ............................................................................................................................... 65 
4.12 
Mali ................................................................................................................................... 71 
4.13 
Mauritania ....................................................................................................................... 77 
4.14 
Namibia ........................................................................................................................... 81 
4.15 
Federal Republic of Nigeria .......................................................................................... 86 
4.16 
Rwanda ............................................................................................................................ 92 
4.17 
Sierra Leone..................................................................................................................... 98 
4.18 
Togo ................................................................................................................................. 103 
4.19 
Zambia ............................................................................................................................ 108 
V. 
GENDER DISPARITIES TO INFRASTRUCTURAL ACCESS AND SERVICES AND CONTRIBUTION OF THE PROJECT 112 
VI. 
RESULTS OF SURVEY THE GENDER PERCEPTIONS IN ICRF COUNTRIES ........................................................... 115 
Page 186

=== PAGE 191 ===
4 
 
6.1 
Project objectives and target group .......................................................................... 115 
6.2 
Resource control and impacts of infrastructure projects ........................................ 115 
6.3 
Strategies for women's participation and consultation in infrastructure projects 116 
6.4 
Women's role as decision makers in infrastructure projects ................................... 117 
6.5 
Gender-disaggregated data on infrastructure. ........................................................ 118 
VII. 
SUMMARY OF CONSULTATIONS UNDERTAKEN WITH GENDER AND WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS ............ 119 
VIII. 
INTRODUCTION TO ICRF ........................................................................................................................... 124 
IX. 
ENTRY POINTS FOR GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION CONSIDERATIONS IN ICRF .......................................... 125 
X. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN .................................................................................................................................. 136 
ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................................................ 146 
Annexe 1 .................................................................................................................................... 146 
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................ 152 
 
Page 187

=== PAGE 192 ===
5 
 
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Current and future infrastructures in Africa face risks associated with climate change which is often 
not a key consideration in infrastructure planning, design, financing, commissioning, and 
construction. Climate-resilient infrastructure would help provide the quantity, quality, and 
accessibility to infrastructure and the associated services to connect people and enhance the 
quality of life.  
The Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) wholly-own Capital Partners is establishing the Infrastructure 
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) to offer tailored financial products (concessional equity and 
parametric insurance) to finance climate-resilient infrastructure and reduce the impact of climate 
hazards on the physical infrastructures in the selected African nations. The ICRF will be supported by 
targeted technical assistance and policy interventions to ensure a long-term and systematic 
approach towards infrastructure financing in Africa. This analysis is prepared to assess potential 
Gender and Social inclusion Risks that might be associated to the implementation of the ICRF in the 
targeted countries, with the view to propose an action plan to ensure a gender-responsive 
implementation of the ICRF.  
The proposal targets 19 countries in Africa and is structured around three (3) components. 
• 
Component 1 – Financial instruments to reduce market failure and attract investment in 
Climate Resilience;  
• 
Component 2 – Strengthening capacity, systems, and networks to improve understanding of 
current and future risks; and  
• 
Component 3 – Policy interventions to support investments in Climate Resilient Infrastructure. 
This Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment and Action plan has been developed using a 
participatory approach to complement intensive documentation review to understand the national 
and regional considerations that affects gender considerations in infrastructure in Africa in general 
and takes into consideration the potential for additional risks associated to climate change and 
specific gender considerations.  
This report is structured in seven (7) parts  
1. General presentation of the ICRF  
2. Connection between climate-resilient infrastructure and Gender considerations  
3. Analysis of gender and socioeconomic indicators at country-level  
4. Gender disparities to infrastructural access and services, resulting from the survey in ICRF 
countries 
5. Considerations of other social inclusion dimensions in infrastructure  
6. Considerations of gender and social inclusion entry points in the program implementation 
7. Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan  
 
Page 188

=== PAGE 193 ===
6 
 
 
Page 189

=== PAGE 194 ===
7 
 
II. ACP INFRASTRUCTURE CLIMATE RESILIENT FUND (ICRF) 
2.1 Investment Objective 
The principal objective of the ICRF is to deploy capital to support the development and financing 
of climate-resilient infrastructure projects in Africa and to achieve medium to long-term returns for 
investors. The fund will focus on investments in high-quality sustainable infrastructure (i.e., roads, ports, 
bridges, rail, telecommunication, clean energy, and logistics projects) with the objective of making 
these assets more resilient to the impacts of climate change while being in accordance with the 
Paris agreement. 
2.2 Investment Themes 
ICRF will focus on infrastructure core sectors including: 
i. 
Climate-resilient Transport and Logistics including ports, roads, bridges, airports, etc. 
ii. 
Climate-resilient Energy Systems1  
iii. Climate-resilient Economic zones  
iv. Climate-resilient Telecommunication and Digital Infrastructures 
2.3 Investment Strategy 
ICRF will invest in greenfield and brownfield infrastructure, acquisition, and growth equity ﬁnancing 
combined with concessional capital from international and multilateral sources like the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF) that have committed signiﬁcant pools of capital to climate resilience ﬁnancing 
for emerging market countries, including Africa. The Fund will co-invest alongside AFC in 
opportunities that ﬁt its climate mandate and investment criteria, hence beneﬁtting from AFC's 
strong track record through this co-investment approach. CP will analyse investment-specific 
climate risks along with related resilience and adaptation considerations to incorporate  ICRF 
investment decision-making processes. 
ICRF will hold a signiﬁcant or majority interest in the Project’s Companies in which it invests and will 
seek to exit its investments after approximately seven to ten years of the respective Project 
Company's lifecycle. ICRF will invest up to 20% of its committed capital in project development. ICRF 
will target projects that exhibit the following characteristics: 
 
 
1 The Fund will not invest into fossil fuel-based energy solutions, and this covenant will be included in the 
exclusion list 
Page 190

=== PAGE 195 ===
8 
 
i. 
Ability to generate sustainable positive cash ﬂows and oﬀer returns commensurate with the 
risk associated with the investment. 
ii. 
Strong sponsors with deep pockets, solid experience, and track record, as well as technical 
expertise in the relevant sector and region. 
iii. 
Credible, experienced, and independent EPC and O&M contractors. 
iv. 
Oﬀer a strategic competitive advantage: Projects with manageable or predictable market 
dynamics, as well as proven and stable or growing demand from credible oﬀ-takers or a 
broad and deep marketplace. 
v. 
Demonstrate alignment with Paris Agreement Goals (commitment for emissions reduction 
and alignment of financial flows to low emissions and climate resilience) as well as a 
commitment to best practice ESG standards. 
vi. 
Projects that have all relevant permits/licenses/concessions and authorizations or have a 
clear and realistic plan to secure all relevant permits and authorizations in a timely manner. 
vii. 
Sound and transparent governance. 
viii. Predominantly exhibit equity characteristics. 
 
 
 
Page 191

=== PAGE 196 ===
9 
Page 192

=== PAGE 197 ===
10 
III.
CONNECTION BETWEEN CLIMATE-RESILIENT
INFRASTRUCTURE AND GENDER CONSIDERATIONS
The impact of climate change on infrastructure is experienced across the globe. However, in Africa, 
the level of exposure of critical infrastructure to climate change is dire as the continent records some 
of the most extreme climatic conditions. Unfortunately, several existing and upcoming infrastructures 
are not built with climate resilience features.  
In addition, there is a strong relationship between climate change and environment-based 
livelihoods, which relates to gender. Climate change also affects the allocation of tasks, resources, 
and time in various ways for men and women, especially in Africa. For example, climate change 
increases the labor burdens connected to the provision of food, water, and energy at the household 
level and caring for children and other vulnerable people. Women mainly undertake these tasks, 
thus limiting their time for other economic and social activities. In addition to others borne out of the 
sociocultural context, fragile environmental setting, and women's dependence on less sophisticated 
technology, these factors make women especially vulnerable to climate change. When 
infrastructure alleviates these burdens, women usually remain at risk of extra labor time when such 
infrastructure endures climate hazards that impact its performance. 
There is a strong relationship between the climate, the resilient-climate infrastructure and gender 
considerations. 
 Climate change affects the allocation of tasks, resources, and time in various ways for men and 
women, especially in Africa;  
For example, it increases the labor burdens connected to the provision of food, water, and energy 
which affects households and leads to fretting for children and other vulnerable people. Women 
mainly undertake these tasks, thus limiting their time for other economic and social activities. In 
addition to others borne out of the sociocultural context, fragile environmental setting, and women's 
dependence on less sophisticated technology, these factors make women especially vulnerable to 
climate change. When infrastructure alleviates these burdens, women usually remain at risk of extra 
labor time when such infrastructure endures climate hazards that impact its performance.  
The impact of climate change on infrastructure is experienced across the globe. However, in Africa, 
the level of exposure of critical infrastructure to climate change is dire as the continent records some 
of the most extreme climatic conditions. Unfortunately, several existing and upcoming infrastructures 
are not built with climate resilience features.  
Climate change disproportionately impacts people across the board. Generally, marginalized 
population groups, including women, suffer more of the negative impact of climate change. It is 
noteworthy that women and girls are "14 times more likely than men to die during a disaster", as 
"natural disasters exacerbate previously existing patterns of discrimination that render females more 
vulnerable to their fatal impact." A World Bank report, Shockwaves, notes that women are most 
vulnerable during disasters. This increases their hardships during floods and their risk of contracting 
waterborne diseases. 
Furthermore, the disproportion in household activities translates to a disproportion in income-
generating labor hours. As a result, women are more likely to experience loss of housing and lack 
Page 193

=== PAGE 198 ===
11 
 
access to services and relief. In addition, the female population is at far greater risk of physical and 
sexual violence during and after disasters. 
Women are more vulnerable than men to job losses in times of crisis. Women only account for 39 
percent of global employment and about 54 percent of overall job losses during the COVID–19 
pandemic2.  As workplaces closed, the earnings of many self-employed and hourly wage female 
workers decreased. The risk of job losses for women due to COVID–19 is higher than for men partly 
because the pandemic affected sectors where female employment is high 3. Women's loss of 
income often has long-lasting effects and compound the vulnerability of children as well. Women's 
loss of income often has long-lasting effects and compounds the vulnerability of children as well.  
 
The social and cultural norms in the program countries impose several constraints on women. The 
division of labor in the households is gendered. This responsibility on women limits them from 
engaging in income-generating activities or pursuing further education. In a context where energy 
and transport infrastructure are heavily impacted by climate change, women would require even 
more time to provide these infrastructural services using conservative means that are less efficient 
and time-consuming. 
Women lack access to knowledge and climate information generated by climate information and 
early warning systems (CIEWS) relevant for preparedness, adaptation, risk reduction, and transfer 
(part of the climate market-related risks through climate-resilient insurance scheme). This is partly 
due to women's low access to media and telecommunication infrastructure through which climate 
information is conveyed. In areas where such communication infrastructure exists, women still have 
the least access compared to men, and such infrastructure is also exposed to various climate 
stressors.  
Although most countries today have a national gender policy or strategy, gender is often 
considered an after-thought, and gender policies are usually limited in their application. Patriarchy 
and lack of political will, religious roadblocks, coupled with scarce resources impede the effective 
implementation of the gender-responsive legal and regulatory framework. Through communication 
and advocacy actions by civil society organisations, various project programs succeeded in 
implementing activities that consider gender equality and equity. This program will draw lessons from 
the success of the past to sail through the social, political, religious, and cultural obstacles to ensure 
that women have full access to resilient infrastructure and infrastructural services. 
To ensure that the program reduces the gender disparities in the implementation area, the output 
in establishing new infrastructure or strengthening existing ones to be more resilient to climate 
change should translate to fewer burdens and more economic and social access for women.  
 
2 MADGAVKAR, A., O. WHITE, M. KRISHNAN, D. MAHAJAN, AND X. AZCUE. 2020. “COVID-19 AND GENDER 
EQUALITY.” MCKINSEY GLOBAL INSTITUTE. HTTPS://WWW.MCKINSEY.COM/ FEATURED-INSIGHTS/FUTURE-OF-WORK/COVID-
19-AND-GENDER -EQUALITY-COUNTERING-THE-REGRESSIVE-EFFECTS. 
3  ABAY, K. A., K. TAFERE, AND A. WOLDEMICHAEL. 2020. “WINNERS AND LOSERS FROM COVID–19: GLOBAL EVIDENCE FROM 
GOOGLE SEARCH.” POLICY RESEARCH WORKING PAPER 9268, WORLD BANK, WASHINGTON, DC. 
 
Page 194

=== PAGE 199 ===
12 
 
The 2020 Human Development data (see Error! Reference source not found.) shows that the gender 
inequality index in the program countries is among the lowest globally. However, gender 
disproportion is observed in critical sectors such as employment, politics, and education. This stresses 
the need to ensure a conscious gender plan in the program activities in response to gender disparity.
Page 195

=== PAGE 200 ===
13 
Table 1: Gender Inequality Index 
Gender Inequality Index 
Maternal 
mortality ratio 
Adolescent birth rate 
Share of seats in 
Parliament 
Population 
with 
at 
least 
some 
secondary education 
Labour 
force 
participation rate 
HDI rank 
Country 
Value 
Rank 
(Deaths 
per 
100,000 
live 
births) 
(Births 
per 
1,000 
women ages 15–19) 
(% 
Held 
by 
women) 
(% ages 25 and older) 
(% ages 15 and 
older) 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
2019 
2019 
2017 
2015-2020 
2019 
2015–2019 
2015–2019 
2019 
2019 
119 
Gabon 
0,525 
128 
252 
96,2 
17,9 
66,2 
50,6 
43,5 
61,8 
130 
Namibia 
0,440 
106 
195 
63,6 
37,0 
56,1 
63,3 
56,1 
63,3 
138 
Ghana 
0,538 
135 
308 
66,6 
13,1 
55,7 
71,6 
63,6 
71,9 
143 
Kenya 
0,518 
126 
342 
75,1 
23,3 
29,8 
37,3 
72,1 
77,3 
146 
Zambia 
0,539 
137 
213 
120,1 
18,0 
38,5h 
54,1h 
70,4 
79,1 
153 
Cameroon 
0,560 
141 
529 
105,8 
29,3 
32,7 
41,3 
71,1 
81,1 
157 
Mauritania 
0,634 
151 
766 
71,0 
20,3 
12,7 
25,0 
28,9 
63,1 
158 
Benin 
0,612 
148 
397 
86,1 
7,2 
18,3 
33,9 
68,8 
73 
160 
Rwanda 
0.402 
92 
248 
39.1 
55.7 
10.9 
15.8 
83.9 
83.4 
161 
Nigeria 
.. 
.. 
917 
107,3 
4,1 
.. 
.. 
47,9 
57,9 
162 
Côte d'Ivoire 
0,638 
153 
617 
117,6 
13,3 
17,9 
34,4 
48,2 
65,5 
166 
Djibouti 
.. 
. 
248 
18.8 
26.2 
.. 
.. 
50.7 
68.8 
167 
Togo 
0,573 
145 
396 
89,1 
16,5 
27,6 
54,4 
76,3 
78,9 
Page 196

=== PAGE 201 ===
14 
 
172 
The Gambia 
0,612 
148 
597 
78,2 
10,3 
31,5 
44,4 
51,2 
68,0 
175 
Congo (the Democratic Republic 
of the) 
0,617 
150 
473 
124,2 
12,0 
36,7 
65,8 
60,7 
66,3 
178 
Guinea 
.. 
.. 
576 
135,3 
22,8 
.. 
.. 
62,7 
60,2 
182 
Sierra Leone 
0,644 
155 
1 120 
112,8 
12,3 
20,1 
33,0 
57,3 
58,5 
184 
Mali 
0,671 
158 
562 
169,1 
9,5 
7,3 
16,4 
61,2 
80,6 
187 
Chad 
0,710 
160 
1 140 
161,1 
14,9 
1,7 
10,5 
63,9 
77,5 
 
Human development groups 
 
Very high human development 
0,173 
— 
14 
17,2 
28,3 
86,5 
88,6 
52,3 
69,1 
 
High human development 
0,340 
— 
62 
33,6 
24,5 
69,8 
75,1 
54,2 
75,4 
 
Medium human development 
0,501 
— 
161 
34,6 
20,4 
30,1 
46,3 
28,3 
77,1 
 
Low human development 
0,592 
— 
572 
102,8 
22,2 
17,2 
30,1 
57,7 
72,3 
Source: Human Development Report, 2020 (UNDP) 
 
The ranking of the gender inequality in the program countries shown in the first column of Table1 highlights the level of gender disproportion. It is thus 
vital that this program purposefully designed gender-centered activities and actions, which will contribute to bridging the gender gap in the program 
intervention areas.
Page 197

=== PAGE 202 ===
15 
 
IV. IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF GENDER AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATORS AT COUNTRY-LEVEL  
4.1 Benin 
Demographics and human development 
With an area of 114,736km² and an estimated population in 2020 of 12,220,528 people of whom 50.75%4 
are females, Benin is a west African country bordered by Togo (West), Burkina Faso and Niger (North) 
Nigeria (East) and the Atlantic Ocean (South). The country’s population age structure is very young: 
77.84% of the population is under 35 years of age and 46% under 15 years of age5. The population growth 
rate is high (3.5%) and the pace of urbanization rapid (11.9% per year). The majority of Benin’s population 
is rural (55.4%)6 and cotton is the main export product contributing 13% to GDP. 
Benin has adopted a national gender policy and action plan to combat gender-based violence and 
also several laws protecting and promoting the rights of women and girls, but women’s status has barely 
improved, according to national statistics. In 2019, the Africa Gender Equality Index shows a generally 
high level of gender inequality with a score of 0.433 indicating a gender gap of almost 57%. Despite this 
overall score, scores in the social and economic areas are close to parity (0.776 and 0.728 respectively) 
but low in the areas of representation and empowerment. (0.145)7. Benin’s HDI value for 2019 is 0.545, 
which puts the country in the low human development category, positioning it at 158 out of 189 countries 
and territories and a Gender Inequality Index (GII) value of 0.612, ranking it 148 out of 162 countries in the 
2019 index 
Education 
Education is highly important in Benin and central government is redoubling its efforts to make education 
for all a reality in this sector in Benin8. It was observed that, in Benin, 59.4% of women have no level of 
education, 24.9% of women have had primary education, 14.2% secondary education and only 1.5% 
have completed higher education. Considerable efforts have been made nationally to ensure enrolment 
for all in primary education and in the first cycle of secondary education where the 1st cycle gender 
parity index score was 0.84 in 20199. In higher education, the parity index score for students was 0.39 in 
2019. The gender inequalities observed in secondary, technical, vocational and higher education have 
impacted negatively on women’s participation in employment and, as a result, on their incomes. 
Employment 
 
4 The World Population Prospects 2020 
5 INSD 2016 Key Socio-Demographic and Economic Indicators (RGPH-4, 2013) 
6 ibid 
7 African Development Bank (2020). Gender Fact Sheet for Benin 
8 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
9 INSD Benin, ERI-ESI 2018 
Page 198

=== PAGE 203 ===
16 
 
Women in Benin are more vulnerable (91.1%) in the employment area than men (71.9%)10. The employee 
rate in the non-agricultural sector is 34.3% for men compared to only 9.7% for women. In 2019, 69.3% of 
the female population was participating in the labour market compared to 73.3% of the male 
population11. Despite this fairly high female labour force participation rate, this rate has a strong gender 
bias and women’s work usually involves poorly paid jobs. 
Health 
It was noted from the recent Demographic and health survey (2017-2018) in Benin that antenatal health 
care coverage for women was higher in urban than in rural areas (90% compared to 79 %). The 
contraceptive prevalence rate was 11% for women with no level of education, 15% for those at primary 
education level and 24% for those at the higher education level. The use of contraceptive methods is 
higher in urban (34.2%) than in rural (30.9%) areas. The fertility rate was less than 5 children per woman 
over the 2007 – 2017 period. Access to health establishments is more difficult in rural areas than in urban 
areas because of distances, inaccessibility and lack of appropriate facilities12. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
The production and reproductive roles assigned to women expose them to the negative impacts of 
climate change. It is important to factor into the climate change impact adaptation and mitigation 
measures, the different needs of women and men to provide an appropriate and sustainable response 
to the impacts of climate change. In the energy sector, this fact generated an unequal access to energy 
source. In terms of access to employment and entrepreneurship in this sector, men dominate, which 
sustains gender inequalities despite the existence of a legal and institutional framework for gender 
mainstreaming.  
Women are the most concerned regarding energy for cooking, unlike men who are more interested in 
other uses (lighting, comfort, ICT, productive energy, etc.). Energy used for cooking and preserving food 
in Benin is dominated by biomass, which has negative effects on people’s health – exposure to respiratory 
diseases (as a result of air pollution in houses due to cooking with traditional biomass). According to ERI-
ESI 2018, 63.4% of households use charcoal compared to 22% for gas and 12.2% for wood. There are 
different combinations of energy types for cooking: wood and charcoal (23.5%) and charcoal-gas 
(23.5%). The butane gas access rate is very low (6.9 kg/yr./household) and the proportion of households 
using improved stoves is also very low (17.64%). 
Energy demand is growing rapidly, with a national electrification rate that is still low, but has increased 
from 13.10% in 1996 to 33.18% in 2015 with an average annual increase of 7.7%. In urban areas, the rate 
rose from 28.78% in 1996 to 61.19% in 2015, while in rural areas it rose from 0,64 % à 8,15 %. The demand for 
electrical energy has increased by 10.4% annually, from 105 MW in 2006 to 192 MW in 2014. In terms of 
coverage, few localities in the country are electrified. The national development plan (NDP 2018-2025) 
indicates that in 2015, 1,654 localities were electrified out of the 3755 localities in Benin, a coverage rate 
of 45%.  
However, Benin has a relatively large hydroelectric potential capacity of at least 400 MW, for the main 
sites identified and evaluated in the NDP (2018-2025) namely Adjarala 147 MW on the Mono River, Kétou 
 
10 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
11 EMICoV (2015) Benin Integrated Modular Survey on Household Living Conditions 
12Demographic and Health Survey V (2017-2018)  
Page 199

=== PAGE 204 ===
17 
 
Dogo 108 MW, Vossa 79.2 MW, Bethel 42.4 MW, Bétérou 30 MW and Olougbé 29.4 MW on the Ouémé 
River. In the context of climate change, where previsions indicate a probable increase or decrease in 
renewable water resources, the hydroelectric production could be affected. 
Since 2015, successive governments in Benin have, in general, implemented a policy of seasonal repairs 
to rural feeder roads, first for the transportation of cash crops (male-dominated) and second, for other 
agricultural products13. In 2016, 45% of the national road network was considered to be in poor condition 
whereas the road is the most frequently used means of transport (93% of people and 73% of goods)14. The 
current government has crafted an ambitious program for strengthening the country’s transport 
infrastructure to open up access to national and regional markets. Its objectives include the opening up 
of production basins, reduction of transport costs to increase economic growth and reduce poverty15. 
Concerning ICT, data showed that 51.1% of Benin’s women have a mobile telephone compared to 79.5% 
of men but only 26.9% of them use it for financial transactions16. In the country’s 2018-2025 National 
Development Plan, there is an ‘entrepreneurship promotion program for women involved in growth 
sectors and for young men and women in certain sectors of the digital economy and green economy.’ 
However, it does not contain any specific measures to encourage women, in particular, those living in 
semi-urban and rural areas, to invest in this sector. The sector’s inclusive development should entail 
specific measures to take this aspect into account. 
Sociocultural 
Patriarchy is the most widespread form of social organisation in almost all of Benin’s ethnic groups. The 
continuation of cultural practices that are degrading  to women appears to be linked to the banalisation 
of gender-based violence by this system. The need for women to obtain authorisation from men (father 
and/or spouse) for important decisions in their lives prevent their full empowerment. Despite the Code of 
Persons and Family which states that monogamous marriage is the only type of marriage recognised, 
polygamy remains very widespread. According to Benin-V Demographic and Health Survey, about two 
out of five women aged between 15 and 49 years old and in a relationship (38%) said they were living in 
a polygamous union and about one out of five men (22%) said they were polygamous. 
Policy and Legal framework 
Various legal and regulatory texts have been promulgated to promote and protect women’s rights and 
gender equality among whom: 
- 
The United Nations Charter adopted in 1945 enshrined the principle of gender equality 
- 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights which enshrines the legal recognition of rights 10 
December 1948  
- 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Optional 
Protocol, Articles 2 and 16)- 3 September 1981  
- 
The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment- 
26 June 1987 
- 
The Convention on the Rights of the Child -2 September 1990 
 
13 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
14 Republic of Benin, Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport, Statistical Yearbook 2013- 2016 
15 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
16 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
Page 200

=== PAGE 205 ===
18 
 
- 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
- 
The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women 
Benin has also ratified almost all the international instruments promoting women and gender. Despite a 
legal framework that is increasingly favourable to gender equality in Benin, effective ownership and 
application of these texts by the different actors remain a challenge because of habits and resistance 
from socio-cultural models. 
On the policy front, several guidance documents have been prepared for women’s promotion and 
gender, including the National Gender Promotion Policy, the National Policy for the Promotion of Women 
in Agriculture and the National Action Plan to combat Gender-Based violence. 
Gender based violence 
Statistics show that 76% of violence against women aged between 15 and 49 years of age is physical, 
44% sexual, 86% verbal or psychological and 7.3% concerns genital mutilation17. Benin has established a 
legal and institutional framework to end violence against women throughout the country. 84 social 
advancement center  at 3 Integrated Center for GBV Survivors are available to support and care for 
GBV victims18.  In order to achieve an effective change in mentalities and behavior, the law must be 
further strengthened in this area and efforts must be made to raise awareness among the population.  
Access to Finances 
The financial inclusion index has generally improved in the West African Economic and Monetary Union 
(UEMOA), standing at 0.520 in 2020 against 0.501 in 2019, on a scale of 0 to 1, according to the annual 
report devoted to the subject by the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). This index stood at 
0.647 in 2020 in Benin, against only 0.170 in 2010 and puts Benin ahead of all other countries in the sub-
region. Account ownership in Benin increased overall, from 38 percent in 2017 to 49 percent in 2021. 
According the Global Findex report financial inclusion (2021), the growth in account ownership since 
2011 has not benefited all groups equally. There has been some progress, though women, the poor, and 
the less educated, remain less likely than men, the rich, and the educated to have an account. This 
gender gap in Sub-Saharan African country like Benin is evaluated to an average of 12 or 13 percent. 
The spread of mobile money accounts has created new opportunities to better serve women, poor 
people, and other groups who traditionally have been excluded from the formal financial system. 
Though there are some early signs that mobile money accounts may be helping to close the gender 
gap, in country like Benin there is a statistically significant gender gap for account ownership overall, 
including both financial institution and mobile money accounts.19 
Poverty 
Monetary poverty has slightly declined from 40.1% in 2015 to 38.5% in 2019 (INSD, Note on Poverty 2019). 
In 2018, it was noted that men’s average monthly income was one and a half times higher (CFAF 31,495) 
than women’s (CFAF 18,203) and that they spent more time than women on remunerated activities 
resulting in higher hourly incomes20. Monetary poverty is highest in rural areas (44.2%). It was also noted 
 
17 Demographic and Health Survey V (2017-2018) 
18 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
19 World Bank, the Global 2021 Findex Database 
20 INSD, Synthesis report on the Integrated Regional Survey on Employment and the Informal Sector (ERI-ESI), 
2018, p. 44 
Page 201

=== PAGE 206 ===
19 
 
that there had been an improvement in the living conditions of poor households, reflected in a 13-point 
drop in monetary poverty between 2015 (29.41%) and 2019 (26.1). Although the improvement in 
monetary poverty is more pronounced in urban areas, rural households also experienced an 
improvement in their living conditions in 2019. The place of residence, gender, level of education of the 
household head are the determining factors on  the level of household poverty21. Therefore, poverty 
affects rural households (44.2%) more than urban households (31,4%) with large country-wide disparities. 
In 2015, monetary poverty affected almost as many male-headed households (40%) as female headed 
households (39.7%). On the other hand, the incidence of non-monetary poverty is higher in female-
headed households (36.3%) than in those headed by men (28%). The incidence of monetary poverty in 
2015 in households where the head had no education was 17 points higher than in those where the 
household head had completed secondary education and 30 points higher than those whose heads 
had completed higher education. The trend is even more pronounced in terms of non-monetary poverty 
where the differences are between 22 and 27 points higher between household heads with no 
education and those with secondary or higher levels of education. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
 Benin has a very low level of women’s participation in political affairs.  From 1991 to date, women’s 
presence in elective bodies (legislative and municipal) has never exceeded 10% (5th legislature 2007). 
Following the most recent legislative elections (April 2019) only 6% of the National Assembly members 
were women. At the latest municipal elections in May 2020, despite the signing of an Equality Charter 
on Politics by all the political parties only 4.3% of women were elected as councilors and there were only 
4 women mayors out of 77 elected mayors22. As regards executive power, women’s participation in 
government was low (varying from 9% to 24%) between 1996 and 2019, according to data from the 
Government’s General Secretariat. The latest government, formed in April 2021, has 5 women out of 23 
ministers, i.e. 18%. However, it was observed that, since 2011, women have occupied an increasing 
number of key positions in successive governments, namely: Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministries 
of the Civil Service and Labour, Trade and Industry, and the digital economy. This is a major development 
since, historically, they were mainly responsible for the social sectors such as education, social affairs and 
health. 
According to the 2021 annual report on gender statistics in public administration in Benin published by the Ministry 
of the Civil Service and Administrative Reform, the proportion of women in positions of responsibility in public 
administration is still low. Out of a total of 1,658 positions of responsibility in the administration, barely 154 are held 
by women, a percentage of 9.3%23. The majority of these women occupy positions related to Statutory Jobs, 130 
(84%). However, 98% of the women who hold positions of responsibility have a university degree of at least BAC+3. 
Also, in the energy sector, only 10% of positions of responsibility are held by women. 
 
 
 
 
 
21 INSD, 2020. Note on Poverty in Benin, page 8 
22 African Development Bank (2021), Gender country profile 
23 UNDP. Republic of Benin: progress to be made for the equitable representation of women in decision-making 
positions in Benin. Online Available: https://www.undp.org/fr/benin/actualites/des-progres-faire-pour-la-
representation-equitable-des-femmes-aux-postes-de-prise-de-decision-au-benin  
Page 202

=== PAGE 207 ===
20 
 
4.2 Cameroon 
Demographics and human development 
According to world development indicator’s database, Cameroon’s population is estimated above 
26 million of inhabitant which 49.98% percent is women. This current population is expected to increase 
to 50 million by 2050 and then 89.62 million by 209924.Despite negative net migration, Cameroon’s 
population growth rate is 2.59%, adding over 600,000 people to the population every year. Cameroon 
has a young population with a median age of 18.7 years and 41.25% of the population being between 
zero to 14 years old. Cameroon’s Human Development Index value for 2019 is 0.563— which put the 
country in the medium human development category—positioning it at 153 out of 189 countries and 
territories. Between 1990 and 2019, Cameroon’s life expectancy at birth increased by 5.9 years, mean 
years of schooling increased by 2.8 years and expected years of schooling increased by 4.1 years. 
In Cameroon, 29.3 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 32.7 percent of adult 
women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 41.3 percent of their 
male counterparts. For every 100,000 live births, 529.0 women die from pregnancy related causes; and 
the adolescent birth rate is 105.8 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19.  
Education 
The disparity between women and men in education has declined in general, but the gender gap is 
wider in the higher levels of education. According to the World Bank data, the primary net enrolment 
was 97% for boys and 88.7% for girls (2017); primary completion rate was 68.5% for boys and 62.3% for 
girls (2019). There is a gender gap in literacy rate (adult men 82.6%, adult women 71.5%: data in 2018). 
The National Gender Policy Document explains the reasons for the gender gaps: some families do not 
value girls’ education as women’s roles and jobs would not create much income; poor families might 
prioritize boys’ education to girls’(the primary education is free of charge since 1999, but the cost of  
clothes and learning materials still incur); parents allocate domestic and agricultural work to girls; some 
girls do not go to school due to early marriage and pregnancy; some families are reluctant to send 
girls to school fearing violence at school or on the way between home and school; and the toilets for 
girls are not appropriate at school. 
The enrolment rate increased after making the primary education free of charge. However, according 
to the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy, quality of education is still low as the number of 
teachers is insufficient compared to the number of pupils and adequate learning materials are not 
available25. The government took several measures to improve the situation such as construction of 
classrooms to reduce the number of pupils per class, increase of salary of teachers to motivate them, 
increase the number of new teachers, and distribution of basic teaching materials to schools. 
The National Gender Policy Document explains that in the vocational training schools, men 
accounted for 55% and women were 45%, and the drop-out rate was 11% for men and 14% for women 
(in 2009). Women are concentrated in the traditional female skills such as homemaking, dressmaking 
and secretary. 
 
24 2015 COUNTRY REPORT OF GENDER PROFILE, JICA, HTTPS://OPENJICAREPORT.JICA.GO.JP/PDF/1000026850.PDF  
25 IBID 
Page 203

=== PAGE 208 ===
21 
 
Employment 
According to the Human development report 2020, female participation in the labour market is 71.1 
percent compared to 81.1 for men in Cameroon. According to the National Gender Policy Document, 
people in formal employment are 53% of the population of Cameroon, and it is 61% for men and 45% 
for women. The public institutions aim to make women’s share at least 30%. The higher are the positions, 
the smaller is the women’s share. Women account for 44% of the lowest job rank (category D: non-
skilled or assistant jobs) in the public institutions, but only 17% in the highest rank (category A2: 
directors). In the private sector, 1.6% of male workers and 0.7% of female workers are in managerial 
positions. It is estimated that women account for 55% of workers in the informal sector. According to 
the World Bank data, Cameroon’s estimated annual Gross National Income per capita was 3,341 
dollars for men and 2,266 dollars for women (about 68% of men) in 2014. Regarding child labour, 8.6% 
of children (8.0% of boys and 9.1% of girls) between six to 14 years old are working. The percentage of 
children in labour is 12.6% in the rural areas and 2.4% in the cities. 
Health 
The latest World Bank data shows that, maternal mortality ratio slightly declined from 564 in 2014 to 529 
in 2017. The proportion of pregnant women receiving prenatal care increased from 82.8% in 2014 to 
87% in 2018, and delivery attended by skilled health workers increased from 63% to 64% during the 
same period. The reasons for the high maternal mortality ratio include late decisions of the patients to 
seek medical care; late arrival of the patients to the health facilities; the low quality of first diagnosis at 
the health facilities; and physical damage to young pregnant women and young mothers (National 
Gender Policy Document). The national average of contraceptive prevalence rate in 2018 was 19.3%. 
It is reported that the higher are the women’s educational attainment or income level, the higher is 
the contraceptive prevalence rate, and that women with lower educational attainment or income 
level tend to be reluctant to negotiate with the husband or partner for the use of contraceptives.  
Child health improved during the period between 2012 and 2020 as the infant mortality rate reduced 
from 64 to 48.3, under-five mortality rate reduced from 101.3 to 72.2.  
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
According to the National gender policy document 2011-2020, there is a great need of resilient 
infrastructure in Cameroon. The rural areas generally lack good roads or have none at all. Motorcars 
and cycles are obsolete, inadequate or even nonexistent in some areas with high transportation costs. 
The flow of agricultural produce from rural to urban areas is thus hampered and women are unable 
to market their produce. They are compelled to carry their crops over long distances or cram them 
onto vehicles in poor conditions endangering their lives. In so doing, they record heavy post-harvest 
losses and the country's food security is undermined. 
World bank data (2019) showed that 63.4% of the population have access to electricity Despite the 
efforts made, there is disparity between residential areas: in rural areas, only 24% of households have 
electricity, against 93% in urban areas. 
In the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector, It can be noted that in urban areas, 
women have taken ownership of ICTs through such social programs as Operation 100 000 women by 
Page 204

=== PAGE 209 ===
22 
 
2012 (National Gender Policy Document 2011-2020). The establishment of multipurpose community e-
centers and media centers across the country helps to reduce the digital divide. 
Sociocultural 
According to the “National Gender Policy Document 2011-2020” by the Ministry of Women's 
Empowerment and Family (Ministère de la Promotion de la Femme et de la Famille: MINPROFF), while 
gender situations in Cameroon vary by regions, ethnic groups or religions, there is a persistent value of 
gender division of labour in which men take the productive and public roles and women take 
reproductive and domestic roles. Traditionally, women’s life is mainly in the domestic sphere and they 
are not present much in the public sphere. According to the data in 2018, women headed 26% of the 
households in the country. Women marry early: about 50% of women get married for the first time by 
the age of 17 or 18. Bearing children is considered as the most important role of women, and it leads 
to the high fertility rate: it was 4.5 in 2019 (World Bank data).  
The National Gender Policy Document explains that the perceptions about the roles, attitudes and 
behaviors of men and women in Cameroon have evolved with the change of the times. At the same 
time, it point out differences between women in the cities and those in the rural areas, and between 
those with high educational attainment and only with basic education. Women in the rural areas and 
those with only basic education tend to keep traditional values. Women and men are on more equal 
terms in the cities than in rural areas, but the perception of gender division of labour, in which a man 
is the main breadwinner and the woman takes domestic responsibilities, exists like in the rural areas. 
Women’s labour force participation rate is high and they contribute to household income. However, 
women’s work tends to be undervalued as it is perceived as supplementing the income of the 
husband, regardless of the actual content of the task or income 
Policy and Legal framework 
The National Population Policy Declaration in 2002 aims at universal primary education, improvement 
of literacy of men and women, and reduction of gender disparities in all areas in the economic and 
social development. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) in 2003 is engaged in the promotion 
of gender equality. The DSCE (employment strategy document) in 2009 also commits to the promotion 
of gender equality in all areas. The National Gender Policy Document 2011-2020 was developed 
based on the country’s long-term development plan called “Cameroon’s long-term vision by 2035”. 
The Vision declares that its principles are unity in the diversity, as well as equal rights and equal 
participation of women and men in development. 
There is an Inter-ministerial Committee of gender at the central level of the country, which is headed 
by the Prime Minister. The Committee is responsible for overall coordination and supervision of 
implementation of the National Gender Policy. It holds an annual meeting. Under this Committee, 
there is a Technical Committee which is headed by MINPROFF. It is responsible for the implementation 
of the National Gender Policy. In collaboration with the gender focal points of the ministries, civil 
organizations and development organizations, the Technical Committee has discussions with the 
stakeholders in the quarterly meetings, assists the ministries to secure budget, and carry out monitoring 
and evaluation of the implementation of the National Gender Policy. The gender focal points are 
responsible for gender mainstreaming of each ministry’s policies and project. Cameroon adopted 
several international legal instruments in order to enable women to fully enjoy their rights. Among the 
relevant one’s we have: 
• The Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict adopted 
Page 205

=== PAGE 210 ===
23 
 
in December 1974, which outlaws all forms of repression and cruel and inhuman treatment of women 
and children, including imprisonment, torture, shootings, mass arrests, collective punishments; 
•  The Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women of 20 December 1993, which commits 
countries or State Parties to take all suitable measures to eliminate violence against women; 
•  ILO Convention No. 3 adopted in 1919 and ratified by Cameroon on 25 May 1970 on maternity 
protection; - ILO Convention No. 89 on Night Work of Women, revised on 9 June 1948;  
•  The Convention on the Political Rights of Women adopted by the UN General Assembly on 7 July 1954, 
which guarantees women the right to vote and to be eligible in all elections without discrimination; 
• The 1957 Convention on Nationality of Married Women, which grants the latter the power to take her 
husband's nationality without losing her own;  
•  The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), adopted on 
18 December 1979 and its Additional Protocol of 6 October 1999. The Convention obliges States to 
promote women in all domains: political, legal, economic, social and cultural development;  
• Resolution 1325 of the UN Security Council which provides an opportunity for women to participate in 
the preservation of peace and conflict resolution. This Resolution was supplemented by Resolution 1820 
of 19 June 2008 which recognizes rape as a crime against humanity, whose perpetrators are 
prosecuted at the International Criminal Court. 
Gender based violence 
Since the adoption in 2011 of the national gender policy (2011-2020), the Cameroon’s government 
has focused on promoting a fair and equal society between men and women with a view of ensuring 
sustainable development. Moreover, the National Strategy to Combat Gender-Based Violence 
(2017-2020) aims at contributing to the reduction by half, the prevalence of various forms of gender- 
based violence by 2020. Overall, gender-based violence, whether physical, sexual or emotional, is 
still frequently observed in Cameroon, despite the drop observed over the period 2004-201826. They 
affect women much more than men, and are more witnessed in the Centre region (excluding 
Yaounde). Specifically, physical violence against pregnant women remains a concern, especially in 
urban areas and in the Centre (without Yaounde), East and South regions27. According to the 2018 
Cameroon’s Demographic and Health Survey, 13% of women were victims of sexual violence at any 
moment of their life, and 5% in the past 12 months before the survey and the current or former 
spouse/partner is the main perpetrators of this violence among both women and men. The 
percentage of girls who get married early stood at 12% in 2018. There still efforts to be made to 
promote gender norms and educate young people, women and men on GBV and Harmful Cultural 
Practices (HCPs), notably through community-based programs aimed at preventing and fighting 
against these practices. 
Access to Finances 
According to data collected by world bank Doing Business report 201828, starting a business for men 
in Cameroon requires 5 procedures, takes 15 days, and costs 32 percent of income per capita. For 
 
26 Gender based violence in Cameroon, magnitude and challenges, August 2020, https://ins-
cameroun.cm/statistique/english-gender-based-violence-in-cameroon-magnitude-and-
challenges/ 
27 Ibid 
28  http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/cameroon 
Page 206

=== PAGE 211 ===
24 
 
women, it requires 6 procedures, takes 16 days, and costs 32.4 percent of income per capita. 
Registering property in the country requires 5 procedures, takes 86 days and costs 18.8 percent of the 
property value. For women, there is an extra requirement to provide a marriage certificate to obtain 
a national identification card, according to the decree N° 2007/254 of September 4, 2007. This 
increases the bureaucracy that married women face in fulfilling financial institution Know Your 
Customer (KYC) requirements in comparison to men and single women. The World Bank Global 
Financial Inclusion Database (2017)29 and FinMark Trust’s Finscope Survey from 201730 indicate that 
20.7% of the adult population have an account at a formal and financial institution. These data have 
also shown that 37% of the female population are excluded from financial services compared to 34% 
for male. 
Poverty 
The country’s general poverty rate is estimated at 39%. Poverty has a strong regional dimension 
concentrated in the Far North, North, Adamaoua and East regions. Cameroon’s northern regions are 
situated in the Sahelian band, where communities are the most deprived as a result of years of 
successive natural disasters and below average agricultural harvests with little means to resist the 
continuous cycle of shocks and stresses. Cameroon has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.560, 
ranking it 141 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. Indeed, women spend on average 8.2 hours 
more per week than men on unpaid domestic work. As these tasks require a significant investment of 
time each day, they are particularly affected by the lack of access to income-generating activities. 
This unpaid workload for women, combined with the fact that they have extremely limited access to 
and control over household resources, partly explains why women are more affected by poverty. As 
a result, nearly 83.2% of these women cannot access credit for any purpose.  
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
It is generally observed that when women contribute to household income that they often participate 
in decision-making as regards to its management. The empowerment and participation in decision 
making of women in union remained considerable in recent decades, and there is reportedly more 
consensus between spouses on the management of household resources and on decisions regarding 
women's health care31. According to the 2018 DHS result’s, women in Cameroon are less autonomous 
as regards to the use of the money they earn (54% in 2018 compared to 2011 where it stood at 68%). 
The use of this money is increasingly consensual between spouses. The percentage of those who 
jointly decide with their husband/partner on how to use the money they earn increased by 13 points 
in 2018 compared to 2011 (25%). Moreover, the proportion of 15-49 year olds who own and use a 
bank account increases with the level of education. This proportion rises from 1 percent among 
women with no education to 43 percent among those with higher education. For men, the proportion 
increases from 2% to 54%32. 
 
29 2018 World Bank, the Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion 
30 http://finmark.org.za/finscope-consumer-survey-cameroon-2017-pocket-guide/ 
31 Ibid 
32
Republic 
of 
Cameroon, 
(2018). 
Demographic 
and 
Health 
Survey. 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR360/FR360.pdf  
Page 207

=== PAGE 212 ===
25 
 
In fact, the installation or extension of the electrical network in the country will allow access to rural 
areas favorable to the development of basic infrastructure including education and health. This will 
increase access to financial services for the entire population, especially those living in rural areas. 
At the local and community level, traditional gender ideologies assume that if women are 
disempowered (through lack of capacity and capability), they will not challenge male dominance. As 
at the administrative and political levels, women's participation in household decision-making is very low. 
Also, women living in urban areas are more likely to participate in household decision making than 
women in rural areas because of the mobilization of certain actors in the fight against gender inequality. 
Nevertheless, several key and strategic positions are held by women in the telecommunications sector. 
These are the posts of: Minister of Posts and Telecommunications of Cameroon; Managing Director of 
CAMTEL (Cameroonian Telecommunications Company) and Orange's Zone Director and Spokesperson 
for the Middle East and Africa zone. 
 
 
 
Page 208

=== PAGE 213 ===
26 
 
4.3 Chad 
Demographics and human development 
According to the World Development indicators data, in 2020 Chad’s population was estimated at 
16.42 million inhabitants, of which 50.1 percent were women; 76.5 percent live in rural areas, and 46.5 
percent are youth under 15 years of age. However, there are still significant gender disparities: it ranked 
160th out of 162 on the Gender Inequality Index in 2019. Chad is also affected by internal and external 
population displacements driven primarily by insecurity in the region. The country hosts 450,000 
refugees, of whom 55.5 percent are female, and 24.3 percent are of school-age (WFP, Chad country 
strategic plan 2019-2023). 
Education 
According to data from the 2019-2020 School Statistical Yearbook of the Ministry of National Education 
and Civic Promotion (MENPC), many provinces of the Sahel Belt have the lowest girls' education rates 
in Chad. These include Borkou (18.8 per cent), Ennedi Ouest (24.6 per cent), Ennedi Est (46.6 per cent), 
Bahr-El-Ghazal (30.2 per cent), Hadjer-Lamis (32.7 per cent), Batha (34 per cent) and Wadi-Fira (40 per 
cent). 
The highest enrollment rates for girls are recorded in the provinces of the city of N'Djamena (131.6 per 
cent), Logone Occidental (126.1 per cent), Mandoul (118.4 per cent), Mayo-Kebbi Ouest (114.7 per 
cent), Moyen-Chari (112.2 per cent), Logone Oriental (104.8 per cent), Tandjilé (99.1 per cent) and 
Tibesti (75.8 per cent). According to the School Statistical Yearbook, the rate above 100 per cent 
means that, in theory, the system has the capacity to accommodate, under current conditions, all six-
year-old students in the primary 1st level. 
Thus, according to the 2019-2020 Statistical Yearbook, out of 100 girls enrolled in primary school, barely 
37 will finish the cycle. In 15 provinces, the primary school completion rate for girls varies between eight 
and 24 per cent, which is a particularly worrying situation. Only the provinces of the city of N'Djamena 
(92.1 per cent), Mayo-Kebbi Ouest (77.3 per cent) and Logone Occidental (51.3 per cent) stand out. 
Employment 
According to the World Bank, Female participation in Chad labour market is 63.9 percent compared 
to 77.5 for men. Women have restricted access to productive assets, credit, land ownership, and the 
opportunity to rent land. Land inheritance customs often discriminate against women, and men 
decide to use harvested crops and income. Only 22.3 percent of women take part in decision-making 
about income-generating activities, 22.6 percent have access to credit, and 26 percent have a bank 
account. Unemployment is higher among women – 24.7 percent compared to 18.7 percent for men– 
and among people with a university diploma or higher qualification. The female labour force 
participation rate is 65 percent, remaining largely stable even during the economic crisis, while the 
male rate steadily decreased from 80.5 percent in 2002 to 77.4 percent in 2016.  
Health 
Page 209

=== PAGE 214 ===
27 
 
According to the results of the Human Development report the maternal mortality is estimated at 1140 maternal 
deaths per 100,000 live births in 2019 and only 24% of births were attended by health personnel whose 58.6% in 
urban areas and 15.9% in rural areas. Life expectancy at birth in Chad in 2019 was 55.7 years for women and 52.8 
years for men and. Women are found to be at risk lower mortality than men with a difference of 1.8 years in favor 
of women (INSEED, 2014b:77).The prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS in the general population aged 15-49 rose from 
3.3% in 2005 (national seroprevalence survey of 2005) to 3.4% in 2010 (survey of measurement of seroprevalence 
in the female population attending sentinel sites UNFPA) and 1.1% in 2020 (World development Indicators,2020). 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications  
The Food Security and Structural Vulnerability Survey Report in Chad (EVST 2009) report demonstrated that wood 
is still the primary fuel source for cooking for over 90 percent of households. This proportion is slightly higher in  rural 
areas (93 percent) than 75 percent for urban areas. In rural areas, the burden of ensuring the household supply 
of wood for energy falls on the shoulders of women and girls. Natural resource degradation increases the distance 
women have to walk to find wood and, thus, their time on this chore. In addition, using wood for cooking exposes 
women to risks of injury and respiratory and other health problems (République de Tchad, Document de Politique 
Nationale Genre de Tchad). 
 Chad has a road network of approximately 40,000 km. Due to its size, the density road traffic is low and highly 
variable depending on the region. It varies from 6.4 km per thousand km squares in the Saharan zone to more 
than 40 km in the Sudanian zone. During the season rainy weather, part of the road network becomes impassable, 
which increases the cost of transport and further isolates certain regions.  
In Chad, only 1.3% of Chadian women are in science, innovation and technology, according to a survey by 
Internet Society Chad (2017) 
Sociocultural 
The division of household responsibility is still highly gender-biased: women are expected to take care of children 
and domestic chores (including those needed to ensure their family's water supply). Furthermore, in terms of 
access to land and property, customary practices are still rife and male-oriented. These realities mean that 
women have fewer opportunities to participate in income-generating activities. For instance, while they 
participate in agricultural activities and often farm plots (owned by their families), their yield is usually subsistence 
rather than commercial. This situation is evident in rural areas where women constitute up to 40 percent of the 
country's population. This leaves a large portion of the population underserved and underrepresented.( 
 Policy and Legal framework 
The Ministry of Social Affairs, National Solidarity, and Family oversee the implementation of gender policies at the 
national level. The main policies in this area are:  
• Constitution of 1996, revised in 2005: recognises gender equality  
• 1996 Labour Code  
• National Population Policy and the 1995 Policy for the Integration of Women in Development  
• Law n° 38/PR/98 recognises that men and women should be granted equal employment opportunities.  
• Law N°16/PR/2006 promotes the education of girls  
• National Gender Policy (PNG) 2007  
 
Page 210

=== PAGE 215 ===
28 
 
The national development plan for 2017–2021 emphasises social protection, gender-based violence prevention, 
economic empowerment and livelihood, capacity strengthening, and formulating a national gender strategy 
(WFP, Chad country strategic plan).  
The 2007 National Gender Policy outlines the Government's strategy to ensure that gender inequality and violence 
will be eradicated by 2030. Women are included in decision-making processes and natural resource 
management. The strategic orientations of this policy are:  
• systematically integrate the gender dimension at all levels: planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring, 
and evaluation of development strategies, policies, and programs;  
• develop a communication strategy for changing mentalities and behaviours;  
• promote equal and equitable access to essential social services and decision-making spheres.  
 
Gender based violence 
Gender-based violence and sexual violence are pervasive and are aggravated by conflict and displacement. 
According to the UN Women Global database on violence against women the lifetime physical and/or sexual 
intimate partner violence is estimated at  29% (DHS-MICS 2014-2015), the child marriage proportion stood at 67% 
and the female genital mutilation is estimated  at 38%. In Chad, a large number of women and men support the 
practice of female genital mutilation33. Three out of ten women aged 15 to 49 are still convinced that female 
genital mutilation is a requirement of their religion. This proportion decreases with the level of education of the 
woman, i.e. 36% for women with no education compared to 18% for women with a higher level of education. 
At the same time, almost 3 out of 10 women (29%) believe that the practice of female genital mutilation should 
be maintained. This proportion is almost ten times higher among women with no education (39%) than among 
women who have reached the highest level of education (4%). 
Access to Finances 
Chad has implemented three national strategies to promote access and usage of formal finance by the poor 
and women specifically in remote areas. These are the SNMF (Stratégie Nationale de la Microfinance) in 2009, 
the PAFIT (Program d’Appui à la Finance Inclusive au Tchad) for the period 2010-2014, and the PADLFIT (Program 
National d’Appui au Développement Local et à la Finance Inclusive au Tchad) for the period 2017-2021. 
However, the financial system in Chad remains one of the least inclusive in the region. The Global Findex report 
indicates that only 22% of Chadians had access to formal financial services in 2017 and 15% of women aged of 
15 and over have a financial account. According to the world Bank, only 11 percent and 5 percent of women 
over 15, have an account mobile banking and a bank account, compared to 20 percent and 13 percent of 
men, respectively in 202134. 
Poverty 
In Chad women do not have access to the same work opportunities as men, or when they do, are more likely 
to work part-time. As a result, women are less productive and earn less than men. All this leads to substantial 
gender gaps in earnings and productivity, which decreases women’s bargaining power and voice and their 
ability to negotiate their productive work. Twenty-three percent of Chad’s households are headed by women 
 
33World Bank (2020), Chad: The Economic Benefits of a Post COVID 19 Gender Equitable Society  
34World Bank, (2021) Investing in rural income growth, human capital, and resilience to support sustainable poverty reduction. 
Online 
available: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/623761633424786706/pdf/Chad-Poverty-Assessment-
Investing-in-Rural-Income-Growth-Human-Capital-and-Resilience-to-Support-Sustainable-Poverty-Reduction.pdf  
  
Page 211

=== PAGE 216 ===
29 
 
and 54% of these live on less than US $1 a day. Most women lack access to fertile land and live off minor food-
processing activities, the sale of firewood, and informal sector jobs. Land and housing in urban areas require rent 
payments, which women usually cannot afford. (Landlinks, USAID) 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Chad, the lack of a legal framework establishing parity or quotas makes it difficult for women to gain access 
to political office. Most political parties agree on the need to involve women in politics, but it is rare to find 
women in decision-making positions such as the President or Secretary General of a party. With some exceptions, 
women are generally present to garner support for political parties during political rallies. In some cases, they are 
in charge of social affairs or the mobilization of members. It should be noted that women are more active in civil 
society organizations. The Association of Women Lawyers of Chad in cooperation with the Female caucus of the 
National Assembly of Chad, have undertaken initiatives to improve the representation of women in politics.35 
According to the National gender policy (2011), in Chadian communities, the perception of male and female 
roles is basis of the unequal participation in decision making. Men take on roles of decision-makers in public 
affairs, as for women, they are rather involved in the establishment and strengthening of social relations 
(baptisms, weddings, funerals, visits to parents and patients). 
 
 
 
 
 
35 https://tsep.africa.ufl.edu/gender-quotas-and-representation/chad/  
Page 212

=== PAGE 217 ===
30 
 
4.4 Côte d’Ivoire 
Demographics and human development 
Côte d'Ivoire has an estimated population of 25.8 million in 2019,2 51.7% being male and 48.3% female, and 
therefore a sex ratio of 107 men per 100 women. 75.5% of the population live in forest areas and 49.7% in rural 
areas. In terms of electricity, 4,500 localities were electrified in 2017 compared to 2,800 in 2011, representing a 
growth rate of 57%. Concerning access to water, 80.7% of households are connected to drinking water.3 The 
population is also relatively young, with 36.2% between 15 and 34. In 2016, the fertility rate remained high with an 
average of 4.6 children per woman, with differences between rural (6.0 children) and urban (3.4 children) areas. 
Côte d'Ivoire remains classified as a low human development country with a ranking of 162th out of 189 countries 
in the world; poverty is declining sharply, from 46.3% in 2015 to 39.4% in 20203637. Life expectancy in the country is, 
on average, around 54.1 years and higher for women (55.7 years) than for men (52.7 years).10 Maternal mortality 
rate is 614 per 100,000 live births, while the birth rate for adolescent girls (15-19 years) is estimated at 132.7 per 
1,000 live births over 2015- 2020. 
Education 
Although the government effort, the country strategy document (CSP 2018-2020), combined with the review 
country portfolio performance 2018 (AfDB, September 2018), highlight that significant disparities remain between 
men and women in terms of access to education, almost one woman for two (51%) and just over one for three 
men (36%) have no level of education and regardless of the level reached. Men are also more educated than 
women: 33% of men have at least completed primary education, compared to 21% of women. Concerning 
enrolment rate, girls represent 49.3% in preschool, 44.8% in primary, 38.4% in secondary, and 29% in higher 
education. The average length of schooling in 2019 was 4.2 years for women compared to 6.2 years for men. 
According to World Bank, in Cote d’Ivoire, the illiteracy rate for people over 15 years of age is 56.1%. The 
proportion of women concerned is 63% and that of men 49%. Only women hold 13.3 percent of parliamentary 
seats. 
Employment 
According to the World Bank, women's participation in labour is 48.2 percent compared to 65.5 for men in 2019. 
Women, who have long been victims of the country's conflicts, find it especially challenging to re-launch their 
economic activities. This gives rise to the need to give greater power to local institutions while at the same time 
building their managerial capacity to launch viable projects and to speed up the access of people at the local 
level to quality services. Côte d'Ivoire's diverse regions bring important assets. 
Health 
According to the health systems assessment for Côte d'Ivoire report (May 2020), communicable, maternal, 
neonatal, and nutritional diseases are the leading causes of disability and death in Côte d’Ivoire, representing 63 
percent of the disease burden, down from 72 percent in 1990. Côte d’Ivoire’s rising urbanization and the 
 
36  UNDP 2019. HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORTS. HTTPS://HDR.UNDP.ORG/EN/CONTENT/LATEST-HUMAN-DEVELOPMENT-INDEX-
RANKING?UTM_SOURCE=EN&UTM_MEDIUM=GSR&UTM_CONTENT=US_UNDP_PAIDSEARCH_BRAND_ENGLISH&UTM_CAMPAIGN=CENTRAL&C_SRC=CE
NTRAL&C_SRC2=GSR&GCLID=CJWKCAJW0A-SBHBKEIWAPLJU0L0PPSAK7DPI_AZQAJEFWVW0NLEVSDAJGT1FN7ESJ1SJLEFB-
YW1TXOCGWQQAVD_BWE 
37 HTTPS://WWW.BANQUEMONDIALE.ORG/FR/COUNTRY/COTEDIVOIRE/OVERVIEW#1  
Page 213

=== PAGE 218 ===
31 
 
introduction of unhealthy lifestyles has also led to a rise in the burden of noncommunicable diseases, resulting in 
a dual burden of disease taxing an already fragile health system. Neonatal disorders, HIV/AIDS, and lower 
respiratory infections are the top three causes of death according to the IHME disease burden data from 2017, 
and neonatal disorders, malaria, and HIV/AIDS were the top three causes of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) 
in 2017. Even though the disease burden has been transitioning toward more noncommunicable diseases, the 
majority of the drivers of the disease burden remain to be communicable disease–related conditions, such as 
neonatal disorders, HIV, lower respiratory infections, and malaria. HIV, TB, and malaria continue to constitute a 
significant burden of disease, combined constituting over 24 percent of annual deaths. While life expectancy has 
been increasing, it still remains the lowest in West Africa, at 55 years. Similarly, infant and under-five mortality rates 
have been declining, but remain high at almost 100/1,000 for under-five mortality. It is significantly below average 
for life expectancy, and above average for maternal mortality and infant mortality, compared to other Lower-
middle-income countries and West African countries. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
Côte d'Ivoire has four primary sources of energy: hydroelectricity, oil; natural gas; and biomass. Provision of primary 
energy in Côte d'Ivoire amounted to 11.6 million tons of oil equivalent (ToE), of which biomass (58%), crude oil 
(29%), natural gas (12%), and hydroelectricity (1%). Côte d'Ivoire has 6 hydro units ("plants") with a total installed 
capacity of 604 MW and 4 thermal power plants with an installed capacity of 1,320 MW, for a total of 1,924 MW 
of installed capacity. In 2015, Côte d'Ivoire produced 8,607.9 GWh of electricity, of which 872.3 GWh were 
exported, representing 10% of total production. Available data indicate that 77% of the Ivorian population lives 
in electrified areas (2014). However, only an estimated 25% of households have effective access to electricity. 
Connection costs are high, one of the main obstacles to improving access. The biomass subsector is the principal 
source of energy consumed, amounting to 70% of total energy consumption in the country. Households have 
recourse to traditional stoves for cooking which are not energy efficient. Access to energy for productive uses 
remains limited.  
According to Oxford 2019 and 2020 reports Business Group, the road network is made up of 86,400 km of roads 
including 244 km of motorways, 6,543 km of interurban roads and 4,314 km of urban roads. Several projects 
extension of motorways and rehabilitation are underway to ensure better quality of roads and facilitate the 
transport of goods with neighboring countries. In terms of Port Infrastrusture, the Autonomous Port of Abidjan (PAA) 
is one of the leaders regional, in particular ranked 2nd West African transhipment port behind that of Lomé. Since 
2012, 1.7 billion Euros have been invested in the development port. The overall traffic of the port of Abidjan was 
up 7% in 2019, from 24,177,261 tonnes in 2018 to 25,738,345 tonnes in 2019. The imports represent 66% of the total 
traffic of 2019, i.e. 16,991,505 tons and exports 34% i.e. 8,746,840 tons. A second container terminal (TC2), of 1,100 
linear meters (length of platforms) and 18 meters draft (depth), is currently under construction to increase the 
capacity of transhipment and overall traffic volume.The port of San Pedro is the 2nd port of the country, located 
not far from the border with Liberia. He is the first world cocoa exporting port in 2018 (more than 800,000 tonnes 
of cocoa exported) and diversifies its activities with the export of other materials raw materials such as rubber, 
cotton or oil of palm. 
Policy and Legal framework 
In The international level, Côte d'Ivoire has ratified most international conventions, including 
• The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1995 has also 
participated in all the major meetings leading up to the Beijing conference. I 
• the resolution 1325 on women, peace, and security in Africa.  
• the Solemn Declaration of African Heads of State and Government on Gender Equality in Africa was 
adopted in July 2004.13  
• the country has committed to implement the recommendations of international and African conferences, 
including those of Mexico City (1975), Copenhagen (1980), Nairobi (1985), Cairo (International Conference 
on Population and Development, ICPD, 1994), Beijing+5 (2000), the African Women's Decade Program 2010-
Page 214

=== PAGE 219 ===
32 
 
2020 and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the voluntary report of which was made in July 2019 
at UN Headquarters in New York.  
At the national level, the formal framework for gender equality is established by the Constitution of 8 the of 
November 2016, which enshrines the principles of gender parity in the labor market and equal opportunities in 
employment and elected assemblies in articles 36 and 37.14 Under this new Constitution, the country has 
embarked on a process of implementing specific measures to promote gender equality in access to elected 
office.  
This process took the form of the adoption by Parliament on 02 August 2019 of a law requiring political parties to 
present a quota of at least 30% women on the lists of candidates for single-member and multi-member elections. 
The National Policy on Equal Opportunities, Equity, and Gender was updated in 2018 but has not yet been 
adopted. A national strategy for the empowerment of women is being finalized. It should be noted that the 
National Development Plan addresses the gender issue with a dedicated budget. In the process of domesticating 
the country's international gender commitments, the Ivorian legal system has been enriched by new laws that 
are more favorable to gender issues, in particular, the Marriage Act, which maintains the abolition of the notion 
of the head of family and forces spouses to jointly manage their household, the Compulsory School Act for all 
children (girls and boys) from 6 to 16 years of age. 
Gender based violence 
According to the Ivorian Ministry of women, children and family, 5,405 cases of GBV were declared in 2020 
including 822 rapes, 152 sexual assaults excluding female genital mutilation, 13 female genital mutilation, 1,286 
physical assaults, 96 marriages forced, 2,119 denials of resources, opportunities or services and 917 psychological 
or emotional abuse. Of these declared cases, 81.98% of the victims are women and 46.79% of sexual violence is 
exercised against children. 
Access to Finances 
The Government of Ivory Coast adopted, in February 2020, a National Financial Education Program (PNEF). This 
program is centered around building the skills of low-income populations, in order to prepare them to access 
financial services and use them wisely. According to the financial inclusion insights (2018), women have markedly 
lower rates of access and use of financial services. They are 50%more likely to have never used a formal financial 
institution and 2.5 times more likely to use an informal non-bank financial institution than men. 
Poverty 
The National Development Plan 2016-2020 in its strategic diagnosis indicates that in Côte d'Ivoire, poverty affects 
both women (47.4% of them are poor) and men (45.5% of men are poor) even if the latter contributes slightly 
more to this poverty (50.6 of the poor are men) and especially in Abidjan where 53.1% of the poor are men. 
Individuals living in extended families are more likely to be poor because the poverty rate for this type of 
household is 52.6%. Poverty affects both households headed by a man (46.4%) and by a woman (45.9%) even if 
in Abidjan the households headed by women are much poorer (28.4%) than those headed by a man (21.1%). 
Data from the National Institute of Statistics shows that the average income of women in Côte d'Ivoire is 59% 
lower than that of men. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Côte d'Ivoire, only 12% of parliamentary seats are held by women, following the March 2021 legislative 
elections. Elsewhere, the female activity rate is 48.3% against 66% for men. Several initiatives are taken by the 
Ivorian government and partners for the establishment of gender-sensitive socio-economic infrastructure and 
the participation of women in grassroots decision-making bodies and the establishment of lines of credit 
dedicated to entrepreneurship. within the framework of the Initiative to promote access to finance for women 
in Africa (AFAWA).  
Page 215

=== PAGE 220 ===
33 
 
In households, Ivorian women report that decisions within the household are made by the husband alone, 
whether it be in the purchase of food or the choice of economic activity and other important tasks. As a result, 
women's decision-making in community and sub-regional settings is also weak. Indeed, women are in the 
minority in regional and city councils with 3.2% and 4.6% of positions respectively (Ministry of Planning and 
Development, 2019). According to the 2016 report based on the Gender Issues and Key Indicators in relation to 
the sectors of intervention of the French development agency (AFD), rural women face difficulties in selling their 
product in neighboring towns and villages due to the poor state of transport infrastructure while very few women 
participate in decision-making processes related to the construction of transport infrastructure. 
 
 
Page 216

=== PAGE 221 ===
34 
 
4.5 Djibouti 
Demographics and human development 
The Republic of Djibouti’s population was estimated to 988,000 inhabitants in 2020, of whom 47.5% 
were women38. The total fertility index dropped from 4.5 in 2000 to 2.6 in 2020 with an estimated 
population growth rate of 1.4%39. The population is highly urbanised and very young. Djibouti City is 
home to 75% of the total population making Djibouti the second most densely urbanised country in 
Africa after Libya. 32% of the total population is under 15 years of age (48.45% of whom are girls) and 
67.27% under 35 years old (47.38% of whom are women), while 8.97% is aged 55 years old and older 
(45.21% of whom are women). The median age is about 20 years old40. Therefore, there is a high 
dependency ratio with 51% of households containing eight people.  
The country is characterized by a high scale of internal migration and immigration as a result of climatic 
changes resulting in recurrent flooding and droughts. This causes the nomadic or semi-nomadic 
population, living off pastoralism, to move to cities in order to settle. Immigrants from bordering 
countries also leave their countries for economic, political or insecurity reasons due to conflicts or wars 
to settle in Djibouti or are passing through before travelling on to other countries. As a result, net 
migration in the country dropped from 1.9 in 2015 to 1.2 in 202041. 
According to the UNDP report the Human Development Index (HDI) score for Djibouti in 2019 was 0.524, 
which also placed the country in the low human development category and ranked it 166th out of 
189 countries and territories. Life expectancy at birth was 62.6 years for men and 64 for women. 
Between 1995 and 2019, Djibouti’s HDI increased from 0.351to 0.524, an increase of 49.3%. The average 
length of schooling increased by 1.2 years and the expected length of schooling increased by 3.7 
years. Over the same period, gross national income (GNI) per capita increased by about 87.6%. 
Despite this progress, Djibouti’s HDI score in 2019 remained below the average of the Sub-Saharan 
region countries at 0.547 and also below the average of the Arab States at 0.705. In 2017, women-
headed households represented 18.8%, 21.1% of which were in urban areas and 18.0% in rural areas 
(Human Development Report 2020). 
Education 
In recent years, the Djibouti’s national education is seeing the number of students in general and 
technical education growing but the proportion of girls is stagnating, if not declining, which could 
perpetuate women’s impoverishment42. Though the literacy rate has raised slowly from 43.7 % in 2011 
to 48.2% in 2017 there is a noticeable decline in primary education gender parity index (from 0.98 in 
2009 to 0.86 in 2017). This drop is due to the slowly rising enrolment (net enrolment rate (NER) from 65.7% 
in 2011 to 68.7% in 2017) and retention (GER from 68.8% in 2011 to 78.9% in 2017) rates. The impact of 
awareness-raising on girls, of gender-sensitive infrastructure and school canteens is more tangible on 
the retention of rural girls (GER from 21.9% in 2011 to 58.7% in 2017), but this has not sufficiently affected 
girls’ dropout rates. The failure to achieve parity in primary education has a side effect on the 
 
38 African Development Bank, Africa Information Highway Portal 
39 Ibid  
40African Development Bank, Africa Information Highway Portal  
41 AFDB (2020), Country gender profile-Djibouti 
42 Ibid 
Page 217

=== PAGE 222 ===
35 
 
achievement of parity in the middle (0.82), secondary (0.83), technical (0.72) and higher (0.61) levels 
of education. 
Employment 
The steadily growing number of young people entering the labor market toughens competition in a 
context where the resources and assets of women/ girls are unevenly distributed from the start. This 
situation is reflected in the male unemployment rate which dropped three times faster (from 54.6% to 
38.7%) than the rate for women (from 68.6% to 63.4%), between 2002 and 2017. The public 
administration recruited twice as many men from 2009 to 2017. The major capital-intensive 
infrastructure projects and other initiatives that create jobs or promote technical training seem to have 
concerned women less. The formal private sector employs 33% of women, mostly in trading and 
household services. Fewer than 15% of businesses employ women in senior managerial positions. In the 
informal sector, 74.3% of jobs are filled by women. The female employment rate/total population 
remains at 15.6%, despite a labour market participation rate of 30%. 
According to Djibouti’s Chamber of Commerce, there are 175 women CEOs for 1140 businesses 
(15.35%) registered in the directory43. According to the AfdB country gender profile 2020, e-commerce, 
tourism and handicrafts are growth sectors in which women are encouraged to participate. But many 
obstacles are impeding the development of entrepreneurial activities: social standards and family 
obligations, cumbersome administrative procedures, failure to connect with the networks 
(international trade fairs, markets, regional and international business networks). Other constraints 
include (i) access to credit which affects young people of both genders and women established in 
the formal and informal sectors, and (ii) access to transport making it impossible for women to travel 
physically to markets to sell their products. This issue is being resolved as a result of large-scale 
infrastructure projects implemented or ongoing. The latter creates new jobs for nationals, e.g. 25,000 
jobs during the construction of the electrified railway, 250,000 jobs planned for the new industrial free 
trade zone, 150 to 200 direct and indirect jobs for the construction of the new solar power plant.44 
Health 
Djibouti’s health outcomes have improved in recent years. For example, between 1990 and 2019, 
Djibouti’s life expectancy at birth increased by 10.4 years according to the human development 
report in 2020. But some underlying challenges remain and have been exacerbated by recent 
pandemic situation. According to the world development Indicators, between 2000 and 2017, the 
maternal mortality rate (MMR) dropped by 259 points from 507 to 248/100,000 live births but remains 
very high (regional average: 78/100,000). Stunting in children is a major concern, at 20.9 % in 2019 
(down from 29.7 % in 2013), with no difference in incidence between girls and boys45. The lack of 
access to basic water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services is another concern46. Only 47 % of the 
rural population has access to basic drinking water (versus 83 % in urban areas), and only 19 % has 
access to safely managed sanitation (versus 41 % in urban areas)47. Only 23 of pregnant women 
receive four or more antenatal care visits, and only 54 % receive any form of postnatal care. Reducing 
 
43 AFDB (2020), Country gender profile-Djibouti 
44 Ibid 
45 World Bank (2021), Djibouti country partnership framework for the period 2022 -2026 
46 Ibid 
47Ibid  
Page 218

=== PAGE 223 ===
36 
 
gender gaps is critical. WASH access is low in health centers and schools (68 % of schools have access 
to basic drinking water, 62 % to basic sanitation, and 58 % to basic hygiene facilities). 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
In the energy sector, data from the Djibouti Household Survey (EDAM 4-IS) shows that, in 2017, 57% of 
households had access to electricity. Depending on the gender of the household head, the difference 
between households headed by women (54%) and those headed by men (58%) seems relatively small 
but inequality in access to energy affecting women increases whenever it is combined with area of 
residence and socioeconomic status. The high cost of electricity automatically deprives poor rural 
households headed by women of this source of energy. As a result, over 8 out of 10 households (86%) 
use solid fuel (wood and charcoal) for cooking – an exclusively female task – compared to 6.5% in 
urban households 60% of households use electricity as their main source of lighting, with wide disparities 
between urban (70%) and rural (6%) households in 2017. Fewer women headed households have 
access to it (58% compared to 61% for men). 5% of urban households have no access to lighting 
compared to 27% of rural households. On the other hand, 25% of urban households and 49% of rural 
households use alternative sources of lighting including the use of solar panels (4% in urban areas and 
10% in rural areas). The remaining households have no other option than to use harmful sources of 
energy (wood, petroleum lamps and candles), practices that have negative environmental impacts. 
In terms of transport infrastructure, although there are no available data on the impacts of new ports 
and roads projects on women and men in terms of jobs and/or business opportunities, it is obvious that 
they provide fresh impetus to trade relations with the countries of the Arabian Peninsula and they are 
designed to strengthen the national economic integration. EDAM4-IS data provide an overview of the 
means of transport used by households to access basic social services. Almost half of households (44%) 
access them on foot. One-third of households (33%) cover 5 to 10 kilometers to reach them. Under a 
third (30%) cover over 10 kilometers. To do so, only 17% of households use public transport. It is worth 
noting that, for the whole population, only 3.4% have at least one means of transport, only 1% of whom 
are women (Afdb 2020, country gender profile). 
As a landing site for eight major submarine fiber optic cables, Djibouti has a unique opportunity to 
transform its economy to support more innovative and sustainable growth. According to the World 
Bank, only 1 % of the population used fixed internet in 2020, and the digital gap remains large. Among 
the richest 20 % of the population, 89 % of households own at least one mobile phone, compared to 
41 % among the bottom 20 %48. The cost of prepaid mobile broadband for low consumption of data 
represents over 12 % of per capita gross national income. As a result, Djibouti ranks 158th of 175 
countries in the ICT Development Index published by the International Telecommunications Union49. 
Household inequalities to the detriment of those headed by women were identified in the area’s 
internet access (20% compared to 25% for those headed by men), mobile phones (67% to 78%), and 
at least one NICT item (68% compared to 79%). Similarly, women headed rural and urban households 
do not have the same opportunities for internet access (2% compared to 25%), mobile phones (20% 
compared to 80%) and at least one NICT device (22% compared to 80%)50. Despite the ‘No woman 
without a mobile phone’ campaign in 2014 in rural areas, the digital divide is still marked by gender 
and area of residence-related inequalities. 
 
48 World Bank (2021), Djibouti country partnership framework for the period 2022 -2026 
49 Ibid 
50 Enquête Djiboutienne Auprès des Ménages / Indicateurs Sociaux (EDAM4-IS 2017) 
Page 219

=== PAGE 224 ===
37 
 
sociocultural 
Men play a predominant role in traditional Djiboutian society which is patrilineal, patrilocal and 
virilocal. Men provide household resources by breeding cattle and camelids, which requires large 
transhumance areas, they give orders and take decisions within the household and are community 
leaders, if necessary. Women, on the other hand, tend to the sheep, goats, perform domestic chores 
and care for the children. They await the return of the men to the settlements or migrate to the towns. 
Many discriminations against women exist and have their source in the Family Code for example, a 
guardian’s consent is required for women to validate the marriage (Art. 7), the regulation granting 
male heirs twice the share of a female heir (Art.115 to 118, 120, 130, 142 and 158). 
Legal framework 
Djibouti’s Constitution of 1992 enshrines the principle of non-discrimination based in particular on gender 
(Art.1), by guaranteeing the equality of all before the law. Djibouti has ratified most of the international 
treaties on human rights and gender equality (GE). Unlike other Arab countries, it unreservedly ratified the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (1998). However, it 
expressed reservations regarding abortion in the case of rape and incest (art.4, Par.2.c) in the Protocol to 
the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (2005). The country 
has not ratified Convention 189 concerning decent work for domestic workers nor the 1999 CEDAW 
Optional Protocol. On the other hand, it subscribed to the post-2015 Global Agendas on gender equality. 
The Djibouti Vision 2035 retains the National Gender Policy (PNG 2011-2021) as the policy framework 
for gender. The PNG aims to ‘contribute to the achievement of gender equity and equality in 
favour of girls and boys, men and women in all areas of economic and social life.’ Its two overall 
objectives are the establishment of a favorable environment for achieving gender equity and 
equality and the effective mainstreaming of gender in all sectors – focusing on gender-sensitive 
budgeting. 
Gender based violence 
In Djibouti, the most common forms of GBV include domestic violence, female genital mutilation 
(FGM)/cutting and, to a lesser extent, rape. Although government action has FGM, the practice 
remains widespread in Djibouti with a prevalence rate among women aged 15 to 49 of 78.4%51. 
Access to Finance 
Women represent 70% of microcredit recipients in Djibouti, however, access to financial services is a 
common concern of entrepreneurs in the formal and informal sectors. From 2010 to 2015, the number of 
women benefiting from the services of microfinance institutions (MFI) increased 15-fold (from 800 to 
12,500) and the amount awarded nine-fold (DJF 57 million to DJF 500 million)52. Available documentation 
suggests that women use credits to purchase food and then to finance their income-generating 
activities. On the other hand, their main reproaches to MFIs are their low penetration and rate and harsh 
credit-granting conditions: limited amount, short-term and without any grace period, in solidarity groups 
 
51 UN Women (2020), Review of health, justice and police, and social essential services for women 
and girls’ survivors of violence in the Arab states 
52 AFDB (2020), Country gender profile-Djibouti 
Page 220

=== PAGE 225 ===
38 
 
and ineligibility of the agricultural, fisheries and handicraft sectors. The country also has a low banking 
rate (20% in 2018)53.  
Poverty 
According to the 2019 Poverty Assessment, using data from the 2017 Household Survey, 17 % of the 
population lived in extreme poverty, with less than US$1.90 per day (in 2011 purchasing power parity 
terms). Disaggregated data by sex showed that, from 2013 to 2017, a six-point reduction was 
observed for women (from 18.2% to 12.3%) and a three-point reduction for men (from 17.1% to 14.1%). 
In rural areas, the increase in the extreme poverty rate in households headed by men is 5 points (from 
73.1% to 78.5%) while the rate for women-headed households is two points (from 76.4% to 78.4% ). 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Djibouti, the overall women’s representation rate in the decision-making spheres was 15%54 over 
the 2006-2011 period compared to 26% in 2012-201955 representing an 11-percentage point increase 
with small differences for elected and appointed positions. For the National Assembly, the 2018 Law 
establishing a minimum quota of 25% women for eligible positions following the legislative elections 
produced tangible results. Women have filled 26% of the seats since February 2018 compared to a 
rate of 11% during the last parliament (2013). In the Administration from 2011 to 2018 the 
representation of women officials rose from 20% to 32%. On the other hand, the proportion of women 
at Director level remained at 27%, though their number increased (46/169)56. 
Inequalities are present at all levels and in all sectors. Since 2013, with eleven (11) municipal councillors 
and nine (9) regional councillors, women represent 9% of regional councils and 10.67% of elected 
municipal officials. Indeed, in the Republic of Djibouti, women are absent from the negotiation tables at 
all levels, whether local, communal, regional institutional, or national; or sometimes their numbers when 
they are present are much lower than those of men. As in all essential sectors such as infrastructure, 
women face several obstacles to accessing positions of responsibility that give them access to decision-
making. Efforts to integrate women into the energy and transport sector through infrastructure 
rehabilitation or installation projects are empowering women affected by energy and transport 
decisions. 
The report of the study on the evolution of the situation of women in Djibouti 2000 TO 2018 mentions that 
women are increasingly independent, and that they are solicited to settle conflicts within their 
neighborhoods, localities, communities and even within couples57. They are increasingly involved in the 
development of their regions and their country. However, their access to strategic positions and key 
sectors remains very limited compared to men. 
 
 
 
53 AFDB, African Economic Outlook 2018 
54 MPFPF, National Gender Policy 2011-2021, 2011 
55 MFF, Evolution of Women’s Status, 2017; Gender Profile in the Public Administration, 2018; Djibouti 
City Council 2019 
56AFDB (2020), Country gender profile-Djibouti  
57 Repiblic of Djibouti, (2018). Study on the evolution of the situation of women in Djibouti 2000 to 
2018 https://famille.gouv.dj/uploads/publications/113b43e1476ef467385dd83c71f5d766.pdf. 
Page 221

=== PAGE 226 ===
39 
 
4.6 Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) 
Demographics and human development 
The Democratic Republic of Congo's (DRC) population is estimated at around 80 million people, the biggest and 
fourth most populated African country. Women represent 52% of the people, and 33% of the female population 
is under 15 years old. The DRC has a population growth rate of 3.2%, an HDI ranking of 175 out of 189 (in 2019), 
and a Gender Inequality Index valued at 0.875. A Social Institution and Gender Index (SIGI) Value of 0.4276 
denotes high gender inequality reflecting a discriminatory family code, inequality in physical integrity, limited 
access to resources and assets, and lack of freedom as a citizen. The Gender Development Index for the DRC is 
0.833, placing women's human development at about 83% of that of men. (Green Mini-Grid Program, AfDB 2019). 
Education 
The DRC’s constitution stipulates free obligatory education and the eradication of illiteracy in Articles 43 and 44. 
However, the country faces a gender gap in education due to early marriage and pregnancy, which leads to a. 
44% of school age children start primary education later than the official age of six. The gender gap in education 
is especially pronounced in secondary education. The reasons for girls not going to school include early marriage, 
forced marriage, and adolescent pregnancy. The double shift faced by many girls in rural areas whereby they 
have to perform household tasks such as searching for water and firewood further adds an increased burden. 
Especially since such household tasks are sometimes performed in the dark due to limited lighting at home and in 
public spaces –putting girls at risk of harassment and attack. Sexual harassment from teachers and early marriage 
are further burdens because schools bar pregnant students from attending classes, and most girls in such situations 
end up dropping out of school. 
Employment 
Women's labour force participation stands at 50%; however, women face more challenges than men. Women 
have less access to skilled jobs than men (8% in paid employment against 12% of men), and they tend to be 
marginalised in the labour market outside the agricultural sector. In 2014, women's unemployment rate was 6.7% 
compared to 9.4% for men, and only 45.3% of the population aged between 15 and 24 years is economically 
active. Among 15–24 years old, the female-male unemployment ratio is 104.8% - young women are more affected 
by unemployment than young men. Women's labour is mainly concentrated in subsistence agriculture (70%) and 
small business in the informal sector (60%), and they participate in economic activities as much as men. Only 2.8% 
of salaried workers are women. The rural population accounts for 70% of the country's total population, 60% of 
whom work in the agriculture sector – the majority at the subsistence level (70%). 
The World Bank's recent report on women's economic empowerment in the DRC shows that significant gender 
gaps in the labor market undermine the country's efforts to achieve inclusive economic growth. Indeed, the 
proportion of women in the active population represents about 62%, while only 6.4% of them are in paid 
employment, compared to 23.9% of their male counterparts. Moreover, improving the level of education and 
skills of girls and women through the availability of basic infrastructure will improve their access to capital, their 
physical security and their autonomy. 
Health 
In 2019, the maternal mortality rate was 473 per 100 000 live births. Around 20% of women die for reasons related 
to childbirth, this can be attributed to: lack of access to medical treatment; poor health facilities; lack of lighting 
in existing health facilities; early marriage; and high birth rates. On average, women give birth to their first child at 
the age of 19.9 years; of women aged 20-24 years, 25% were younger than 18 years old when they had their first 
Page 222

=== PAGE 227 ===
40 
 
child. Abortion is only legal in cases where the mother’s mental or physical health is in danger. The contraceptive 
prevalence rate is 23.1%, and the total fertility rate per woman is 5.8 children. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications  
Limited access to resources and assets increases women's energy poverty – and women as both consumers and 
suppliers of energy remain invisible in the sector. Women's energy access rates tend to be lower than men's due 
to disproportionate access and consumption levels. The country's 9% electrification rate is one of the lowest 
globally. Urban electrification is at 27%, while rural areas remain at less than 1%. 
Infrastructure is one of the priorities of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Considerable efforts 
are being made for the rehabilitation and modernization of the country's basic infrastructure in order to 
consolidate the country's economic integration. The DRC has several assets in the infrastructure sector including: 
• 
238,935 km of roads; 
• 
5,033 km of railway lines; 
• 
500 landing strips, 270 airfields, including 101 open to public traffic, 164 private airfields and 5 international 
airports; 
• 
25 with paved runways; 
• 
16,238 km of waterways; 
• 
2,513 linear km of bridges (1,965 bridges); 
• 
89 hydroelectric plants and other renewable resources. 
In term of ICT infrastructure, the Hootsuite and We Are Social’s Digital 2020 Report, reveal that the DRC had an 
internet penetration rate of 19% for a population of 88.18 million people. That is 16.35 million Internet users. 
Sociocultural 
In DRC, women's access to resources and assets are restricted by gender norms– for example, assets obtained 
within marriage are registered under the husband's name and regarded as assets of the husband, his parents, 
and brothers. Legally, the husband administers the marital property, and women and men do not have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property. Women can inherit according to the law, but they cannot own a house 
due to prevailing social norms. Women are not legally recognised as heads of households, and there is no 
prohibition on discrimination based on marital status in access to credit. Women, especially those who are 
married, thus have minimal access to land, and even though women make up the majority of the agricultural 
labour force – the best land is still in the hands of men. Women also lack access to new technology – thereby 
relegating them to subsistence agriculture. Due to gender norms, women hand over their incomes from 
agriculture to their husbands and cannot make productive investments for productive assets, such as improved 
inputs, technologies, seeds, and fertilisers, which keeps their productivity low. The gender role many girls and 
women face in rural areas where they have to perform household tasks such as searching for water and firewood 
further adds an increased burden. These household tasks are sometimes performed in the dark due to limited 
lighting at home and in public spaces – putting girls at risk of harassment and attack. 
Legal framework 
The key gender-related policies and the other sub-regional and international legal instruments on gender and 
human rights in the country are: 
• National Gender Policy (2017-2021), 
• SADC Memorandum of Understanding on Gender and Development;  
Page 223

=== PAGE 228 ===
41 
 
• Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women;  
• Maputo Protocol (The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights of Women 
in Africa);  
• UN Convention on the Rights of the Child; 
• Universal Declaration of Human Rights;  
• UN Security Council Resolution on Women, Peace, and Security (UNSCR1325). 
Gender based violence 
Over the past 20 years, the DRC has experienced multiple crises, including wars and intercommunity conflicts. In 
addition to the ancestral practices from which women and minors suffered, the war situation has accentuated 
violence against women. In fact, GBV and serious violations against children's rights also remain major issues. In 
just nine months (January to September 2021), 74,275 cases of GBV were reported, 94 percent of which were 
women and girls, an increase of 73 percent compared to the same period in 202058. Children are particularly 
vulnerable because, during the conflict period in 2021, 1,540 children were victims of physical and sexual 
violence. In the DRC, the fight against GBV appears to be difficult, as some provinces face limited access to 
funding to combat GBV, which undermines the implementation of strategies that have been adopted to 
combat these forms of violence. However, several NGOs and agencies have been set up throughout the country 
to fight against GBV and to provide care for victims of such violence. These include the following: the Strategic 
Studies and Planning Unit for the Promotion of Women, the Family and Child Protection (CEPFE); the National 
Fund for the Advancement of Women and Child Protection (FONAFEN); the National Center for Documentation 
and Information on the Family (CENADIF); the National Agency for the Fight against Violence against Women, 
Youth and Girls (AVIFEM); the Regional Center for Research and Documentation on Gender, Women and 
Peacebuilding in the Great Lakes. 
Access to Finances 
In the DRC, the "informal" sector is the main source of subsistence for the population, especially women, since 
"formal" employment is dominated by men, particularly in the public sector. According to the 2016 report by the 
French Development Agency, 97% of women in South Kivu work in the informal sector, compared to 85% of men. 
Women work in precarious conditions with meager wages. Indeed, 2.4% of women have regular salaries, 
compared to 18.4% of men59.  
Poverty 
Heavily impacted by the war, the DRC remains a country greatly affected by poverty, particularly in rural areas. 
According to 2012 data from the World Bank, more than 77.2% of the population live below the poverty line, with 
40% living on less than $1 a day60. According to World Bank estimates in 2019, 73% of its population, or 60 million 
 
58
 OCHA, 
(2021). 
Democratic 
Republic 
of 
the 
Congo: 
overview 
of 
humanitarian 
needs. 
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/sites/www.humanitarianresponse.info/files/documents/files/hno_2022
_drc_20211224vf.pdf 
59  AFD, 
(2016). 
Gender 
Profile 
Democratic 
Republic 
of 
Congo. 
https://plateforme-elsa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Profil-Genre-RDC.pdf  
60 The world Bank. Ratio of poor population living on less than $1.90 per day (2011 PPP) (% of population). Online 
available: https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/theme/pauvrete?locations=CD  
Page 224

=== PAGE 229 ===
42 
 
people, lived on less than $1.90 a day in 2018 (the level set as the international poverty line). Thus, nearly one in 
six people in extreme poverty in sub-Saharan Africa live in the DRC.61 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
According to the Human Development Report 2020, In Congo (Democratic Republic of the), 12.0 percent of 
parliamentary seats are held by women. The issue of women's political participation is complex given the 
obstacles involved. In provincial elections, 10.6% of the positions were filled by women in 2018 compared to 6.8% 
in 2016. In senatorial elections in 2018, the proportion of women elected was 19% compared to 4.6% in 2006. In 
the Government, there are 18% of women in 2018 with the Ministry of Gender transformed into a Ministry of State. 
Despite the positive dynamics observed in terms of the election of women in these different institutions, their 
representation remains at least five times below that of men. 
In the DRC, women's participation in management and decision-making at the local level depends on the 
village or region of the country. Within CSOs, women were an integral part of civil society but sometimes remain 
frustrated in their work because the leadership was entirely made up of men who did not understand or take 
into consideration women's actions. Many women participate in the country's economic development activities 
and processes. Despite the fact that the participation rate of women in the labor force is about 96.5% of the 
participation rate of men, they hold fewer positions in decision-making bodies appointed in the transportation, 
energy, telecommunications and heavy industry sectors. 
 
 
 
61 The World Bank, (2019) https://www.banquemondiale.org/fr/country/drc/overview  
Page 225

=== PAGE 230 ===
43 
 
4.7 Gabon 
Demographics and human development 
Gabon is a small Central African country with a low population density and a youthful population, with an area 
of 270,000 km2 and an estimated population of 2.2 million62. At 8 inhabitants per km2, it is one of the least dense 
countries in the world. More than 40 percent of Gabonese are under the age of 15, and with an urban fertility 
rate of 4 children per woman and a rural rate of 6, the population is growing. Though the youthful population can 
be an asset for the country’s development, the benefits will materialize only if the economy can absorb them 
productively. 
Education 
In Gabon, Law No. 21/2011 of 14 February 2012, on General Orientation of Education, Training, and Research 
stipulates, in its article 2, that Education and Training are mandatory in Gabon. Access is guaranteed to any young 
person, Gabonese or foreigner residing in Gabon, aged 3 to 16. Significant efforts have been made in education 
regarding access, particularly at the primary level with a rate of net schooling, which increased from 88.3% in 2013 
to 92% in 201563,64. But the completion rate in primary seems to have decreased, from 62.08% in 2007 to 41% in 
2015. Literacy among young people in 15 to 24 has also made remarkable progress reaching a rate of 88.4% in 
2012, including 92.4% for women and 84.4% for men. 
According to the latest Demographic and Health Survey (EDS) of 2012, the net enrolment rate is 95.5% among 
boys and 97.2% among girls, translating to a gender ratio of around 98.3 boys for 100 girls in the primary. Gender 
disparities remain practically non-existent in terms of access to primary education. However, Gabon is among the 
African countries with a high level of schooling: 95.5% for boys and 97.2% for girls (UNDP, 2021). The explanatory 
reasons for non-attendance at school, perceptible through the net enrolment rates, are probably: the poverty of 
the parents, a lack of sectorization, unwanted pregnancies, and School failure. 
According to the 2017 Gabonese Survey on Poverty Evaluation and Monitoring, 24.1 percent of women aged 15 
years and older had no education at all and 21 percent of those who have some education did not go beyond 
primary, compared with, respectively, 19.7 and 15 percent of men. About 19 percent of women are unemployed, 
compared to 11 percent of men. Also, around 62 percent of employed women work in low profile jobs, such as 
household worker or self-accountant, compared to 46 percent of working men. Around 50 percent of women 
aged 15–49 agreed that a husband has the right to beat his wife for some reasons. The rate reaches 59 percent 
among women with primary education or lower and 63 percent among those in the lowest welfare quintile, 
compared to 40 percent and less among women with secondary education and those in the richest quintile. 
Employment 
Women are very vulnerable in the labor market job. First of all, 39.1% work for their own account, mainly in informal 
agricultural and trade jobs or in unpaid jobs, compared to 27.6% for men. Then, unemployed women are about 
twice that of men, and it is among them, discouraged unemployed is more observed. As a result, they are less 
present on the market work with an activity rate estimated at 34.5%, i.e., more than 15 points difference with that 
of men, which amounts to 49.6% According to ILO data, in 2019, women’s labor force participation in Gabon 
 
62 World Development Indicators, 2019 
63 UNESCO (2019)  https://fr.unesco.org/fieldoffice/libreville/acces-educational-system-gabon 
64 The world Bank (2015). Gabon’s unemployment Conundrum: Why Economic Growth is not Leading to More 
Jobs. Gabon’s Unemployment Conundrum: Why Economic Growth is not Leading to More Jobs (worldbank.org)  
Page 226

=== PAGE 231 ===
44 
 
stood at 45%, as opposed to 64% for men, with even lower employment in industry, at 2.72% for women against 
14.1% for men. Unemployment was 28% for women compared to 14.1% for men.. 
Women's vulnerability in the labor market is mainly the consequence of the differences observed in secondary 
and higher education levels. So that the girl/boy ratio is close to 1 at the primary level, the significant differences 
in education to the disadvantaged women are observed in  the upper secondary and higher levels with 
respectively 21% against 16%, and 8% versus 6%. 23% of young girls who have stopped going to school say it is 
because of early pregnancy and marriage (23%), and 42% answer that it is due to the financial incapacity of the 
parents. Due to the above, as in most African countries, women receive less income than men. 
Health 
Gabon’s health sector is plagued by malaria, premature birth, acute respiratory infections, HIV and diarrheal 
diseases, which are the leading causes of death among children under the age of five. The country has seen an 
increase in the prevalence of noncommunicable diseases, in particular cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, renal 
failure and cancers. Gabon bears a double burden of communicable and noncommunicable disease, each 
with high mortality rates. Through a 2008 health financing reform, Gabon instituted a system of mandatory health 
insurance and established a national mandatory health insurance and social security fund; currently this fund 
covers 60% of the population65. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
According to the World development indicators, 90.6% of the Gabon population has access to electricity. This 
proportion is 98.2 in the urban area and 24.1 in the rural. Gabon is one of the top five oil producers in sub-Saharan 
Africa and one of the leading countries in its oil exploration and production, however the country has been facing 
declining output for more than a decade. The economy and energy sector remain highly dependent upon the 
country’s oil production, with oil revenues accounting for 45% of total government revenue and crude export 
accounting for nearly 74% of total export revenue in 2019.58 Gabon’s electricity supply is through seven 
hydroelectric facilities. A heavy fuel station was commissioned in 2000 to meet the increasing demands of 
Libreville, however new studies are underway to find more economical and efficient power generation facilities.59 
Still, the World Bank estimates that only 60% of Gabon’s population has access to electricity. According to the US 
Energy Information Administration (EIA), nearly 50% of energy consumption is from biomass and waste (wood, 
crop residues, manure, and charcoal), the rural population’s primary method of meeting household cooking and 
heating needs. Amidst rising electricity demand among both residential and industrial consumers and frequent 
electricity shortages, Gabon is currently working to expand the electricity supply and meet increasing demand, 
primarily by building hydropower plants and extending transmission lines. However, expansion of hydropower 
does not erase concerns regarding electricity reliability, as key business hubs in the country have previously 
experienced blackouts during periods of low rainfall. 
The recent progress in the coverage of telecommunication services, concentrated around large cities Libreville, 
Port-Gentil and Franceville and resource sites This created a “digital divide” between the urban population and 
the remote rural areas, where it is typically not economically viable for telecommunications operators to deploy 
and maintain telecommunications infrastructure: around 15 percent of the population still had no access to 
mobile telecommunications networks as of October 201766. Such a “digital divide" requires public intervention to 
bring ICT services (e.g. mobile banking, e-learning, e-health, etc.) to these underserviced areas as the economic 
and social benefits could massively compensate for the lack of physical infrastructures. The 2016 Global 
Information Technology Report shows that Gabon has yet to reap the benefits of emerging technologies and to 
 
65 Sango, N.A. and Yaya, S. (2019). Wealth Status, Health Insurance, and Maternal Health Care Utilization in Africa: Evidence 
from Gabon. BioMed Research International. Research Article. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4036830 
66 ANPI-Gabon. (2017). www.anpigabon.ga. 
Page 227

=== PAGE 232 ===
45 
 
capitalize on the opportunities presented by the digital technologies. The country ranks 125th out of 139 countries 
in the Networked Readiness Index (NRI), trailing behind its structural and aspirational peers. 
Socio cultural 
In September 2021, Gabon adopted new laws designed to reduce the risk of violence against women and prohibit 
discrimination in the economy, in particular by amending legislation to promote women’s financial inclusion and 
access to more employment. Revisions to the country’s 1972 Civil Code allow women to be the official head of 
household, choose where they live, and own and manage property in the same way as men. They can also open a 
bank account independently of their husbands and apply to a broader range of jobs. Married women should no 
longer be legally bound to the duty of wifely obedience. Amendments to the Criminal Code protect women from 
discrimination based on gender in accessing credit. 
Policy and legal Framework 
The Gabon’s National Strategy for Equality, Equity and Gender (SNEEG): adopted by the government in 2010. The 
development of the strategy was supported by UNDP and UNFPA. The SNEEG is articulated around six 
fundamental axes constituting challenges for equity and equality between men and women from a development 
perspective. These axes are:  
• The adherence of all actors to the vision and objectives of gender equality and equity; 
• Empowerment through improved productivity in the main sectors in which women are found, 
for an increase in their income; 
• Improving access to production support services; 
• Improving access to social services; 
• The promotion of equitable participation in the management of power, respect for rights and the suppression 
of violence; 
• The redefinition of the new role of the ministry in charge of gender mainstreaming with regard to 
strategy issues. »  
Gabon also has several legal instruments among whom: 
• 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in 1982 of the CEDAW  
• 
the Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa of the African Charter of Human Rights of Man and Peoples 
in 2011. 
• 
• The Gabonese constitution guarantees “freedom of conscience, thought, opinion, expression, 
communication, free practice of religion, (…) to all, subject to respect for public order” (article 1). Article 
2 states "the equality of all citizens before the law, without distinction of origin, race, sex, opinion or 
religion”. 
 
Gender based violence 
The official statistics on gender-based violence available  in Gabon comes from the DHS-2012. The data showed 
that just over half of women (52%) in Gabon said they had been subjected to acts of physical violence since the 
age of 15 at some point in their life and 22% in the 12 months preceding the survey. In 45% of cases, the perpetrator 
of the acts of physical violence is the current husband or partner. About one in five women (21%) have been 
victims of sexual violence during her  life and 8% during the 12 months preceding the survey. Slightly more than 
Page 228

=== PAGE 233 ===
46 
 
one in ten women (11%) said they had suffered acts of physical violence during pregnancy. Among women aged 
15-49, who had suffered physically or only 43% sought help. 
Access to Finances 
In terms of financial services, Gabon gives all persons – male or female – equal legal right to access bank loans. 
Nevertheless, certain discriminatory practices persist in preventing women from equally accessing credit. Some 
banks require wives to obtain permission from their husbands before opening an account, and the law itself 
requires that husbands be notified.67 According to the latest data from the World Bank, 54% of women had a 
bank account at a financial institution in 2017 compared to 64% of men. Mobile money is helping women to 
accelerate their access to the formal financial system. 
Poverty 
In Gabon, poverty is more prevalent among women. According to the world Bank systematic country diagnostic 
report (2020), the poverty rate for women-headed households is 36 percent, compared to 32 percent for men-
headed households. This is due to a higher incidence of poverty among urban women-headed households (33.7 
percent) than urban male-headed households (27.6 percent). In both areas, widows are poorer than widowers 
by about 10 pp. Women-headed households have less adult members, less education and work less in qualified 
jobs and productive sectors than men headed-households. The gender gaps are particularly important among 
poor households. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
The Gabonese political landscape is marked by the presence of women in certain key positions (such as the 
presidency of the Senate, or the Prime minister’s office and previously the Libreville’ City hall) but the latter remain 
largely under-represented among the elected representatives of the Republic within the government. Indeed, 
at the national level, in the two chambers which make up the parliament, less than 20% of the seats of elected 
officials are occupied by women and at the local level, only 13% of town halls are controlled by female mayors. 
While current legislation provides for quotas for women for elections and for the highest positions, these are not 
respected in the absence of implementing decrees. 
Globally, at least 50% of women have access to administrative, political and community decision-making 
positions. As a result of the country's efforts to implement its gender policy, at least 80% of women and girls have 
benefited from adequate protection of their human rights and have increased access to legal services. In fact, 
the economic power of women and girls throughout the country has increased by at least 30%.68 
 
 
 
 
67 Civil Code, article 257 
68  Republic of Gabon, (2015). Decennal plan for the empowerment of gabonese women 2015-2021. 
https://gabon.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-
pdf/Brochure%20Auto%20femme%20Gab%20-%20FINALISATION.pdf  
 
Page 229

=== PAGE 234 ===
47 
 
4.8 Gambia 
Demographics and human development 
The population of The Gambia is estimated at 2.416,664 million, with an annual growth rate of 2.94% between 
2015 and 2020 and an average household size of 8.3. About 37 percent of the population lives in rural areas, and 
women constitute 51 percent69. One in five households is headed by a female, mainly because of the migration 
of males to urban areas and overseas. Women's poverty is closely linked to their high illiteracy level (73 percent), 
the absence of economic opportunities, inadequate access to economic resources, including credit, land 
ownership, skills, and support services. About 67 percent of the population is aged below 25 years (2009 National 
Youth Policy). The factors that make women vulnerable, such as poverty, power relations, lack of economic 
power, low level of education, and lack of or limited technical knowledge, are also vital issues affecting youths.  
In 2018, Gambia's value on the Human Development Index was 0.466, positioning it at 174 out of 189 countries 
and territories. Gambia had a GII value of 0.620 and thus ranked 150th out of 162 countries in the 2018 index. In 
the Gambia, 10.3 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women.  
Education 
Gambian young women lag the young men with an illiteracy rate of around 30 percent. According to the Human 
Development Report 2019, 30.7 percent of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education 
compared to 43.6 percent of their male counterparts. 
Education in The Gambia is less inclusive as children with disabilities have limited access to education due 
to social norms and structural limitations. At the community and family levels, social norms and values set 
limits on the education of boys and girls. Already from secondary school onward, girls' education is 
compromised in large part because of the higher value placed on marriage over education and career 
development. In 2017, the upper secondary completion rate disaggregated by sex and age is in favour 
of men (31%) with a gap of 3%. Moreover, in 2019, women teachers represent only 21% of the staff in 
secondary education70. In recent years, efforts have been made to promote gender equality, education 
for all, and reduce gender disparities in schooling. The proportion of Gambian women with access to paid 
employment is very low compared to their male counterparts.  
Employment 
Women make up 78 percent of the economically active population who work in agriculture compared to 57 
percent of men. The majority of women farmers are unskilled agrarian wage earners and are responsible for about 
40 percent of the total agricultural production in the country. Female participation in the labour market is 51.7 
percent compared to 67.7 for men (Human Development Report, 2019). Even though there are more women in 
agricultural production than men, and they make a massive contribution, it does not award them the improved 
social status they desire. Most engage in the production of non-cash crops for subsistence and thus operate at 
low levels of productivity owing to limited control and ownership of productive resources such as land, inputs, 
credit and technology, and markets. While women are active in horticultural production, which generates 
relatively good revenues, this income is often invested in sustaining the household. Their limited capacity and skills 
to embark on viable agro-based and entrepreneurial activities, lack of ownership and control over resources such 
as land and modern agricultural equipment, coupled with the triple roles of women, impede all efforts for rural 
 
69 Gambia, the. The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/country/gambia-the 
70 UNESCO, Institute for Statistics as reported by World Bank data. 
Page 230

=== PAGE 235 ===
48 
 
women to graduate into the mainstream livelihood economy (FAO, National gender profile of agriculture and 
rural livelihoods – The Gambia). 
The proportion of Gambian women with access to paid employment is very low compared to their male 
counterparts. Moreover, up to 74%71  of them work in the informal sector or in sectors and jobs that require unskilled 
labor. Despite the fact that women's economic empowerment was often mentioned as a priority during 
consultations with civil society, the lack of women in decision-making positions is an obstacle to the 
implementation of decisions taken in favor of women's empowerment. Involving more women and youth in all 
stages of the life cycle of resilient infrastructure would be an excellent way to involve them in local, regional and 
national decision-making. 
Health 
In Gambia, for every 100,000 live births, 706.0 women die from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent 
birth rate is 78.2 births per 1,000 women of ages 15. Mortality is slightly lower among women (2.72 deaths per 1,000 
population) than among men (3.13 deaths per 1,000 population). Among both women and men, mortality rates 
generally increase with increasing age. Rates are lowest among those age 15-19 and highest among those age 
40-44 and 45-49. Mortality rates are higher for men than for women in all age groups until age 40 (Gambia 
Demographic and Health Survey 2019-2020). The rate of mortality associated with pregnancy and childbearing 
in The Gambia is 0.43 maternal deaths per 1,000 woman-years of exposure. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
In 2018, 76 percent of the urban population had access to electricity, whereas only 35.4 percent of the rural 
population had such access. This means that rural households rely on other energy sources, such as fuelwood. 
Rural women still spend a significant amount of time gathering fodder. 
The Gambia Demographic and Health Survey 2019-2020 results showed that, among all women and men age 15-
49, 62% and 73% have used the internet in the last 12 months, respectively. Of those who have accessed the 
internet in the past 12 months, a greater percentage of men (65%) than women (60%) use the internet on a daily 
basis. The Strategy for Youth and Women Development & Empowerment Through ICTs 2021-2024 revealed that 
there is limited sex-disaggregated official data and geographic coverage of most ICT indicators but consultations 
showed that there are gender gaps observable in ICT access, skills and leadership. A number of the barriers to 
gender digital equality generally relate to the state of availability of infrastructure, financial constraints, the ICT 
ability and aptitude of the women, the interest and perceived relevance of ICTs, issues of safety and security and 
the socio-cultural and institutional contexts. The strategic actions for addressing some of these findings relate to 
measures for addressing affordability, education on digital skills and online safety measures. The Gambia has 
produced a National Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (NSTIP) under the theme “Harnessing Science, 
Technology and Innovation for A More Vibrant and Sustainable Socio-economic Growth and Development” 
through the Ministry of Higher Education, Research, Science and Technology. It is a strong indication of the 
country’s intention of ensuring that STI drives the national development. 
Sociocultural 
The Gambia Demographic and Health Survey 2019-2020 highlighted some key sociocultural facts: 85% of currently 
married women age 15-49 who receive cash earnings for their employment mainly decide how their earnings are 
used. The ownership of both a house and land among women and men is higher in rural areas than in urban 
areas. Concerning women’s participation in decision making, only 27% of currently married women age 15-49 
make decisions regarding their own health care, major household purchases, and visits to their family and relatives 
 
71 Ibid 
Page 231

=== PAGE 236 ===
49 
 
either alone or jointly with their partner.  A greater percentage of women (55%) than men (40%) agree that a 
husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under one or more specified circumstances. More women (63%) 
than men (60%) believe that a woman is justified in refusing to have sexual intercourse with her husband if she 
knows he has sex with other women. 
The Gambian National Agricultural Investment Plan (GNAIP), the Gambia Sustainable Land Management 
Investment Framework 2016-2020 (GAMSIF), and the National Rice Development Strategy (NRDS) all 
acknowledged that "feminization" of poverty is underway, exemplified by higher levels of poverty among female-
headed households. It is estimated that such households represent 18 percent of those in rural areas; 63 percent 
of them fall below the poverty line, compared to 48 percent of male-headed households. 
Legal and Policy framework 
The Government has taken concrete policy decisions and actions related to gender and women in the past two 
decades. To better manage the affairs of women and gender, the Government established the Women's Bureau 
and NWC in 1980, established the Ministry of Women's Affairs in 1996, and created the Federation of Gambian 
Women in 2010. The Government also ratified several international conventions and developed and 
implemented many national policies to address gender issues. It endorsed the CEDAW in 1992. The country 
developed its first national policy on women, the 1999–2009 National Women's Policy (NPAGW). The 2010– 2020 
Gender and Women Empowerment Policy (GWEP) is implemented with the Gender Mainstreaming and Women 
Empowerment Strategic Plan (2010–2015). The GWEP was developed through a consultative process informed by 
consultations at national, provincial, and district levels spearheaded by the National Women's Bureau. 
Furthermore, to put gender equality and women empowerment on a sound legal footing, the Government 
enacted the Sexual Offenses Act 2013, Domestic Violence Act of 2013, and Women's Amendment Act 2012. 
These laws have domesticated international best practices instruments such as the CEDAW (FAO, National 
Gender Profile). 
Gender based violence 
Sexual and gender-based violence is a deeply rooted evil in Gambian society and is fueled by a culture of 
silence. Indeed, approximately one in three women (33%) experiences sexual or physical violence in her lifetime, 
which is similar to the global prevalence rate. Girls in particular are the most vulnerable groups, as the forms of 
violence experienced by them are in the form of rape and other forms of sexual abuse, early marriages. To curb 
this phenomenon, which undermines the lives of women and children and other vulnerable groups, the 
government has passed laws against sexual and gender-based violence. However, there is a form of impunity 
due to the silence, stigmatization and fear of both the victims and those around them.  
According to the Gambia Demographic Health Survey 2019-2020, it is noted that 46% of women aged 15-49 
have experienced physical violence, while 9% of the same age group have experienced sexual violence. In The 
Gambia, domestic violence is one of the forms of violence suffered by women and is an important public health 
issue that transcends geographic and cultural barriers. Between 2019-2020, 39% of married women experienced 
domestic violence, either physical, sexual, or emotional, from their partners72. 
On the legal front, measures have been taken to combat these forms of violence. These include the Sexual 
Offences Act 2013, the Domestic Violence Act 2013, the women’s Act 2010, the Trafficking in Persons Act 2007, 
the Children Act 2005, etc. Women are not represented in the management and decision-making bodies of 
most of the country's higher education and research institutions73. 
 
72
Republic 
of 
Gambia, 
(2020). 
Demographic 
and 
Health 
Survey 
 
2019-2020. 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR369/FR369.pdf  
73 Republic of the Gambia, (2018). Stem & Gender Advancement (saga); the Gambia country report. 
https://www.moherst.gov.gm/sites/default/files/2021-12/Gambia-SAGA%20Country%20Report-DRAFT02.pdf  
Page 232

=== PAGE 237 ===
50 
 
Access to Finances 
For all countries, financial inclusion is seen as a key indicator of development and citizen well-being. Its effective 
implementation is even more crucial for women, who remain largely excluded from financial services due to 
poverty, gender inequality, and low literacy rates. By 2021, 49% of the total population, or more than 1.2 million 
people, will be living below the poverty line. Implementing the financial inclusion strategy is therefore a crucial 
tool to serve the disadvantaged, most of whom are unbanked, especially since about 37% of the Gambian 
population lives in rural areas. 
As of 2019, the country's first National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) has been formulated by the Central Bank 
of The Gambia (CBG) with technical support from UN Capital Development Fund (UNCDF). The strategy received 
financial support from the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) and the European Union74. However, according 
to Finscope's 2019 report, financial inclusion in The Gambia has remained very low, with 69% of the adult 
population lacking access to formal or informal financial services. Banking products and services are used by 
about 5% of the population; 14% access other formal non-bank services and 12% use informal financial services75. 
According to the final report of the PoWER survey on Assessing Women's Economic Empowerment in The 
Gambia, women and youth have limited access to formal banks. The majority of the surveyed population relies 
primarily on informal channels to access financial services. Indeed, the average rate of account ownership 
among women aged 26-55 is 15% compared to 51% among men in this age group. Women living in rural areas 
are the most disadvantaged by this financial inclusion program where only 9% have access to financial services 
compared to 20% for women living in urban areas76. To access financial services and develop their economic 
activities, this disadvantaged population uses informal channels such as savings groups, cooperative 
associations, etc. However, steps have been taken by the Gambian government to provide financial access to 
the population with a target of reaching 70 percent of adults by 2025. 
Poverty 
The Gambia is a country that relies heavily on agriculture, yet the country is subject to extreme weather events 
that make the population very vulnerable. The agriculture sector employs about 46% of the working population 
and is the main source of food for the majority of Gambians, especially in rural areas. However, the climate, 
EBOLA, and COVID-19 crises are continually affecting the availability and price of food, leaving more and more 
families hungry. The long periods of drought in 2017, caused agricultural production to drop by 26% at the same 
time, fluctuating market prices have adversely affected vulnerable households, who spend the majority of their 
income on food77. As a result, populations that depend primarily on agriculture are the most affected by hunger.  
 In 2015, the incidence of extreme poverty in The Gambia, as measured by the international poverty line of 
US$1.9 per day (2011 PPP), was 10.3 percent, and 2.5 percent of the population lived below the poverty line. 
Poverty rates were higher in rural areas, where the population represented more than 41% of the total population 
 
74UN Capital Development Fund. Online Available: https://mm4p.uncdf.org/article/7460/launching-gambias-
nfis. [Accessed: 23-06-2022] 
75
Republic 
of 
the 
Gambia, 
(2019). 
Finscope’s: 
Consumer 
Survey 
Highlight. 
https://finmark.org.za/system/documents/files/000/000/147/original/FinScope-Gambia_Pocket-guide-28-11-
2019_Final.pdf?1594135120  
76 Republic of the Gambia, (Juin 2019). PoWER assessment of Women’s Economic Empowerment in The 
Gambia.https://www.uncdf.org/Download/AdminFileWithFilename?id=9423&cultureId=127&filename=091019
-wee-thegambia-powerpdf  
77 UN World Food Program, Gambia. Online Available: https://www.wfpusa.org/countries/gambia/  
Page 233

=== PAGE 238 ===
51 
 
in 2015. In rural areas, the poverty rate was 70 percent compared with 41 percent in other urban areas and 17 
percent in the capital city of Banjul78. 
Unfortunately, women and minor children are the most affected by poverty. Indeed, 8.2% of Gambian women 
aged 15 and over live below the international poverty line compared to 7.6% of men. In 2021, unemployment 
will affect more than 12.4% of women, while men are less affected by unemployment with a rate of 8.9%. 
However, several organizations are working in The Gambia to help the population, including social justice, 
gender equality, and poverty eradication. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In The Gambia, women have experienced limited access to participation and representation in the country's 
national governance. They have always been poorly represented in positions of power and decision making in 
the country. However, the country adopted the Women's Law in 2010, which provides for the adoption of 
temporary special measures by any body, agency, public institution, authority or private enterprise to accelerate 
"de facto" equality between men and women. In fact, a 50% quota for women at all decision-making levels in 
government as well as in private institutions. As early as 2012, the African Center for Democracy and Human 
Rights Studies (ACDHRS) implemented a project to promote gender equality through the participation and 
representation of women in national governance. Women make up more than half of the population of The 
Gambia, yet they represent only 9% of parliamentarians in 202179. 
Women's access to certain decision-making positions is limited in all sectors and areas of infrastructure in The 
Gambia. According to a study on the analysis of the energy and gender situation in ECOWAS member states, 
some decision-making positions are implicitly inaccessible to women, even when they have the necessary 
qualifications80. This is because most people believe that women's roles as wives and mothers may interfere with 
their ability to perform work and hold key positions within structures, institutions and businesses. Sometimes these 
positions require long working hours or long trips to the field. 
 
 
 
 
78
Republic 
of 
the 
Gambia, 
(2019). 
Poverty 
& 
Equity 
Brief; 
Africa 
Western 
& 
Central. 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/987B9C90-CB9F-4D93-AE8C-
750588BF00QA/AM2021/Global_POVEQ_GMB.pdf  
79 The World Bank, (2021). Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%) – the Gambia, The. 
Online Available. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.GEN.PARL.ZS?locations=GM  
80ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE), (2015). Situation Analysis of Energy 
and Gender Issues in ECOWAS Member States. Efficiency. 
Page 234

=== PAGE 239 ===
52 
 
4.9 Ghana 
Demographics and human development 
Located on the coast of the Gulf of Guinea, Ghana's landscape consists mainly of plains and lowlands 
covered by tropical rainforests in the west and Lake Volta in the east. With a total population of over 
31 million by 2021, Ghana has an annual population growth rate of 2.10%. In addition, the urban 
population represents more than 58% of the total population with an annual growth rate of 3.2% in 
2021. Ghana's population is very young with over 60% of the population under the age of 30. However, 
the ratio of the inactive population to the active population is very low compared to the average for 
sub-Saharan Africa. Indeed, the proportion of the population of working age in Ghana in 2021 is only 
67%, whereas in Sub-Saharan Africa this rate is about 82% (World Bank, 2021). On the other hand, 
Ghana's HDI is higher than the average human development index for sub-Saharan Africa. With a 
score of 0.611 in 2019, the country is ranked 138 out of 189 countries81. Ghana is among the lower 
middle-income countries with a population, which is heavily dependent on cocoa and coffee export 
revenues, ranking among the top 2 cocoa exporters in the world. In addition, the mining sector, 
dominated by gold mining, remains one of Ghana's economic lungs, ranking as the top gold-
producing country in Africa since 2019, accounting for about 95%82 of the country's mining revenues. 
In 2020, gold mining contributed about US$1.3 billion to the country's gross domestic product (GDP). In 
addition, the industry sector is very important to the country's economy as it contributes 28.3% to the 
GDP and provides employment to over 21% of Ghana's population. 
Education 
Ghana has made impressive strides in economic growth, poverty reduction, and educational 
improvement. Indeed, in recent years, the country has adopted approaches to make quality 
education accessible to more children. According to the World Bank's 2019 data, Ghana's elementary 
school enrollment rate (% net) was 86.16% and slightly lower in 2021 with 82.4%83. However, the country's 
education indicators reflect a gender gap and disparities between rural and urban areas and 
between the southern and northern regions of Ghana. First in 2018, the adult literacy rate was 79.04%, 
with 78.3% for males and 65.3% for females. Between the ages of 15 and 19, 85% of women and 90% 
of men are literate, compared to 47% of women and 76% of men between the ages of 45 and 49. At 
all levels, the literacy rate for boys is systematically higher than for girls. However, Ghana is doing well 
in terms of access to education for girls compared to other sub-Saharan African countries. In Ghana, 
the gross enrollment rate of women in primary education is 106% in 2018. For this indicator, the country 
is in the 72nd percentile compared to all countries, meaning that 72% of countries have a lower gross 
 
81 UNDP, (2020). Human Development Report 2020. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/GHA.pdf  
82 International Trade Administration, (2022). Ghana – Mining Industry Equipment. Online Available: 
https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/ghana-mining-industry-
equipment#:~:text=Ghana%20is%20Africa's%20largest%20gold,of%20the%20country's%20mineral%2
0revenue. accessed on [26/07/2022] 
83
 UNESCO 
Institute 
for 
statoistics, 
(2022). 
BROWSE 
BY 
COUNTRY 
Ghana. 
http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/gh?theme=education-and-literacy  
Page 235

=== PAGE 240 ===
53 
 
enrollment rate than Ghana84. In addition, Ghana scored 1 on UNESCO's Gender Parity Index (GPI) for 
primary and secondary education levels in 202085. On the other hand, per pupil expenditure (PPE) in 
primary education as a percentage of GDP per capita is 8 percent, which is lower than the median 
PPE in primary education for lower-middle income countries, which is 13 percent. Overall, Ghana's 
spending on education has accounted for about 25% of its annual budget over the past decade. 
Employment 
Although Ghana's female enrollment rate is higher than that of some Sub-Saharan African countries, 
and also has enormous economic potential, the country has large gender disparities in economic 
participation and income. First, the female labor force (% of total labor force) in Ghana was 46.71% in 
2021 (World Bank, 2021). According to 2019 International Labor Organization (ILO) estimate data, only 
65% of working age women were employed in Ghana, compared to 73% of men. The low participation 
rate of women in the labor market is rooted in societal norms and also prevalent cultural factors that 
view women as complementary to men whose role was limited to the Home.  
The average "working poor" poverty rate for all employed women in Ghana was estimated at 67.1 
percent, compared to 63.7 percent for men. For non-agricultural employment, the rates for women 
and men were 54.8 percent and 49.3 percent, 
Health 
With five levels of providers, Ghana's health system includes health posts, the first level of primary care 
in rural areas; health centers and clinics; district hospitals; regional hospitals; and tertiary hospitals. On 
average, Ghana spends about 6 percent of its GDP on health infrastructure. . Ghana has long placed 
special emphasis on the country's health sector. In 2019, this sector received more than $202,230,000 
USD, which represents 8.2% of Ghana's gross domestic product, an increase of 1.1% over the 2018 
budget. Ghana has one government agency: the Ghana Health Service (GHS) established in 1996 as 
part of Ghana's health sector reform. Despite the efficiency of the country's health service, Ghana's 
health system is still not comparable to that of developed nations (ranked 135 out of 191 for overall 
health system performance by the WHO). This means that private medical insurance is essential for 
expatriates to have access to better quality private facilities and/or treatment by air. 
A 2019 study found that 81.4% of the population had access to primary health care in Ghana, while 
61.4% had access to secondary level care and 14.3% to tertiary care. This while the number of 
specialists per capita remains low. Despite these relatively high accessibility rates, about 30% of the 
population has to travel long distances to access primary facilities or consult a specialist. The gender 
situation with regard to access to health care remains uncritical86. However, according to a study 
conducted in 2021, the majority of women aged 15 to 19 (59%) encountered at least one barrier to 
 
84
 FHI360, 
(2018). 
National 
Education 
Profile 
2018 
Update. 
https://www.epdc.org/sites/default/files/documents/EPDC_NEP_2018_Ghana.pdf  
85 World Bank, (2022). Female to male secondary enrollment ratio (%) – Ghana. Online Available: 
https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/indicateur/SE.ENR.SECO.FM.ZS?locations=GH  
86 eidu, AA., Darteh, E.K.M., Agbaglo, E. et al. Barriers to accessing healthcare among women in Ghana: a 
multilevel modelling. BMC Public Health 20, 1916 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-10017-8 
Page 236

=== PAGE 241 ===
54 
 
accessing health care, compared to the other age groups in the study. In terms of marital status, 61.6% 
of widowed women reported facing at least one barrier to accessing care. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
Thanks to these hydroelectric dams and solar and thermal power plants, Ghana has one of the highest 
electrification rates in Sub-Saharan Africa (84%)87. However, access to energy sources remains low. 
Ghana's energy mix has historically been dominated by hydro (1,365 MW or 29%) and thermal power 
(3,300 MW or 67.9%) with a total installed capacity of 4,700 MW considered reliable. 
With a population of 31.7 million, spread over a geographically heterogeneous territory, Ghana has 
long focused on the construction and expansion of its transport infrastructure (roads, railroads, airport 
and port) to facilitate better mobility of goods and people but also to serve the remote rural areas. 
Ghana's transport infrastructure plays a major role in the country's economic growth, especially since 
the country has made significant investments in this sector. Road transport remains the predominant 
mode of transport throughout the country, with an estimated market share of over 95% of passenger 
traffic and 90% of freight traffic88. The rail network is less developed due to years of underfunding and 
lack of maintenance. However, the rail sector is becoming increasingly important due to key 
investments made between 2015 and 2016 in the rehabilitation and modernization of western and 
suburban rail lines89. The western rail line dedicated to manganese transport offers its services as does 
the eastern line, which focuses on passenger traffic between Accra-Nsawam and Accra-Tema. 
The air and maritime transport sectors remain the country's key sectors in terms of the quality and safety 
of passenger and freight transport and their contribution to the country's economy. With its two major 
ports (Tema port focused on imports and Takoradi port focused on exports) and two international 
airports, Ghana's transport sector has contributed significantly to the country's economic growth over 
the past decades. Thus, the contribution of the transport and storage sector to the economy in 2017 
is estimated at about 5.3 billion dollars or 12.8% of Ghana's GDP90. Nevertheless, the sector is male-
dominated and inequalities exist in access between rural and urban areas. 
With an advanced infrastructure platform, especially compared to other low-income countries in 
Africa, Ghana has adopted institutional reforms in all key infrastructure sectors of the country. The ICT 
sector is no exception. Indeed, the country has created an organization to promote the ICT sector, 
namely the National Communications Authority (NCA)91 The ICT sector plays a key role in the overall 
 
87 The electricity sector in Ghana. https://www.tresor.economie.gouv.fr/Articles/2018/08/22/le-secteur-de-l-
electricite-au-ghana-en-2018  
88 Republic of Ghana, (2020). National transport policy 
https://www.bcp.gov.gh/acc/registry/docs/NATIONAL%20TRANSPORT%20POLICY.pdf  
89 Africa Community Access Partnership, (2017). Scaling up Gender Mainstreaming in Rural Transport: Analysis 
of Policies, Practices, Impacts and Monitoring Processes. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5ac47f3240f0b60a4be86d44/AmoakoSakyi-IFRTD-2017-
ScalingUpGMAnalysisPoliciesPractiesImpactsMonitoringProcesses-GhanaCS-AfCAP-RAF2044J-171208-
redacted.pdf  
90 OXFORD BUSINESS GROUP. Ghana's renewed commitment to transport infrastructure provides opportunity 
for the private sector. Online available: https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/opportunities-private-
engagement-abound-government-renews-its-commitment-infrastructure-investment . [Acceded on 07/09/22] 
91Republic of Ghana, (2008). Annual Report. 
https://www.researchictafrica.net/countries/ghana/NCA_Annual_Report_2008.pdf 
Page 237

=== PAGE 242 ===
55 
 
economic growth of the country and according to the International Trade Administration's analysis of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT), the ICT sector in Ghana is valued in the first half of 
2022 at about $1 billion92. 
Sociocultural 
Transportation in Ghana is by road, rail, air and water. Ghana's transport and communication networks are 
dominated by road transport and concentrated mostly in the south. The country seeks to improve the mobility of 
goods and passengers throughout the country by reducing travel time and vehicle operating costs. 
Policy and Legal framework 
In Ghana, the 1992 constitution provides for a multiparty republic with a president as head of state and a vice 
president.  There is a broad-based Council of State with deliberative and advisory functions and a unicameral 
Parliament, whose members are directly elected for a four-year term. The country's political system is hybrid. 
Indeed, since colonial times, chieftaincy and traditional political authorities have tended to operate in parallel 
with the central government. Over the years, this tendency has persisted and even expanded, and the institution 
of chieftaincy has become increasingly divorced from the exercise of real political power at all levels of 
government, while its role is now largely ceremonial. At the same time, Ghana operates a legal system based on 
English common law. The constitution; statutes enacted by Parliament; ordinances, rules and regulations made 
by any person or authority vested with power under the constitution; existing law; and the common law are the 
laws that make up the legal system of Ghana. Ghana experienced political and economic stability during the 
period of the COVID-19 pandemic, yet the country was affected by the pandemic.  
Ghana has passed laws and established policy guidelines to encourage foreign investment in the country. These 
include the Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) Act 2013 (Act 865)93; the Free Trade Zone Act 1995 (Act 
504)94. These laws promote economic development and regulate the activities of investors throughout the 
country. In addition, the GIPC Act regulates both public and private enterprises in all sectors of the economy with 
a focus on infrastructure. Better yet, industries are governed by sectoral legislation. The country's political and 
legal system also emphasizes non-discrimination of rights and obligations under the Investment Act. To strengthen 
the investment framework in the country and protect foreign investment in the country, the Ghanaian 
government relies on the application of the framework of bilateral or multilateral investment protection 
agreements.  
In April 2017, the Board of Directors approved the Ghana Infrastructure Investment Fund's Investment Policy 
Statement marking the country's openness to both achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and also 
addressing climate change through investments in resilient infrastructure95. 
Gender based violence 
 
92
International 
Trade 
Administration, 
(2022). 
Ghana 
– 
Country 
Commercial 
Guide.  
https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/ghana-information-and-communications-technology-ict  
93
 Republic 
of 
Ghana, 
(2013). 
Ghana 
Investment 
Promotion 
centre 
ACT, 
2013. 
https://www.gis.gov.gh/PDFs/GIPC%20Act%202013.pdf  
94 Republic of Ghana, (1995). The five hundred and fourth act of the parliament of the republic of Ghana 
entitled the free zone act, 1995. http://images.mofcom.gov.cn/gh/accessory/201212/1354895042040.pdf  
95  Republic of Ghana,(2017). Ghana Infrastructure Investment Fund Investment Policy Statement. 
https://mofep.gov.gh/sites/default/files/reports/economic/GIIF%20Investment%20Policy%20Statement_April62
017.pdf  
Page 238

=== PAGE 243 ===
56 
 
Ghana has strong policies and laws and is also a signatory to international and regional human rights frameworks 
that aim to prevent and respond to SGBV and protect the vulnerable. In Ghana, forms of violence against 
women and vulnerable persons include: social violence, physical violence, psychological violence, economic 
violence. In addition to these forms of violence, women and girl minors are also exposed to sexual violence. In 
fact, one in three women in Ghana is likely to be a victim of gender-based violence, although it is more prevalent 
in rural areas of the country. As of August 2020, 31.9% of Ghanaian women have experienced at least one form 
of domestic violence - physical, economic, psychological, social or sexual. 
For several years, key civil society and women's rights organizations have been struggling to pass laws that not 
only protect women from all these forms of violence, but also punish the perpetrators. Indeed, in 2007 the 
government of Ghana enacted the Domestic Violence Act (Act 732). This law was followed by the formulation 
of the National Policy and Plan of Action (NPPOA) developed by the former Ministry of Women and Children's 
Affairs in 2008. Thus, the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare continues to lead the implementation 
of this policy. Since then, Ghana has slightly improved the framework for women to access labor opportunities 
on par with men. Selon le rapport 2020 du Forum économique mondial sur l'écart entre les sexes (GGG),  le 
Ghana se place à la 107e place (sur 153 pays). Already in 2019, the Human Development Report (HDR) ranks 
Ghana 142nd (out of 189 countries), with an HDI of 0.59616 while at the same time, the HDR's Gender Inequality 
Index (GII), ranks Ghana 133rd globally, with a GII of 0.54196. Despite some progress in the fight against gender-
based violence, civil society associations and NGOs still record cases of violence. However, the government has 
now directed gender actions towards the promotion of women through investment in resilience infrastructure. It 
is a matter of bringing men and women together around the issue of climate change by involving them at all 
stages of the infrastructure life cycle. To this end, the Ministry of Energy has allocated a budget for gender 
mainstreaming activities, although addressing the specific energy needs of women and children in the 
implementation of sectoral programs and projects remains a challenge97. 
Access to Finances 
Ghana has a low level of retail financial inclusion and access to finance for businesses remains a major 
challenge. The main problems facing Ghana's financial sector are low account ownership and usage, 
predominance of cash, limited access points for transactions Ghana's small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are 
functioning well and remain a fundamental part of the country's economic fabric as they play a crucial role in 
contributing to GDP growth by reducing unemployment and promoting innovation and social welfare. However, 
these SMEs are severely limited in their access to capital to increase their production. Likewise, women and 
women-led enterprises have difficulty accessing finance. Ghana has a low level of retail financial inclusion and 
access to finance for businesses remains a major challenge. The main problems facing Ghana's financial sector 
are low account ownership and usage, predominance of cash, limited access points for transactions Ghana's 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are functioning well and remain a fundamental part of the countries 
economic fabric as they play a crucial role in contributing to GDP growth by reducing unemployment and 
promoting innovation and social welfare. However, these SMEs are severely limited in their access to capital to 
increase their production. 
Likewise, women and women-led enterprises have difficulty accessing finance. In 2015, only 57% of women had 
access to formal financial services compared to 62% of men.  Ghana's financial inclusion remains largely 
unfinished. While more than 73% of adults lived on incomes above the poverty line, Ghana's population still had 
a low utilization of financial services. However, access to financial services in Ghana is still higher than average 
levels in Sub-Saharan Africa over the same period. In 2015, 58 percent of the population had access to a bank 
account in Ghana compared to 43 percent on average in sub-Saharan Africa and 39 percent had access to a 
mobile banking account compared to 21 percent on average on the continent. 
 
96 World Economic Forum, (2020). Global Gender Gap Report 2020. WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf (weforum.org)  
97 Adshead, D., Thacker, S., Fuldauer, L.I., Gall, S.S., Chow, N., Pant, R., Russell, T., Bajpai, A., Morgan, G., Bhikhoo, 
N., Boroto, D., Palmer, R., Cançado, D., Jain, N., Klöttschen, V., Lawal, H., Dery, P., Twum, E., Mohammed, G., 
Hall, J.W., and Agbesi, L. 2022. Ghana: Roadmap for resilient infrastructure in a changing climate. Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology & Innovation, Accra, Ghana. 
Page 239

=== PAGE 244 ===
57 
 
Poverty 
Ghana has long achieved significant economic growth and poverty reduction. With an economy based largely 
on the agricultural sector including coffee and cocoa exports, many Ghanaian families are farmers and work 
tirelessly to improve their crop yields and provide for their families. In 2018, the country was one of the ten fastest-
growing countries in the world, and by 2021 it will be the second largest economy in West Africa. This economic 
growth based on significant investment in the renewable energy sector, transportation and industrial 
infrastructure has enabled the country to make considerable progress in reducing poverty over the past 10 years. 
However, important inequalities remain, especially between the South and the North, as well as gender 
inequalities. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
Ghana has adopted affirmative action measures reserving 40% of seats in decision-making bodies for women, 
even though women make up nearly 50% of the country's population. In the national parliament, women 
represent only 13.8% of parliamentarians. In rural areas, estimates are still low. Very few women participate in 
decision-making in Ghana. Of 275 seats in the lower and single houses after the 2020 parliamentary renewals, 
only 40 seats are held by women, representing 14.5% of women. 
Ghanaian women are increasingly able to strive for rewarding positions in the industry, but they are 
underrepresented in the sector, especially in key or strategic positions. Through the development of the Gender 
and Social Inclusion Policy approved in February 2020 for the energy sector, women are encouraged to 
participate in the various activities in this sector. Indeed, this policy commits to having a workforce composed 
of 24.4% to 40% women by 2035. Currently only 11% of women hold management positions in companies in the 
sector, while the objective of this policy is to reach 40% of women in management positions by 2035.98 
  
 
 
98 Millennium Challenge Corporation, (2020). Working Towards Gender Inclusiveness in Ghana’s Energy Sector. 
Online Available: https://www.mcc.gov/blog/entry/blog-062220-towards-gender-inclusiveness-ghana-energy-
sector  
Page 240

=== PAGE 245 ===
58 
 
 
4.10 Guinea 
Demographics and human development 
The Guinea population is estimated to be 10 523 261 inhabitants according to the Third General 
Population and Housing Census (RGPH3) of 2014. According to Word development indicators, it should 
be above 13 million in 2019. Made up of a majority of women (52%), its demography is characterized 
by a high rate of growth (2.9), and more than three-quarters of the population is under 35 (77.4%). 
Furthermore, over a third of the population is aged 15-35 (34.5%). According to the EHCVM (2018-2019) 
survey, 79% of Guinean households are men, and 21% are women. From the point of view of natural 
resources, Guinea has more than half of the reserves of bauxite (2/3 before the recent discoveries of 
large deposits in South East Asia), large deposits of iron (9 billion tonnes), nickel, copper, gold, 
diamond, and titanium. What makes Guinean soil and subsoil a "geological scandal. 
Despite these natural resources and although having experienced a slight increase in its HDI, which is 
dropped from 0.341 in 2011 to 0.457 in 2015 and 0.477 in 2019 — which put the country in the low 
human development category— positioning it at 178 out of 189 countries and territories, (Human 
Development Report, 2020). At birth, the life expectancy is estimated to be 61.6 in 2019 compared to 
61.4 in sub-Saharan Africa. The mean years of schooling to 2.8. According to the results of the EHCVM-
2018/2019, the proportion of the population living below the national poverty line, i.e., with an annual 
per capita income of less than 5006,533 GNF, is 43.7% and higher in female-headed households than 
those led by men, respectively 44.9% and 43.5%. The results show the high vulnerability of households 
headed by women due to their low educational level. Many female heads of households are 
divorced/separated or widowed by others. On the individual scale, the EHCVM-2018/2019 report also 
showed that more than half of the poor in Guinea are women (53.6%).  
Education 
Guinea has the lowest literacy rate, with 23% for women and 38% for men. Although significant progress 
has been made in education, especially in primary school and in technical and vocational education, 
much remains to be done. In Guinea, education is compulsory only at the primary school level, with 
primary school enrolment in 2015 being 81% for boys and 69% for girls. Secondary and higher school 
enrolment is much lower, especially for women, with percentages of 23% in secondary and 6% in 
higher secondary schools compared to 37% and 14% for men. Girls account for 46.21c/o of the total 
number of learners in technical education and public and private vocational training. However, there 
is strong segregation by sector of activity: men are the majority in secondary sector training and 
women in tertiary sector training. Women account for 67% of learners in tertiary sector training, and 
men account for 80% of learners in secondary education. 
Moreover, in 2012, public IES had only 22.11% female students compared to 37.09% in private IES. Much 
remains to be done in education to develop skills for the country's socioeconomic transformation. The 
gross primary school enrolment rate rose from 81% in 2012 to 88.6% in 2017. However, this rate fell 
significantly in 2015 (79.8%) due to the Ebola epidemic before gradually improving to 88.6% in 2017. 
The primary completion rate fell from 59.4% in 2016 to 52.2% in 2017. As for secondary school, the 
enrolment rate increased from 38% in 2016 to 42.5% in 2017. With a Gross Primary Education Rate (GST) 
of 75.6% for girls and a still worrying dropout rate (9.0% for the whole, 10.1% for girls, and 8.2% for boys), 
Guinea is facing low enrolment among women/girls. As the training curriculum progresses, there has 
Page 241

=== PAGE 246 ===
59 
 
been a decrease in the number of girls. In secondary school, women's GER is 28% compared to 49% 
for boys. During  the 2014-2015 academic year, the proportion of female researchers was 6.2%, with 
an even lower proportion in the scientific and technical streams (2.36%). 
Employment 
According to the National Gender Policy Document 2017, the working-age population in Guinea is 
2,306,244, of whom 54% are men and 46% are women. In this workforce, 49% of men and 72% of 
women work for themselves. Despite their demographic weight (51.7%), Guinean women make up 
only 9.7% of the formal labour force (public and private). Overall, women make up less than 30% of 
the public service workforce. However, Guinean women are economically very active, even though 
most work in the informal sector. 
Salaried jobs generally occupy a small share of jobs in African countries. However, these jobs are the 
least precarious, and when they are regular, they are the best remunerated and provide those who 
hold them with social security. According to EHCVM 2017 In Guinea, the proportion of employed 
persons classified in the category of salaried jobs, jobs for which the holders receive wages, or can 
also be paid by commission on sales, or by other means remains very low, 13.5%. Data by sex show 
that the proportion of men who receive a salary among employment remains far superior to that of 
women (20.8% and 5.5%). 
The unemployment rate is higher among women (2.5%) than men (2%). It is the same trend in urban 
areas (5.4% against 4.4%) as in rural areas (0.8% and 0.5%). 
Health 
The Guinea DHS 2018 revealed that between 2012 and 2018 there is a 10% drop in the level of infant 
and child mortality. But this drop is mainly due to child mortality (1 to 4 years) which decreased by 20% 
during the same period. The two components of infant mortality (neonatal and postneonatal) 
remained almost constant during this period. Approximately 81% of women aged 15-49 who have had 
a live birth in the 5 years before the survey received antenatal care, provided by a qualified.  Staff. In 
nearly half of the cases, these are nurses or midwives who provided this care prenatal care (49%), 
physicians provided care in 17% of cases and technical health workers (ATS) in 15% of cases. One in 
seven women (14%) received no no prenatal care. According to the results of the test carried out at 
during DHS V, 2018, the HIV prevalence in the whole Guinean population girl aged 15-49 is estimated 
at 1.5%. This prevalence ranges from 1.6% among women to 1.3% among men aged 15-49. The 
percentages of women and HIV-positive men increase with age. Very low at ages 15-19 and 20-24 
years, the seroprevalence increases and reaches a maximum of 2.5% at 30-34 years in women and 
2.6% at ages 40-44years in men, then decreases by continues with age .The peak of prevalence is 
therefore reached earlier in women than in men. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
The access rate to electricity is 44% (including many illegal connections). The access rate is 20% in rural 
areas compared to 87% in urban areas. According to Doing Business, the country fell in terms of 
electricity connection from 119th in 2012 to 159th in 2018 with a score of zero in terms of reliability of 
supply and transparency of tariffs. The electricity tariff does not cover operating expenses. Electricity 
Page 242

=== PAGE 247 ===
60 
 
is sold at a maximum price of 800 GNF (less than $0.1) per kWh, while the average cost is 2,700 GNF 
per kWh ($0.3). 
Guinea is developing both the SE4ALL Action Agenda and the Investment Prospectus in the framework 
of the SE4ALL implementation in the ECOWAS region, coordinated by ECREEE. Before that, the main 
objectives of the Government in terms of access were fixed by a 2012 Energy Policy document that 
envisaged an increase of the access rate to 50% in 2020, as well as improvements in energy efficiency, 
an increase in the share of renewables and a reduction in the local electricity tariffs. A 50% access to 
clean cooking by 2025 was also foreseen. These objectives are being revised in the Action Agenda. 
Guinea has considerable renewable energy resources, particularly for hydroelectricity, for which 
around 4740 MW of potential has been detected. The energy demand in Guinea is projected to rise 
considerably, and – according to government forecast – additional capacity between 535 and 1838 
MW would be necessary by 2025. 
Overall, there is a low per capita energy consumption level by any gender, about 500 kep (kilo oil 
equivalent). The specific situation of women is characterized by a decline in the connection to 
electricity, low access to electricity, and a quasi-dominant use of coal as an energy source. In rural 
areas, women and men are affected differently by the challenges of accessing modern energy 
sources. Indeed, in the absence of accessible alternative energy sources and innovative practices, 
firewood and charcoal remain predominant, affecting women more in their cooking meals (as 
mothers or caregivers), exposing them to the harmful smoke of burning wood.  
Concerning the ICT use, the DHS 5 data showed that during the 12 months that preceded the survey, 
15% of women and 32% of men said they had used the internet. Among these women and men, 
respectively 42% and 49% have used it almost every day. The Guinean’s government has made the 
strategic choice to "make ICT a locomotive of the economic and social development of Guinea”. The 
authorities thus consider the telecommunications and the digital economy as essential factors of 
development and a transversal sector with a direct multiplier effect on all the other sectors of 
economic activity. The PNDES falls within this perspective by relying on the six main levers for the 
development of telecommunications in Guinea99:(i) the development of broadband networks; (ii) 
improving the energy supply; (iii) sharing infrastructures; (iv) the strengthening of regulations, through 
a “regulatory authority» strong and effective regulation”; (v) building the capacities of executives in 
the sector of telecoms/ICT; and (vi) the emergence of a telecommunications/ICT ecosystem. 
Socio cultural 
The Guinean population remains strongly influenced by ancestral customs that not only place the man 
at the head of the household but also grant the man dominance over the woman100. Indeed, in most 
communities in Guinea, there are rules and customary practices that establish the distribution of roles 
and tasks according to gender and that are in disfavor of women. As a result, women are used by 
their husbands, brothers or fathers as available "labor". Due to the persistence of social and cultural 
factors and the inequalities they engender, women remain vulnerable and 65% of them are illiterate 
but also face violence of all kinds. 
 
99 Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and Digital Economy, August 2016 
100 Canada: Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Guinea: Domestic violence, including legislation, 
protection 
provided 
to 
victims, 
and 
support services (2012 
September 2015). 
Online available: 
https://www.refworld.org/docid/563c5fb14.html 
Page 243

=== PAGE 248 ===
61 
 
Although the country's customary laws favor men as the head of the household, women have for 
some time gained some autonomy from their spouses. Indeed, according to DHS 2018 results, more 
than 73% of women in unions who were paid money for their work said they primarily decide how to 
use the money they earn. In 14% of cases, this decision is made jointly with the husband/partner. In 
contrast, 14% of women said it was mainly the spouse who decides on the use of the money they earn. 
Concerning the participation in making important decisions of the household: Overall, 30% of women 
have participated in making the 3 decisions and 37% were not involved in any decision making. It’s 
also reported that 67% of women aged 15-49 think it is justified for a man to beat his wife/partner for 
one of the reasons given. At the men, the percentage who share this opinion is 55%. FGC is widely 
practiced in most regions of the country, with 95% of women aged 15-49 having been cut. However, 
this practice is declining, as the proportion of girls who have been cut between the ages of 0-14 is 39% 
nationwide101. 
Policy and Legal framework 
In 1997, the Ministry for the Promotion of Women, Children and the Family (MPFEF) was created as the 
main government institution responsible for women's empowerment and gender equality. It is 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of the National Policy for Gender Equality, adopted in 
2010. This national policy sets the country's Vision, strategy, and priorities for strengthening gender 
equality and equity. It promotes equal rights for men and women, active and participatory citizenship, 
and equitable access to resources. One important component is to improve women's access to 
appropriate technologies that are less costly and less reliant on wood energy use. The "Gender and 
Development Thematic Group" (GT/GED) was established to facilitate dialogue between the 
Government, development agencies, and civil society to support the policy's implementation. 49. In 
2009, the Government attempted to adopt a new Family Code to introduce improvements for 
women's rights (inheritance, property, and marriage, among others). However, opposition from 
conservative groups forced the Government to withdraw the code. Two years later, a new code was 
introduced, resulting in several setbacks in terms of women's rights (World Bank, Mali Gender 
Assessment). 
Gender based violence 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is a major international health problem that constitutes a threat to 
sustainable peace and human dignity. As in many countries, the issue of gender-based violence is a 
major concern in Guinea. In fact, the phenomenon is becoming more and more recurrent, despite 
the efforts of women's rights organizations and human rights organizations. According to a report by 
the French development agency, "Between January 2012 and December 2015, the OHCHR office in 
Guinea and civil society organizations documented at least 3,021 cases of gender-based violence 
(GBV), including 1,001 cases of rape and sexual assault102."  
As mentioned in the sectoral document for social action, violence against women and children has 
increased in recent years in certain regions of the country. The most widespread and recurrent cases 
are rape of minors, early marriages, physical abuse, and female circumcision. This violence against 
 
101
 Republic 
of 
Guinea, 
(2018). 
Demographic 
and 
Health 
Survey 
2018: 
Summary 
Report. 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR262/SR262.pdf  
102 Agence Française de Développement, (2016). Gender Profile Guinea. https://plateforme-elsa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Profil-Genre-Guinee.pdf  
Page 244

=== PAGE 249 ===
62 
 
women and vulnerable persons is as widespread in urban areas as in rural areas (although the 
prevalence rates of violence vary slightly according to ethnicity). In most parts of the country, the 
prevalence of early marriage is among the highest in the world. Some regions have an early marriage 
prevalence rate of more than 70%, while the average for sub-Saharan Africa is 37%103. However, the 
country has made significant progress in the fight against gender-based violence and all forms of 
inequality and inequity against vulnerable people. As a result, the National Economic and Social 
Development Plan for the period 2016-2020 has been developed, including the reduction of social 
and gender inequality with a particular focus on the promotion of employment for women and girls. 
By taking the commitment to eradicate all forms of violence against vulnerable people, the country 
has adopted policies, plans and strategies to serve as a reference guide and achieve the objectives 
set. Thus, the country has developed the National Strategy to fight against gender-based violence; 
the National Strategic Plan for the abandonment of female genital mutilation 2012-2016 (PSN); the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy II III. The objective of the latter is to give special attention to the issue of 
“gender and equity” and in particular to promote the participation of women in political life and in 
decision-making bodies in order to correct inequalities between men and women104,105. 
Access to Finances 
The financial inclusion of vulnerable people and women is a major issue in most countries. This situation 
is also of concern in Guinea Conakry, where only 23% of the population is banked. Nevertheless, 
access to credit and financing is essential to enable vulnerable people and women to launch an 
income-generating activity and escape poverty. To promote the financial inclusion of women and 
youth some studies and strategic plan on the promotion of financial inclusion of women and youth 
for entrepreneurship and job creation have been conducted at the National Level. 
To promote the financial inclusion of women and youth, studies and strategic plan on the promotion 
of financial inclusion of women and youth for entrepreneurship and job creation have been 
conducted at the National Level. This is the case of the study conducted by the country in 
collaboration with the African Center for Economic Transformation (ACET); the Ministry of Youth, the 
Ministry of Social Action and Women's Promotion, banks, microfinance institutions, NGOs and other 
related associations where a responsive development-oriented financial system was proposed to 
meet the needs of the Guinean population, especially women and youth, who are mainly farmers. 
However, already in 2011, the country had created a decree "ANAMIF" with the mandate to design, 
implement and evaluate the government policy on microfinance with the main objective of 
improving access to finance for women and youth. To implement this decree, an $18.6 million 
microfinance fund for women and youth was created, with 80 percent of the resources dedicated 
to microcredit and 20 percent to financing support activities (SA, capacity building, etc.)106. Following 
 
103 Agence Française de Développement, (2016). Gender Profile Guinea. https://plateforme-elsa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Profil-Genre-Guinee.pdf 
104 Republic of Guinea, (2011). Second National Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for Poverty Reduction-
DENARP 
II 
 
2011-2015. 
https://www.cabri-sbo.org/uploads/bia/guinea-
bissau_2011_planning_external_national_plan_author_region_portuguese_.pdf  
105 Republic of Guinea,(2013). Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper III (2013-2015). https://scorecard.prb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/Document-de-Strate%CC%81gie-de-Re%CC%81duction-de-la-Pauvrete%CC%81-
DSRP-III-2013-2015.-Guine%CC%81e.pdf  
106 Republic of Guinea; The world bank, (2018). Diagnosis and preparation of a national financial inclusion 
strategy. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/pt/577621548998046677/pdf/Guinea-Financial-Inclusion-
Diagnostic.pdf  
Page 245

=== PAGE 250 ===
63 
 
the experience of ANAMIF and the government's commitment to private sector reform, Guinea has 
created a Private Investment Promotion Agency (APIP) whose mission is to implement the 
government's national private investment policy. In this regard, one of the agency's major objectives 
is that "all men and women, especially the poor and vulnerable, have equal rights to economic 
resources and access to new technologies and adequate financial services, including microfinance. 
Nevertheless, these various actions taken by the Guinean state reveal important challenges. The 
main challenge is to close the urban-rural gap, the youth gap, the gender gap, and to ensure that 
excluded groups have the digital and financial capacity to benefit from the advantages of digital 
finance. 
Poverty 
The Republic of Guinea, despite its enormous natural and human potential, remains one of the 
poorest countries in the world, with a Human Development Index of 0.477 in 2019, ranking 178th out 
of 189. According to the results of the Harmonized Household Living Conditions Survey, the number 
of poor people is estimated at 5,264,038 in 2019. While the rural population represents more than 64% 
of the population in 2019, 55.4% of the rural population (nearly 4.5 million) lives below the poverty line. 
With a poverty rate of 44.6%, women remain the most vulnerable group in Guinea, compared to 
42.8% for men. Although the difference is small, women remain the poorest segment of the population 
and account for more than half of the country's poor (53.6%). The incidence of poverty is 44.9% 
among female-headed households, compared with 43.5% among their male counterparts107. More 
than 77% of the poor are young people under the age of 35. Although the depth and severity of 
poverty has improved since 2012 in the population as a whole, female-headed households remain 
the most affected. Women thus remain the poorest, most vulnerable, and least endowed with the 
capacities and resources to assert their rights and interests in the arbitrations in which they are 
involved alongside men. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In recent years, Guinean populations have been affected by the negative impacts of climate 
change such as drought and flooding108. However, because of the different roles and responsibilities 
assigned to men and women, they feel the impacts of climate change differently. Guinean culture 
relegates women to the background, which limits their access to decision making in the household, 
the workplace and in politics. According to the 2013 report by the Ministry of State for the Economy 
and Finance, 52.4% of women are not considered on the same level as men in agricultural water 
management and remain marginalized in the decision-making process. Thus, women's interests and 
needs are masked by their low participation in decision-making in this sector (agricultural sector) 
where they are satisfied only with market gardening as their source of income. And when, under the 
effect of climate change, populations are confronted with drought problems, this lack of 
consideration for women farmers becomes critical while their participation in the policy and decision-
 
107 Republique of Guinea; National Institute of Statistics (NIS), (2019). Harmonized Survey on Living Conditions of 
Households, 
EHCVM-2018/2019: 
Final 
report. 
 
https://www.stat-
guinee.org/images/Documents/Publications/INS/rapports_enquetes/INS_Rapport_Final_EHCVM%20GUINEE_01
_03_2021.pdf  
108 République de Guinée, (2019) Plan d’Actions de la Guinée 2019 – 2023 pour la mise en place du Cadre 
National 
Pour 
les 
Services 
Climatiques 
(CNSC).https://gfcs.wmo.int/sites/default/files/GUINEE_PLAN_CORRIGE_11_2018_reducedsize.pdf  
Page 246

=== PAGE 251 ===
64 
 
making process remains insignificant109. However, provisions for decision-making on the sharing of 
land and the choice of areas to be developed have been included in the country's land and 
property code. Nevertheless, customary law deprives women of their rights. 
In the energy sector, the lack of equal numbers of women and men in the energy ministries and 
parastatals appears to be the primary barrier to equal participation. Among the 33 senior executives 
in the ministry of energy, only 2 are women. Within Guinea’s renewable energy division, there are 11 
women and 50 men.110. 
At the political level and in the management of the country's administrative positions, very few 
women are represented. However, the country has made progress in the representation of women 
in parliament, increasing from 7% in 1995 to 22.8% in 2020111. In May 2019 Guinea passed the Parity 
Law, ensuring equal representation for women on electoral lists from 30% to 50%112. 
 
 
 
 
109Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation. (2017b, January). Guinea's Accelerated Food and 
Nutrition Security and Sustainable Agricultural Development Program, 2016-2020. Republic of Guinea. 
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/gui172926.pdf  
110  ECREEE (2015), Situation Analysis of Energy and Gender Issues in ECOWAS Member States: 
https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/downloads/resource/situation_analysis_of_energy
_and_gender_issues_in_ecowas_ECREEE.pdf 
111
Inter-parliamentary 
Union 
(UIP), 
(2020). 
Women 
in 
Parliament: 
1995-2020. 
https://www.ipu.org/fr/file/8938/download  
112 ONU Femmes: https://www.unwomen.org/fr/news/stories/2019/5/news-guinea-adopts-law-on-parity  
Page 247

=== PAGE 252 ===
65 
 
4.11 Kenya 
Demographics and human development 
Kenya is a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic country with a population of 54,985,702, of which women 
make up over 53% of the population. The country is diverse in terms of geography and ethnic 
population. Indeed, many different groups make up the country's population. The following ethnic 
groups are found throughout the country: Kikuyu; Luhya; Luo; Kalenjin; Kamba; Kisii; Meru; Other 
Africans and Non-Africans. On the Human Development Index (HDI), Kenya scores 0.671 and is ranked 
109th out of 153 countries on the Global Gender Gap Index 2020. Thus, the drops 33 places from the 
2018 ranking. Similarly, in the Global Gender Gap Index ranking, the country is ranked 114th with a score 
of 0.598. This low score shows that Kenyans face a challenge in participating in economic opportunities 
in the country. Kenya's main economic sectors remain Agriculture (54.3%) Industry (6.2%) Services 
(39.4%). These three sectors contribute 35.2%, 16.2% and 42.2% respectively to GDP 113. With the 
economic growth in recent years, Kenya's population has increased considerably, thanks to a decline 
in the mortality rate at birth from 39 in 2010 to 31 in 2020. Life expectancy at birth has increased since 
2000 from 51 to 67 by 2020 (World Bank, 2022). 
Education 
In Kenya the national education system consists of three levels: compulsory primary education (starting 
at age six), secondary education, and higher education. Thanks to free schooling at the primary and 
secondary levels, the country has seen an increase in the national enrollment rate. In 2020, nearly 1.77 
million women were enrolled in secondary schools in Kenya. Although primary education is now free 
in Kenya, families sometimes face barriers to sending their children to school. In rural Kenya, one in two 
girls is married before the age of 19. The legal age of marriage is 16. The percentage of girls who marry 
before age 18 is 30.5 percent. This situation prevents women from reaching higher education. In 
addition, housework was often left to girls. However, the development of girls through infrastructure 
projects, particularly electricity and telecommunications, will reduce the time spent looking for wood. 
The latter will be able to turn to new technologies to learn and strengthen their skills. 
Employment 
According to the country's national statics, in 2020, about 17.4 million people were employed in Kenya , 
compared to 18.1 million people 2019. The majority of employees were in the informal sector. About 14.5 
million worked in informal conditions, while 2.9 million were employed in the formal sector. Although the 
unemployment rate in 2021 for the population aged 15-64 increased from 5.4 percent in 2020 to 6.6 
percent, it remains low. To produce more quality jobs, investments in resilient infrastructure are needed. 
Health 
 
113 Republic of Kenya, (2022). Country profile Kenya. Online Available: Les indicateurs économiques du Kenya : 
Croissance - Objectif Import Export (objectif-import-export.fr)  
Page 248

=== PAGE 253 ===
66 
 
The Kenyan health care system is divided into three categories: public providers, private non-profit organizations 
(including faith-based hospitals, mission hospitals, and local and international NGOs), and private for-profit 
providers. In recent years, the country's health care system. The goal is to Stay the Course on Universal Health 
Coverage in Kenya. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
 Kenya has a relatively well-developed physical infrastructure. Among other things, the country has 
four international airports, an extensive road and rail network, a modern deepwater port in Mombasa 
capable of handling bulk and other containerized cargo, an expanding liberalized energy sector, and 
digital telecommunications. Moreover, Vision 2030 emphasizes the development of key infrastructure 
sectors, including energy and roads. Despite a low population density (54.99 million inhabitants for a 
surface area of 580,370 km²) and a human development index of 0.671, which places it 109th in the 
world, Kenya has made rapid progress in electrification over the past 10 years. To achieve its Vision 
2030, Kenya has made significant investments in roads, railroads, ports, airports, water and sanitation 
facilities, and telecommunications. 
Nationally, the rate of access to electricity is 71.4% while over 62.7% of the rural population has access 
to electricity. Thanks to these investments in renewable energy, emissions from the Kenyan electricity 
sector are particularly low. In addition, the installation of power plants has enabled the development 
of communities, especially those living in rural areas, by enhancing the agricultural sector. Ultimately, 
the Kenyan energy sector is guided by various constitutional, policy and legal frameworks. The 
government has pronounced its commitment to gender equality through various statutory instruments 
and national international protocols and declarations that include. These are: 
• 
The Constitution of Kenya 2010; 
• 
The Energy Act, 2019 
• 
The National Energy Policy, 2019;  
• 
Kenya National Electrification Strategy 
• 
Kenya's Vision 2030 
• 
National Gender and Equality Commission Act, 2011. 
• 
The National Policy on Gender and Development, 2000 
In the transport sector, although the Logistics Performance Index (LPI), which measures the quality of 
trade and transport infrastructure, remains average, the country has taken a step backwards, from 3.2 
in 2016 to 2.55 in 2018. In the telecommunications sector, Kenya's Vision 2030 proposes an intensified 
application of STI to increase output and efficiency levels across the three pillars. 
Sociocultural 
 A multi-ethnic country, Kenya's cultural heritage is dominated by handicrafts. The gestures and 
methods of work are transmitted from generation to generation. The culture of Ghana is based on 
ancestral traditions. Each town and village in Ghana has a "royal family" descended from the first 
family to settle there. In fact, queen mothers are chosen from these families, and are the guardians of 
the cultural traditions. The current governmental situation has not integrated the status of queen 
mothers into the institutions representing the regions, and their role has been reduced to an essentially 
honorary title. However, as they become better educated and, more importantly, connected, 
Ghanaian queen mothers are beginning to reclaim their traditional role by modernizing it. They are 
Page 249

=== PAGE 254 ===
67 
 
acquiring new skills and collaborating with their counterparts in other African countries. As a result, 
they are playing an increasingly important role in the fight for girls' education and against female 
genital mutilation, early marriage, poverty and other societal problems. Their involvement in 
community development projects will further fight against gender inequality. 
Policy and Legal framework 
A unitary state divided into 47 counties, the Republic of Kenya is governed by the national government 
and 47 county governments. The Parliament of Kenya is a bicameral chamber consisting of the 
National Assembly and the Senate. The National Assembly of Kenya has a total of 349 members plus 
the Speaker who is an ex-officio member. Kenya's political framework incorporates a strong focus on 
youth and the vulnerable, including the disabled, who are represented in the Senate114.  
For better management and enforcement of legal texts at the national level, Kenya has adopted a 
specific legal framework for each sector of activity allowing the country to relax the conditions and 
criteria for investment in the country. Since 1998, the country has adopted the Kenya Information and 
Communications Act. Indeed, the main legislation governing the telecommunications sector in Kenya 
is the Kenya Information and Communications Act (KICA). This Act sets out the general legal 
framework for telecommunications in Kenya.  This Act has enabled the country to attract a lot of 
foreign investment through PPPs in telecommunications / information and communication 
technologies. 
In general, the Kenyan government has relied on PPPs for the implementation of strategic 
infrastructure projects since 2013. Adopted in 2013, this law made Kenya the first country in East Africa 
to have legislation governing PPPs. With the new investment, through PPP programs and projects 
Kenya has advanced the level of infrastructure development while reducing poverty and promoting 
gender equality and women's empowerment in the long term. To improve these relationships in terms 
of resilient infrastructure investment, Kenya has passed several pieces of legislation to promote gender 
equality, protection of the vulnerable and women's empowerment. The Access to Government 
Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) Act ensures that men and women participate fully in public 
procurement. 
Gender based violence 
Gender-based violence takes many forms, including female genital mutilation, rape, domestic 
violence, and forced and early marriage, sometimes to older men. According to a recent study in 
Kenya, gender-based violence affects 32% of young women between the ages of 18 and 24, 
compared to 18% of their male counterparts. For several years, Kenya has been experiencing the 
effects of climate change, particularly drought and floods. When the drought crisis intensifies, the 
population especially those in rural areas are heavily impacted. These impacts range from crop 
failure to loss of livestock and sometimes difficulty in finding wood for cooking. Due to the impact of 
the drought, dowries in cash, food, and livestock decrease, sometimes forcing families to marry off 
more girls (UNICEF, 2022). In northeastern Kenya, early marriage and genital mutilation are 
increasingly common, with more than four out of ten women being given in marriage before the 
 
114 Republic of Kenya,(2022). The Government 
and the Political System. Online Available: http://www.kenyarep-jp.com/en/kenya/government/  
Page 250

=== PAGE 255 ===
68 
 
legal age of 18, while 80% of women. While girls face increased risks of child marriage, with 
prevalence rates already reaching 98%. 
In pursuit of achieving these goals for the SDGs, one of which is to end all forms of gender-based 
violence by 2030, Kenya has put in place policies and strategies to prevent and respond to gender-
based violence.  For example, the National Policy on Prevention and Response to Gender-Based 
Violence was launched in 2014. The country has also ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women. In addition, for the country, including women in the planning, 
implementation and management of resilient infrastructure projects that affect their daily lives can 
help reduce gender inequalities and respect women's rights and needs. While women are an 
important source of quality labor to boost and accelerate progress towards the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, at the same time, their contribution will help eradicate poverty in the 
country. 
Access to Finances 
With the opening up to investment in the country, Kenya has made significant progress in financial 
inclusion, tripling its financial sector in 13 years. In Kenya, several surveys have been conducted 
including in 2006, 2009 and 2013 to measure the country's financial inclusion landscape. The reports 
from these surveys showed that Kenya has made significant progress in promoting financial inclusion 
among its population. In addition, two more FinACCESS surveys were conducted in 2016 and 2021. 
According to the 2016 report, nearly 7 out of 10 Kenyan adults held a registered account with a 
formal financial institution115. According to the 2019 Financial Access Household Survey, financial 
access is available to over 83 percent of the Kenyan population. However, gaps still exist by wealth, 
gender and geography. The gender gap in financial inclusion in Kenya remains significant. Another 
household survey conducted in 2021 by Finaccess reveals that eight out of ten Kenyans (83.7%) have 
access to formal financial services. This time, the gender gap in access to financial services has 
improved from 8.5 percent in 2016, to 5.2 percent in 2019, to 4.2 percent in 2021116  
To further involve women in the country's economic development process, the Kenya SDF has 
undertaken work on gender and women's economic empowerment through a number of actions. 
These include the Women's Economic Empowerment Project (completed in Marsabit), a survey of 
gender-sensitive financial products and services among urban women traders, and a gender review 
of financial laws in Kenya. Notwithstanding the multiple initiatives undertaken to facilitate improved 
access to financial services for the entire Rwandan population, people in rural areas largely do not 
benefit from these changes due to lack of essential infrastructure such as electricity. Moreover, 
energy is essential to charge phones and other digital equipment necessary for mobile money 
transactions. The project to extend the electricity network, especially renewable energy in Kenya, will 
indeed increase economic activity in rural areas and, in the medium term, the multiplication of 
mobile money services and, in the long term, the implementation of banking services. 
Poverty 
 
115 Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Kenya, (2016).  FinAccess 
Household Survey. https://fsdkenya.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/The-2016-FinAccess-household-survey-
report4.pdf 
116 FSD Kenya, (2022). Online Available:  https://www.fsdkenya.org/blogs-publications/blog/putting-women-at-
the-centre-of-inclusive-
finance/#:~:text=Kenya's%20financial%20inclusion%20gender%20gap,then%20to%204.2%25%20in%202021.  
Page 251

=== PAGE 256 ===
69 
 
As the largest economy in the East African Community (EAC), with a GDP of USD 100 billion in 2019, 
or USD 1,998 per capita, Kenya is the only middle-income country in the EAC. To increase its growth, 
Kenya has long embarked on the process of modernizing all sectors of economic activity. As a result, 
the country's national poverty rate fell from 46.8 percent in 2005/06 to 36.1 percent in 2015/16. In rural 
areas, the poverty rate has dropped significantly from 50% in 2005/06 to 38.8% ten years later due to 
the industrialization of the agricultural sector and the electrification of rural areas117. The impact of 
climate change, particularly drought, has had a major impact on the population, especially the rural 
population. The weakness of rural infrastructure, especially irrigation, has limited the growth of 
agriculture. In addition, strong demographic growth, increased income of the population and 
urbanization have created increased pressure on the environment. Poverty and food insecurity have 
also increased pressure on natural resources. Also, opportunities for access to arable land are limited 
by disasters. Thus, the country is once again plagued by poverty, especially among the vulnerable 
and women. New investments in resilient infrastructure are an opportunity for the country to ensure 
continued economic growth while reducing the risks associated with climate shocks. The installation 
of power plants such as solar thermal or wind energy will allow Kenya to reduce greenhouse gases 
and also increase the country's energy security. According to the Government of Kenya's 2013 report, 
electricity generation from renewable sources including wind power could enable the country to 
reduce up to 2.5 metric tons of CO2 by 2030 (Government of Kenya, 2013.) 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
After a series of reforms in the country, including the revision of the constitution in 2010, equality for all 
and non-discrimination are among the important national values and principles of governance set 
out in Article 10 of the constitution. These national values and principles should guide the country in 
its process of economic development, modernization and effective gender mainstreaming in 
decision-making. In sum, the 2010 constitution promulgated in Kenya requires that the number of 
male MPs not exceed two-thirds of the members of parliament, i.e. at least 33% of the seats should 
be held by women. However, three years later, only 68 women were elected to the 349-seat National 
Assembly in 2013, representing less than 20% of the seats. This is because Kenya does not have a 
specific law on equality and non-discrimination, while the government has chosen simply to 
incorporate these principles into various pieces of legislation, policies and other interventions to 
provide protection to the vulnerable. Still, the country has achieved an all-time high in the number of 
women in high decision-making bodies, ranking 76th among the top 100 countries in the world 
ranking of women in national parliaments118. 
In 2017, women were elected as governors and senators. In addition, the number of women in the 
country's decision-making bodies has increased globally.  Now, women now hold 172 of Kenya's 1,883 
elected seats, up from 145 after the 2013 elections. However, more work needs to be done as 
significant barriers remain for women seeking elected office. Now to further engage women in 
decision-making, new investments in resilient infrastructure can help Kenya achieve these goals. In 
fact, the project must involve companies at any stage of the infrastructure lifecycle that have more 
than 30 percent women in management, or more than 30 percent women on their boards, 
considering equity in the workplace. 
 
117
 World 
Bank, 
(2020). 
Poverty 
& 
Equity 
Brief; 
Sub-Saharan 
Africa; 
Kenya. 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-4AE2-ABC7-
AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_KEN.pdf  
118 Republic of Kenya. https://ke.boell.org/sites/default/files/86_and_counting_bookweb_09_03_15.pdf  
Page 252

=== PAGE 257 ===
70 
 
In Kenya, gender mainstreaming in the planning and delivery of transport and energy infrastructure 
and services is very important because women's and men's transport and energy access needs and 
patterns are different. In Kenya's local communities, women are generally not represented in 
decision-making roles or are sometimes very poorly represented. At the household level, there is a 
form of inequitable gender relations that limit women's decision-making power, as well as their access 
to public space.  Women in communities hold positions as chiefs or leaders of villages or communities. 
However, they are poorly represented at the national level. At the chief's level, only 4.9% of women 
hold this position compared to 95.1% of men, and 8.3% of women participate in decision-making 
positions as assistant chiefs. 
 
 
 
Page 253

=== PAGE 258 ===
71 
 
 
4.12 Mali  
Demographics and human development 
Mali's population is about 15.8 million inhabitants, of which 51 percent are women. The vast majority 
of the population (80 percent) lives in rural areas, where the national electrification rate in 2016 was 
19.39 percent (39 percent national, 86 percent in urban areas).  
Mali's HDI value for 2018 is 0.427, positioning it at 184 out of 189 countries and territories. The 2018 female 
HDI value is 0.380, significantly lower than the 0.471 for males, resulting in a Gender Development Index 
(GDI) value of 0.807. In terms of gender inequality, it is one of the unequal countries in the world: Mali 
has a GII value of 0.676, ranking it 158 out of 162 countries in the 2018 index. For every 100,000 live 
births, 587.0 women die from pregnancy-related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 169.1 births 
per 1,000 women of ages 15-19. (Human Development Report, 2019).  
Education 
Similar to other countries in the region, women and girls in Mali have less access to education than 
men and boys. The adult literacy rate for women is 25.7 percent, whereas the rate for men is 46.2 
percent. The proportion of adult women who have reached at least a secondary level of education 
(7.3 percent) is less than half the percentage of their male counterparts (16.4 percent). In comparison, 
78.2 percent of school-age boys and 66.1 percent of girls are enrolled in primary schools, only 48.3 
percent complete the primary school cycle. In some areas of the country, less than 36 percent of 
enrolled children are girls, one of the widest gender gaps in the world. This is unlikely to improve in the 
short term, as insecurity has resulted in the closure of many schools, particularly in Central Mali (WFP, 
Draft Mali country strategic plan 2020-2024). 
Employment 
World Bank data show that In Mali, Female participation in the labour market is 61.2 percent compared 
to 80.6 for men and As elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa, females are under-represented in political 
decision-making in business and employment. Females are also under-represented amongst owners 
and managers of formal enterprises in Mali – although according to estimates, the informal economy 
accounts for up to 70 percent. In 2010, females in the formal economy represented 13.1 percent of all 
managers, while in 2007, females were 16.3 percent of owners. Similarly, other Sub-Sahara African 
countries show that female-controlled firms differ from their male-controlled counterparts. 
Health 
Despite the interest given to maternal health in recent decades in Mali, in particular through the 
policies of free caesarean section (2005), free means of prevention and treatment of malaria in 
pregnant women (2010) and the institutionalization of notification of maternal deaths, peri and 
neonatal (2017), pregnancy and childbirth remain associated with high risks for mothers. 
Page 254

=== PAGE 259 ===
72 
 
The results of the recent Demographic health survey indicate a maternal mortality rate among women 
aged 15-49 of 0.70 deaths per 1,000 woman-years of exposure. The highest rates are in the age groups 
30-34 and 35-39 years (respectively 0.97 per 1,000 and 1.41 per 1,000). The overall percentage of 
female deaths that are related to motherhood is 21%. This percentage increases with the age of the 
mother up to the 35-39 age group, beyond which a decline is observed. Thus, the percentage of 
female deaths related to maternal causes is lower among women in the 40-44 age group (9%) and 
among those aged 45-49 (6%). The pregnancy-related mortality ratio decreased overall between 2001 
and 2018, from 582 per 100,000 live births in the 7 years before 2001 to 465 per 100,000 live births in the 
7 years before 2006, then to 368 per 100,000 live births. 100,000 live births in the 7 years before 2012-
2013 and 373 per 100,000 live births in the 7 years before 2018. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
The national access to electricity in Mali is 41% (17% in rural areas), and the electrification rate remains 
low, with around 19% of households connected to the electricity network. The country has enormous 
potential for renewable energy sources. Still, these are poorly exploited, which accentuates the 
energy deficit as the country is dependent on imported petroleum products and wood combustible 
from its natural forests. This situation has a considerable impact on the country's environmental 
situation. Indeed, Mali's energy sector remains very vulnerable to climate change due to its high 
dependence on hydropower. The entire energy system is under the threat of climate change. This 
situation requires prioritization and more rapid deployment of renewable energy technologies such as 
solar energy and biomass. The burden of securing the household’s energy supply falls 
disproportionately on women. . Statistics on total energy consumption in the country in 2016 show that 
women account for 77 percent of all biomass use. 
Mali faces significant environmental problems such as desertification, floods, and rapid deforestation. 
Women are more victims of the adverse effects of climate change. Still, certain women's activities, 
such as the artisanal transformations of agricultural products the sale of wood and coal, negatively 
impact the environment. So, concrete measures should accompany the ongoing awareness-raising 
campaigns, such as the development of collection pits for processing dyeing wastewater, 
development of soaps workshops, etc. The national priority is to strengthen efforts to promote the 
adoption of appropriate technologies that are less costly and less energy-consuming for all men and 
women in rural areas. 
Mali has a vast classified road network, consisting of 89,024 km, of which approximately 24,000 km are 
developed, ranging from rural tracks (cotton and pastoral) to international road corridors, coated 
either with bituminous concrete or surface dressing. The paved network, consisting mainly of national 
roads, has a length of 5,700 km. The road density is 1.80km/100km², one of the lowest in Africa. This 
weakness is even more accentuated in the northern regions119. 
In terms of communication infrastructure, Mali’s telephone network is at a very low level of 
development. The development of its telecommunication infrastructure is mostly in the urban areas 
with 69.9% of all lines in the biggest cities. Its telephone density (telephones per hundred people) in 
urban areas is 1.78, compared to 0.08 for the rest of the country. 
 
119
 Note 
on 
the 
sector 
transport 
in 
MALI, 
AfdB 
2014 
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications/AfDB_-_Mali_-
_Note_sur_le_secteur_des_transports.pdf  
Page 255

=== PAGE 260 ===
73 
 
Socio-cultural 
As in most African countries, the social and professional situation of Malian women is often inferior to 
that of men for various reasons, all related to education. Certain ancestral practices are a hindrance 
to the education of girls. These practices range from child rape to early marriage. The large amount 
of time spent on certain activities such as the search for wood and household chores is a hindrance 
to the education of girls. Young girls who have been forced into marriage do not benefit from a pre-
marital period that would allow them to gain space for expression as adults, to make those choices in 
education and to develop personal projects. Excision and infibulations are practices that affect the 
bodily integrity of Malian women in certain regions of the country even though they are denounced 
in the country. 
In Mali, there is a gender division of labor based on a patriarchal organization that still keeps women in 
reproductive functions in society. This situation creates a disparity between men and women in their 
economic occupations. In these patriarchal social systems, the man is the authority in the household, 
and his wife owes him respect and obedience. He makes all important decisions and is responsible for 
providing for the family. Women have remained on the margins of literacy activities because of their 
multiple occupations, the reluctance of their husbands, socio-cultural constraints and the extreme 
poverty of the populations, especially in rural areas. 
Policy and Legal framework 
In 1997, the Ministry for the Promotion of Women, Children and the Family (MPFEF) was created as the 
main government institution responsible for women's empowerment and gender equality. It is 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of the National Policy for Gender Equality, adopted in 
2010. This national policy sets the country's Vision, strategy, and priorities for strengthening gender 
equality and equity. It promotes equal rights for men and women, active and participatory citizenship, 
and equitable access to resources. One important component is to improve women's access to 
appropriate technologies that are less costly and less reliant on wood energy use. The "Gender and 
Development Thematic Group" (GT/GED) was established to facilitate dialogue between the 
Government, development agencies, and civil society to support the policy's implementation. 49. In 
2009, the Government attempted to adopt a new Family Code to introduce improvements for 
women's rights (inheritance, property, and marriage, among others). However, opposition from 
conservative groups forced the Government to withdraw the code. Two years later, a new code was 
introduced, resulting in several setbacks regarding women's rights (World Bank, Mali Gender 
Assessment). 
Gender based violence 
Mali has few national legal instruments working for gender equality. With respect to violence against 
women, domestic violence, or sexual harassment, the country has no specific law; only rape is 
punishable under criminal law. Indeed, Mali has not yet brought its national system into line with the 
international instruments that have been ratified. In 2014, more than 40% of women and girls aged 15 
or older were victims of domestic violence120. According to the latest Mali Demographic Health 
Survey (EDSM) of 2018, 45% of women aged 15 - 49 have experienced physical or sexual sexual 
violence in the Kaye region. Approximately 89% of women aged 15-49 have been cut, three-quarters 
 
120LUX DEV, (2019). Gender equality in MALI https://luxdev.lu/files/documents/Genre_MLI_vF2.pdf  
Page 256

=== PAGE 261 ===
74 
 
of them before the age of five, while 18% of women aged 25-49 are in union before the age of 15 
and this proportion reaches 53% before the age of 18.121 Among children aged 0-14, 73% of girls have 
been excision. Despite the efforts made by the Malian government with the support of its partners, 
the indicators related to gender-based violence are very alarming. The main factors that contribute 
to GBV are, among others, the social and cultural constraints and the persistence of harmful practices 
such as female circumcision, levirate, sororate and child marriage.) 
According to statistics from the Malian Association for the Monitoring and Guidance of Harmful 
Practices (AMSOPT), more than 200 cases of gender-based violence were recorded between 2019-
2020 in the regions of Yélimané, Diéma and Kayes. In 2021, the number of GBV cases increased in 
Mali. Between January and October 2021, more than 7,900 new cases of GBV were recorded 
according to the GBV information and management system (MINUSMA, 2021). Approximately 49% of 
Malian women between the ages of 15 and 49 report having experienced emotional, physical 
and/or sexual violence at least once in their lives. In order to fight against GBV and promote gender 
equality and women's empowerment, several Malian civil society organizations and local NGOs have 
benefited from the technical and financial support of MINUSMA and international NGOs with 
expertise in GBV. 
Access to Finances 
Since 2020, the combined effect of the pandemic and poor agricultural performance has impacted 
the Malian economy, which is experiencing a slowdown in its growth rate (World Bank, 2020). This 
situation has an impact on the population, particularly women, who suffer from financial exclusion. 
With a rural population that represents more than 56% 122 of the total population, the country's 
economic activities are dominated by the informal sector. This situation limits the population's access 
to basic financial services offered by the country's traditional financial institutions. A 2016 UNDP report 
shows that the net per capita income for women is US$1,349 while for men it is US$3,071 and 49.3% of 
the population lives on less than US$1.90 per day. Four out of five Malians residing in rural communities 
do not have access to the financial capital needed to develop economic activities (FAO, 2020). 
However, to improve the living conditions of its population, the Government of Mali has developed, 
with the support of its partners, strategies for the financial inclusion of its population, particularly 
women and the disadvantaged social strata. This includes the Inclusive Financial Services in the 
Agricultural Sector Project (INCLUSIF), co-financed by IFAD and the Kingdom of Denmark, to improve 
the financial inclusion of small farmers and small and medium-sized agribusinesses in Mali. A financial 
inclusion program in place since 2011 supports income-generating activities and community savings 
groups in the country. Finally, in order to better integrate Malian women, particularly those living in 
rural areas, the Malian government has adopted a law on agricultural orientation which provides for 
equitable access to agricultural land resources and the possibility of taking positive discriminatory 
measures for vulnerable groups. 
Poverty 
 
121
 Republic 
of 
Mali,(2018). 
Demographic 
and 
Health 
Survey 
2018: 
Summary 
Report 
. 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/SR261/SR261.pdf  
122  The world Bank,(2020). Population rural (% de la population totale) – Mali. Online available : 
https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/indicateur/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?locations=ML  
Page 257

=== PAGE 262 ===
75 
 
With a GDP per capita of $862.5123, and growing insecurity since 2012, most of the Malian population 
is experiencing food insecurity. Mali's population is growing at a rate of 3.6% per year, while more 
than three-quarters of its population lives in rural areas. In recent years, Mali has been faced with 
numerous security and environmental challenges. The impacts of climate change such as drought 
and floods have left thousands of Malians facing hunger. In fact, recurrent droughts and floods 
entrench poverty and undermine people's resilience. In 2017, 115,000 pregnant or breastfeeding 
women in need of nutritional assistance and 620,000 children124 in a situation of acute malnutrition 
were counted across the country. This problem specifically impacts women since they tend, in the 
event of a lack of sufficient food, to deprive themselves of their ration in favor of their children. 
Between 2011 and 2013, the monetary poverty rate rose from 45.4% to 47.1%, an increase of 1.7%. 
However, in 2013 more than 54% of the rural population dominated by women, lived below the 
poverty line. In 2014, the highest poverty rates were recorded in the regions of Sikasso (65.8%) and 
Mopti (60.4%). At the national level, about 43.6% of the population lived below the national poverty 
line, 88% of whom (mainly women and children) live in rural areas over the 2018-2019 period.125  
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Mali, women's decision-making capacity in reproductive health, financial empowerment, and 
politics is low. However, they play a very important financial role in nutrition and health expenditures 
within their households. Women are also marginalized politically and in terms of decision-making. 
Indeed, there are obstacles to Malian women's access to decision-making positions at the 
community, communal and parliamentary levels. Consequently, very few women are represented in 
decision-making bodies. In 2015, only 8 women were elected as mayors out of 703 available positions 
and 927 communal councillors out of 10,774, i.e., a representation rate of 8.6% for women versus 
91.4% for men126. There are also 6 women national councilors out of 75. In 2013, less than 10% of 
women were represented in the national assembly. Despite the strategies adopted and the laws that 
have been passed, the rate of women's representation and participation in decision-making in the 
governance of the country remains low. The low level of education and the weight of socio-cultural 
roles are two important blocking factors.  
In December 2015, a law was passed to include women in decision-making bodies and at the 
forefront of the Malian political scene. This law calls for a 30% quota for women in nominative and 
elective positions in Mali. In fact, after the legislative elections of 2020, nearly 28% of women will be 
sitting in the Malian parliament. Since the beginning of the political crisis in Mali, the proportion of 
women parliamentarians has dropped considerably. In February 2021, only 8% of women sit in 
parliament; 17.4% of women hold leadership positions. However, senior and middle management 
positions are where women are better represented with a rate of 33.7%127. 
 
123
 The 
World 
Bank, 
(2020). 
GDP 
per 
capita 
(current 
US$) 
- 
Mali 
https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/indicateur/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=ML&view=chart  
124 Republic of Mali, (2022). MALI: Nutrition Overview. Online Available. https://www.instat-mali.org/laravel-
filemanager/files/shares/eq/analyse-ipc-malnutrition-oct2021.pdf  
125 Xun Yan, Boulel Toure, Aly Sanoh, (2020). Note on the state of the economy and Poverty in the Time of COVID-
19. 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/193171601535830644/pdf/Mali-Economic-and-Poverty-
Update-during-COVID-19.pdf  
126 EISA, (2015). Appui à La Mobilisation et à la Participation Effective des Femmes au Processus De la 
Gouvernance Locale au MALI. https://www.eisa.org/pdf/mali2015women.pdf  
127 UN Women, (2021). Online Available: https://data.unwomen.org/country/gambia  
Page 258

=== PAGE 263 ===
76 
 
Women and youth are poorly represented in the decision-making bodies of civil society organizations (CSOs) 
and in municipal bodies. On this basis, women's intervention mechanisms capable of influencing decisions are 
lacking and their opinion in community projects (installation or rehabilitation of infrastructures) counts for very 
little. However, efforts have been made through the government and particularly through organizations that 
defend the rights of women and vulnerable people to ensure their effective and successful involvement in 
positions of responsibility. In addition, women constitute an important workforce in Mali's economic sectors. 
However, their proportion in decision-making bodies is much lower than that of men. In recent years, members 
of decision-making bodies in various infrastructure fields and women themselves have become aware of the 
need for their involvement in the management of public affairs at all levels: institutional, parliamentary, 
community and also at all stages of the infrastructure life cycle. At the local level, the presence and participation 
of women in the management of CSOs and community affairs are improved through the existence of parallel 
action mechanisms and the number of places for them in the bodies and instances of public life management. 
 
 
 
 
Page 259

=== PAGE 264 ===
77 
 
4.13 Mauritania 
Demographics and human development 
According to the National Agency of statistics the Mauritius’ population is estimated to 4.3 million of 
inhabitant which 50.7% are women. the Mauritius’ HDI value for 2019 is 0.804, which put the country in the 
very high human development category—positioning it at 66 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 
1990 and 2019, Mauritius’ HDI value increased from 0.624 to 0.804, an increase of 28.8 percent. The 2019 
female HDI value for Mauritius is 0.791 in contrast with 0.811 for males, resulting in a Gender Development 
Index value of 0.976, placing it into Group of countries with high equality in HDI achievements between 
women and men. The Gender Inequality Index (GII) is estimated to a value of 0.347, ranking it 78 out of 
162 countries in the 2019 index. 
Education 
Significant progress has been made in the education sector. The HDR 2020 shows that the mean years 
of schooling increased by 3.8 years between 1990 and 2019 and the expected years of schooling 
increased by 4.6 years in the same period.  But some gender disparities remain concerning the level 
of literacy. The National Demographic and health survey (2019-2021) results showed an improvement 
in the literacy rate from the older generations to the younger but the gender gap remains. Among 
women, the literacy rate raises from 40% among those aged 45-49 to 68% at 15-19 and it goes from 
67% to 75% respectively among men. The proportion of adult women who have reached at least a 
secondary level of education is estimated at and 65.8 percent compared to 68.5 percent of their male 
counterparts. The World Bank strategic country diagnostic in January 2022 revealed that the more 
pressing gender gaps in education are around sex segregation by subject, with women less likely to 
follow science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) streams at school, less likely to be in 
vocational education and, among those in tertiary education, less likely to be on doctorate (PhD) and 
master of business administration (MBA) programs. This segregation, informed by gender norms around 
the types of subject that are suitable for women and girls, feed into gender gaps in employment 
Employment 
According to the world Bank, in Mauritius, women stop working at an early age to marry and raise their 
children. So, their rate of participation in the labor market is particularly low 45.2 percent compared 
to 72.0 for men. The unemployment rate is certainly much higher among women than among men 
and this difference seems to be particularly accentuated among 24- to 33-year-old which is the right 
age to give birth. In 2012, female unemployment stood at 12.6%, i.e. 46% higher than that of men 
(8.6%) In Mauritania, the labor market participation rate for young women was only 18.5%. Indeed, the 
combination of several factors has shown that women have often have less access than men to 
productive resources, education, skills development and the labor market. They still remain confined 
to their vast majority in the exercise of domestic work, work in the informal sector (crafts and trade) 
and often work in lower paid jobs than men. This situation confirms their underrepresentation in several 
sectors of public or private life, especially in level of scientific and technical branches (for example in 
the transport and communication sector, 7.6% of employees are women against 92.4 for men). A 
recent Enterprise Survey conducted jointly by the Mauritian National Productivity and Competitiveness 
Council (NPCC) and the World Bank found that women account for only 13 percent of top managers 
Page 260

=== PAGE 265 ===
78 
 
and only nine percent of businesses are majority female owned. However, having female 
management is associated with fewer skill shortages and increased support mechanisms for female 
employees128. 
Health 
Even if there is room for improvement, Mauritius has a free and high-quality universal healthcare system 
and close to 100 percent of births are attended by skilled health staff, only a third of pregnant women 
initiate prenatal care in the first trimester and the maternal mortality rate (61 deaths per 100,000 live 
births) is high compared to the average for middle and high-income countries (43 and 11, 
respectively). The adolescent birth rate is 25.7 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19. The number of 
infant deaths, that is deaths among children aged under one year, registered in 2019 was 173, 
corresponding to an infant mortality rate (IMR) of 14.3 per thousand live births compared to 13.8 in 
2018 and to 15.3 in 2007. Although there are many encouraging results, the impacts of climate 
changes will have with a more detrimental impact on women, if gender equality is not addressed on 
time. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
In Mauritania, the transport sector is under increasing pressure from more congestion. Much of the 
primary and secondary road network, and virtually the entirety of the tertiary network, are not 
engineered roads and have been constructed by paving of the former tracks across sugar cane 
production areas, leaving them highly exposed to the impacts of climate change. The lack of Resilient 
Infrastructure and quality transport infrastructure remains a major obstacle to the growth of the 
Mauritanian economy, in general and in particular, the empowerment economy of women, 
especially in rural areas. Indeed, rural women still continue to suffer great problems for the sale of their 
products derived from crafts, market gardening and picking. Given the vastness of the country and 
the configuration of its reliefs, the development of transport infrastructure is an essential issue to 
promote the exchanges, reduce production costs, strengthen the competitiveness of the national 
economy and reach rural or remote areas which are areas where the poor are concentrated 
(including the majority are women), which, moreover, contain a significant potential for production 
and economic growth. 
According to the world bank systematic country diagnostic report (2022), earlier efforts in the 
liberalization of the telecommunications sector in Mauritius allowed for new players to join the industry 
and provide competitive connectivity rates. Consequently, Mauritius is doing well in terms of access 
to telecommunications and broadband services, boasting high penetration rates such as 151 percent 
for mobile penetration and 87 percent for broadband penetration respectively. Much progress has 
also been done on the cornerstones for the digital governance. Recent years have been marked by 
the significant push of the Government of Mauritius to advance a digital strategy for services and the 
country’s adoption of digital transformation is thus expected to achieve greater maturity in the coming 
years. 
 
128 World Bank (2021). Investing in Foundational Skills in Mauritius. Input to the World Bank’s 2021 
Systematic Country Diagnostic Report, March. Washington D.C. 
Page 261

=== PAGE 266 ===
79 
 
Access to energy is a major problem in Mauritania, as the energy needs of the Mauritanian population 
are not covered. Indeed, only 47.3%129 of the population has access to electricity in 2020. In addition, 
there are significant inequalities between urban and rural areas. The rate of access to electricity in 
2020 in the urban area is 88.4% while in the rural area it is less than 10%. In 2020, the country adopted 
a national strategy for the transformation of its energy sector and aims to increase the access rate of 
the national population by turning more towards renewable energy.  The country's goal is to increase 
the share of renewable energy to 60% by 2030. 
Socio-cultural 
Mauritania is a multicultural and multiethnic country, made up with different Arab and black African communities 
who all share the same religion, Islam. The Islamic rites are the cement that unites the people of the country 
despite the sociological and political differences that sometimes create inter-community tensions. Within 
Mauritanian society, the status of men and women is strongly influenced by religion but also by the customs and 
traditions of different social groups that make it up. As a result, the status of women differs from one community 
to another and from one social class to the other. Despite the strong political commitment of the Mauritanian 
Government, materialized by the adoption of several strategies and texts in favor of the advancement of women 
and gender equality gender. 
Policy and Legal framework 
The Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare is the government entity in charge 
of policies and programs for women’s empowerment and the promotion of gender equality in Mauritius. 
For the Legal Framework the Government has taken the following actions towards gender quality: 
- 
Mauritius has ratified the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discriminations Against 
Women (CEDAW); 
- 
Mauritius is party to the 1997 SADC Declaration on Gender; 
- 
Mauritius is party to the 1998 Addendum on the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against 
Women and Children; 
- 
Mauritius is party to the 1998 Addendum on the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against 
Women and Children; 
- 
Mauritius has signed the African Union Declaration on Gender Equality in 2004; 
- 
Mauritius has signed the Commonwealth Plan of Action on Gender Equality 2005-2015; 
Mauritius has signed and ratified the Protocol on the Rights of Women of the African Charter on Human 
and People’s Rights in 2005. 
Gender based violence 
The Demographic health survey 2019-2021 data revealed that in Mauritania, the percentage of women 
aged 15-49 who declared having already suffered violence since the age of 15 is 10% and this situation 
vary with the level of education of the women. Women with a higher level of education suffered acts of 
physical violence less frequently than the others (7% against 10% among those with primary education 
and 15% among those with no level of education). They were also more likely to report having been 
 
129
 The 
World 
Bank. 
Access 
to 
electricity 
(% 
of 
population) 
– 
Mauritania 
https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=MR  
Page 262

=== PAGE 267 ===
80 
 
victims of sexual violence (13%) than those with primary education (6%) and those with secondary or 
higher (5%). 
Access to Finances 
 According to Global Findex 2017 data, Mauritius has the highest financial inclusion rate on the 
African continent: 89.8%, more than double the average for sub-Saharan Africa (42.6%) and well 
above the average for high-income countries (73.1%). The financial inclusion rates were 80.1% and 
82.2% respectively in 2011 and 2017. Gender disparities regarding access to financial services are 
minimal: 87.1% of women have access to the domestic financial system. In 2017, a Mauritian had an 
average of at least two bank accounts. Just under one in two (42%) bank accounts registered in the 
country benefited from a line of credit in the same year. In addition, more than two-thirds (68.5%) of 
the adult population made electronic payments in 2017, a level well above the sub-Saharan African 
average (34.4%) and slightly above the average for high-income countries (62.3%). The quality of the 
technological and financial infrastructure has also facilitated the rapid development of mobile 
money in the country: over 90% of the adult population has a mobile money account, while only 50% 
had one in 2013. 
Poverty 
Climate change affects men and women differently - which in turn affects exposure to poverty - 
depending on their roles and responsibilities in the household and community. In many communities, 
climate change has a disproportionately greater effect on women. The national official statistics showed 
that women are more likely to be in relative poverty130. The proportion of female in relative poverty was 
11.0% against 9.6% for male. Out of 130,500 persons in relative poverty, 70,300 were females and 60,200 
were males. In 2017, 15.9% of female-headed households were in relative poverty as compared to 7.6% 
of male-headed households.  
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In July 2006, the adoption of the ordinance relating to the promotion of the involvement of women in the political 
decision-making process which imposed a minimum quota of 20% for the representation of women on every 
municipal and legislative list has boosted their presence in municipal and parliamentary decision-making 
spheres. The 2020 human development report data showed that 20% of parliament seat are held by women 
and according to the 2021 UNDP annual report, 30.2% of managerial position are occupied by women in the 
country. Women also hold 20% of positions ministries, five of the 25 ministries being headed today by women.  
A study on the gender country profile conducted in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania by the African 
Development Bank, shows that there is a low participation of women in decision-making positions in the 
Mauritanian administration. Within the civil service, key positions are mostly held by men and women are mainly 
administrative officers (25.2%) and secretaries (83.7%) and represent only 5.9% of the directors of the 
administration131. The country's energy sector, particularly the oil and gas sector, is a male-dominated industry. 
As a result, women are largely underrepresented in these sectors in decision-making positions. 
 
 
 
130 Republic of Mauritius (2020), statistics in Mauritius A Gender Approach Year 2018 
131
 AFDB, 
(2015). 
Profil 
genre 
pays 
republique 
islamique 
de 
la 
Mauritanie. 
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-
Operations/PROFIL_GENRE_MAURITANIE-2015.pdf  
Page 263

=== PAGE 268 ===
81 
 
4.14 Namibia 
Demographics and human development 
According to World Bank data the total population of Namibia is about 2.5 million, of which 52% reside 
in rural areas and 51.5% (WDI, 2020) are women.  Namibia’s 2019 HDI of 0.646 is above the average of 
0.631 for countries in the medium human development group and above the average of 0.547 for 
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Between 1990 and 2019, Namibia’s HDI value increased from 0.581 to 
0.646, an increase of 11.2 %. The life expectancy at birth also increased by 2.1 years. The mean years 
of schooling increased by 1.4 years and expected years of schooling increased by 1.5 years. Namibia’s 
GNI per capita increased by about 57.0 percent between 1990 and 2019. 
Namibia performs relatively well on gender equality; however, further efforts are needed. In the 2018 
Global Gender Gap Report, Namibia ranked 10th out of 149 countries, a significant improvement from 
40th out of 142 countries in 2015. The gains have largely been driven by improvement 37.0 % of 
parliamentary seats are held by women and achievement of gender parity at all education levels. 
Despite the progress, gender inequality persist in many domains: the proportion of female population, 
for instance with at least secondary education in Namibia (39.9%) is lower than the average for 
medium Human Development Index (HDI) countries (42.9%), and employment rates for females 
(69.1%) are lower than their male counterparts (73.5%) according to the 2018 Labour Force Survey. This 
is despite the parity observed in primary and secondary education levels. Gender inequity also exists 
in access to finance and titled land. Furthermore, Gender Based Violence remains a challenge in 
Namibia. About 32% of all women aged 15-49 have experienced physical violence since the age of 
fifteen years. 
Education 
According to the UNDP, Namibia National Human Development Report 2019, Namibia has made 
progress in making education accessible to all boys and girls in primary and secondary schools. The 
differences in education literacy levels are visible between rural and urban areas. The level of 
education in Namibia is high, with only 5 percent of women and 8 percent of men having no formal 
education. Women are more likely to reach higher levels of education than men. In most regions in 
Namibia, women tend to complete more years of schooling than men, and 40.6 percent of adult 
women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 42.0 percent of their 
male counterparts. The World Bank data’s show that the youth female literacy rate was 96.2% and 
94.1 for their male counterpart in 2018. The most recent data (2018) on primary school completion rate 
is  also high for women (96.9%) than men(91.2%). 
Employment 
According to the 2018 Labour Force Survey, there were 876,908 youth aged 15 to 34 in Namibia, of 
whom 310,854 (35.4%) were employed, and 265,770 (30.3%) were unemployed. This means that the 
labour force in these age groups totals 576,624 persons, giving a Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR) 
of 65.8%. Sex disaggregated data show a labour force participation of 65.0% for women and 66.5 % 
for men.  The statistics also show that the overall youth unemployment rate is 46.1% which is an increase 
of 2.7% compared to the youth unemployment rate of 43.4% reported in the year 2016. Female youth 
Page 264

=== PAGE 269 ===
82 
 
experience a higher unemployment rate of 48.5% compared to their male counterparts 43.7%. In 
Namibia, women hold approximately 44% of leadership positions. 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
According to the African Development Bank (Afdb country strategy paper, 2020-2024), Namibia’s 
energy Installed generation capacity currently stands at 611 MW, of which 521 MW is available against 
a peak power demand of 672 MW in 2018. Lack of access to energy remains a critical barrier to 
poverty alleviation and Namibia’s industrialisation efforts. In 2019, only 35% of the rural population had 
access to electricity compared to 74.6% for the urban population. The current national electrification 
rate stands at 55.2%, compared to 87.4% in South Africa. Rising urbanisation and rapid growth in mining 
have exacerbated the electricity supply gap. The shortfall in domestic supply is met through imports 
from South Africa and the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP). However, supply is at risk as the region 
faces generation and transmission bottlenecks. Namibia is well endowed with renewable energy 
resources, including hydro, and natural gas, which have not been fully exploited. The Government’s 
energy sector goal NDP5 is to have a sustainable mix of locally generated capacity of 755 MW by 2023 
to support households and industry, reduce reliance on imports, and increase the national electricity 
access rate from 49% in 2018 to 67.5% by 2023. To this end, Government of Republic of Namibia (GRN) 
is encouraging investments by Independent Power Producers (IPPs) in the renewable energy space, 
while promoting off-grid solutions to ensure rural communities and peri-urban areas are supplied with 
electricity in a cost-effective manner in support of inclusive growth. 
According to the Living Standards Survey 2016, when it comes to cooking activities, households 
headed by women are more likely to go without electricity than those headed by men (64% versus 
58%); the same goes for lighting (66% versus 57%). The trend in energy consumption shows that female-
headed households are in rural areas/slums where access to electricity is low. These areas either have 
low incomes or have different spending priorities. In addition, the heavy dependence on wood in the 
same areas for energy means that women will constitute the majority of people likely to suffer from 
deforestation, in the sense that they will have to walk long distances and spend more time looking for 
wood. 
The AFDB country strategy paper also showed that Namibia has a relatively well-developed road 
network covering 45,380 km, of which 14% is paved. About 93% is either in good or fair condition. The 
rail network comprises 2,382 km of Cape gauge configuration like the rest of the region. The railway 
network plays an important role in the movement of bulk freight. Namibia’s largest port, Walvis Bay, 
has recently undergone expansion and modernisation. The expansion of the port container terminal, 
which was commissioned in August 2019, is part of long-term plans to position the country as a logistics 
and distribution hub for the SADC region. The port is linked to the region through four transport corridors, 
the promotion of which is key to the sustainability of the port.  
Namibia has achieved significant progress in the expansion of access to ICT services. The mobile 
phone population coverage and subscription rates have increased significantly, standing at 95% and 
103%, respectively. However, in comparison with peer MIC countries, Namibia still lags behind in use of 
internet (31%) and fixed broadband subscription rate (2.2%). In the 2019 Global Competitiveness 
Report, Namibia is ranked 91st out of 141 countries on the ICT Adoption Pillar with a score of 48.1. This 
highlights the need for the country to make further progress in the ICT space to build a foundation for 
a knowledge-based economy. 
Socio-cultural 
Page 265

=== PAGE 270 ===
83 
 
In Namibia, culture has been integrated into key documents such as the 2001 Arts and Culture Policy 
and the National Development Plan 3 (2007-2012). However, in recent years, its role in the 
development process has been less important, especially since it is not integrated into the National 
Development Plan 4 (2013-2017)132. The country, therefore, faces the complex challenges of redressing 
socio-cultural imbalances. Addressing women's inequalities in Namibia remains complex as the 
country is divided into thirteen regions containing eleven ethnic groups with a wide range of tribes 
among them and ancient traditions. 
It should be noted that for a long time women were considered the property of men until the country's 
independence. After independence, many changes to improve gender equality, as well as equality 
for all, were incorporated into the country's new constitution133. As a result, women have the right to 
sign contracts, register property in their own names and be directors of companies. 
Policy and Legal framework 
The Namibian Constitution provides the foundation for principles of gender equality in Namibia. Those 
principles were highlighted in Article 10, Article 95(a). These constitutional provisions form the basis of 
the commitment of the Namibian Government to the improvement of the status of women in society 
and the eradication of the injustices of the past. Towards this end, measures have been implemented 
to promote economic and social justice for women. 
The National Gender Policy conforms to the provisions of several national, regional, and international 
legal instruments, which the Namibian Government has adopted, signed, and/or ratified to promote 
gender equality. These include: 
• The SADC Declaration on Gender and Development and its Addendum on the Prevention and 
Eradication of Violence against Women and Children 
• The SADC Protocol on Gender and development 
• The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (BPFA) 
• The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW,1997) 
and its Optional Protocol 
• The Convention on the Rights of the Child (1990) 
• The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in 
Africa (2003) 
• The UN Convention against Transnational Crime, 2000 (UNTOC) and the Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, known as the Palermo 
Protocol 
• The UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace, and Security (2000) 
• The International Conference on Population and Development (1994) 
• The Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) 
 
132 Republic of Namibia Namibia’s, (2012). Fourth National Development Plan http://www.npc.gov.na/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/NDP4.pdf  
133 The Borgen Project. Online Available: https://borgenproject.org/gender-wage-gap-in-namibia/. consulted 
on [06/20/2022] 
Page 266

=== PAGE 271 ===
84 
 
• The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) 
• The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 
The Government adopted the National Policy Frameworks for promoting gender mainstreaming in 
Namibia, including the National Development Plans (NDPs) and Vision 2030, which recognizes the 
NDPs as the main instruments to implement policies and programs to achieve the Vision. The Third 
National Development Plan (NDP3) represents the first systematic attempt to translate the Vision 2030 
objectives into concrete policies and actions. NDP3 identified five core areas to be mainstreamed 
through sector programs and programming processes. They include Gender, HIV and AIDS, Poverty, 
the environment, information, communication, and technology. The Gender Policy seeks to create an 
enabling environment for institutions and sectors to mainstream gender perspectives according to the 
NDP directives. 
Gender based violence 
As an equitable and gender-sensitive nation, the majority of Namibia's population, and women in 
particular, enjoy a safe environment, largely free from violence, including gender-based violence 
and crime. The country is prepared to face and respond to any man-made or natural calamity. 
According to the 2013 Namibia Demographic and Health Survey, 33 percent of women aged 15 to 
49 have experienced some form of physical or sexual violence. Orphans in rural areas are particularly 
vulnerable to exploitation through trafficking and other forms of forced labor. In 2015, the first human 
trafficking case was successfully prosecuted in Namibia. As a result, the country has seen a significant 
decrease in the number of GBV. As a result, the country has set a target to lower the GBV prevalence 
rate from 3% (2013) to 20% by 2022134. 
Access to Finances 
Financial inclusion plays a central role in fighting poverty and contributing to Namibia's inclusive 
economic growth. Indeed, the Namibian government has long viewed financial inclusion as a key 
driver of inclusive economic growth and prosperity for its people. In fact, the government has made 
it an overarching national program integrated into Namibia's financial sector strategy.  
Poverty 
With a population of over 2.5 million in 2020, 20% of the population lives on less than US$1.9 per day 
and unemployment remains high. Women and people living in rural areas are among the most 
affected populations135. The country ranks 8th in sub-Saharan Africa on the Human Development 
Index (HDI) and 130th out of 188 countries in the world.  With the COVID-19 crisis and the effects of 
climate change impacts such as drought, the poverty situation especially in low-income communities 
has worsened. 
Indeed, the Namibia Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) report (2021) shows that the incidence of 
multidimensional poverty (H) is 43.3%, which means that 43.3% of the Namibian population is 
 
134
 Republic 
of 
Namibia, 
(2017). 
Namibia’s 
5th 
National 
Development 
Plan 
(NDP5). 
https://www.ecb.org.na/images/docs/Investor_Portal/NDP5.pdf 
135
 Republic 
of 
Namibia, 
(2021). 
Country 
sheet. 
Online 
available: 
https://www.tresor.economie.gouv.fr/Pays/NA/situation-economique-et-financiere-de-la-namibie-avril-
2018#:~:text=Sur%20le%20plan%20social%2C%20le,peu%20plus%20de%2020%25%20fin  
Page 267

=== PAGE 272 ===
85 
 
multidimensionally poor. The report also highlights the fact that the incidence of multidimensional 
poverty is higher among female-headed households (with a rate of 46%), than among male-headed 
households (with a rate of 41%). 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
Namibia is one of the countries with a high rate of women's participation in decision-making positions. 
In fact, since 2013, the 50/50 gender policy that requires "equal representation of men and women" 
in parliament has been implemented by the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) party. 
After the implementation of this policy, women's positions in parliament increased from 25% to 44%. 
Thus, an inclusive environment, in political and urban settings, has been created for women in 
Namibia. As a result, the number of women in politics and decision making has increased significantly. 
The percentage of women in politics and decision making has increased from 44% to 47% (2015) with 
a target of 50% for the years 2021-2022136. 
For several years now, communities in the North have been working towards women's empowerment with many 
stakeholders dedicated to increasing the role of women in the justice system. The main actors are the 
International Development Law Organization (IDLO), which has been leading the project, and Women's Action 
for Development (WAD), an inclusiveness group with community members from every constituency in northern 
Namibia. In addition, women are increasingly participating in decision-making at the local level, as traditional 
gender norms have evolved and become more inclusive.  Women chiefs are already working in the customary 
courts. 
 
 
 
 
 
136
 Republic 
of 
Namibia, 
(2017). 
Namibia’s 
5th 
National 
Development 
Plan 
(NDP5). 
https://www.ecb.org.na/images/docs/Investor_Portal/NDP5.pdf  
Page 268

=== PAGE 273 ===
86 
 
4.15 Federal Republic of Nigeria 
Demographics and human development 
The population of Nigeria is estimated above 184.6 million inhabitants, of which 49.3137  percent are 
women. Nigeria also has the fastest-growing demographics, about the average population growth 
rate for West Africa, i.e., 2.7% per year. The ratio between the urban and rural populations is 48.3 
percent to 51.7 percent. According to UNDP (2020), Nigeria's Human Development Index (HDI) value 
for 2020 was 0.539, placing the country in the low human development category, ranking it at 161st 
out of 188 countries.  
Nigeria is ranked 139 out of 156 on the 2021 Gender Gap Index countries, with a score of 0.627. On the 
AfDB Gender Equality Index 2015, Nigeria is ranked 23rd out of 52 countries. The AfDB Index reflects 
women's status in three dimensions of equality: economic opportunity, social development and law, 
and institutions. The ranking is 0-100, with 100 representing perfect gender equality. Nigeria's overall 
score is 54.7%; it ranks 18th in economic opportunities, an unsatisfactory 32nd in human and social 
development, and 30th in-laws and institutions.  
Education 
Data from the Demographic and Health Survey 2018 showed that men are better educated than 
women. Thirty-five percent of women and 22% of men age 15-49 have no formal education, while 11% 
of women and 17% of men have more than a secondary education. The percentage of women with 
no education has decreased since 2003, from 42% to 35%. The median number of years of schooling 
completed has increased from 5.0 to 6.5 years during the same period. Among men age 15-59, the 
median number of years of schooling has increased from 6.6 to 10.5 years. Results also revealed that 
the percentage of women who have a secondary education or more is highest in Lagos (68%) and 
lowest in Sokoto (5% ). 
Employment 
According to World Development Indicators the female labour force participation rate is 44.2 % in 
2021. The latest Demographic and Health Survey (2018) showed that seventy-four percent of currently 
married women age 15-49 were employed in the 12 months before the survey, as compared with 99% 
of currently married men (Table 15.1). Among those employed, women are less likely than men to be 
paid in cash only (73% versus 80%). Fifteen percent of women and 8% of men do not receive any 
payment for their work. Trends: The percentage of currently married women employed in the 12 
months before the survey has increased slightly over time, from 71% in both 2008 and 2013 to 74% in 
2018. After increasing from 81% in 2008 to 93% in 2013, the percentage of employed married women 
who receive cash earnings (including cash and in-kind) declined to 85% in 2018. The percentage of 
employed married women not paid for their work declined from 17% to 6% between 2008 and 2013 
before rising to 15% in 2018. 
 
137 WORD DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS 2020 
Page 269

=== PAGE 274 ===
87 
 
Health 
The health profile of Nigeria has improved in recent years, but it remains worrisome overall. The under-
5 mortality rate has been enhanced from more than 191 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 89 per 1,000 live 
births in 2014. However, it remains higher than the regional and global averages. The most frequent 
causes of child mortality are malaria (20%), pneumonia (17%), other diseases (14%), prematurity (12%), 
and diarrhea (11%). Child malnourishment is widespread. The rate of children under five with stunted 
growth has stagnated above 40 % since 2000. For the population, the most frequent causes of death 
are infectious diseases (81%), non-communicable diseases (14%), and injuries (5%). Nigeria is one of 
the few countries worldwide where polio persists. However, it is limited to the northeastern states. 
Fertility is at six children per woman, above the regional average (5 children) and the world average 
(2.5 children). Maternal mortality was 243 per 100,000 live births in 2014, which was higher than the 
world average (200 deaths per 100,000 live births) (see figure 12). Life expectancy at birth was 49 years 
in 2005 and has increased to 52.3 years in 2012 (53.4 years for women and 51.7 years for men). 
Energy, transport and telecommunications 
Although Nigeria is rich in energy resources and the largest oil-producing country in Africa, access to 
modern energy such as electricity, liquid and gaseous fuels, modern cooking options, and mechanical 
power remains a major challenge for its citizens'. With 55.4%138 access, nearly half the population is 
unelectrified, and most households, especially in the rural areas (only 25.5% access), use mainly 
biomass to cook.  
While access to modern energy services is documented as necessary for economic growth and 
development, Nigeria's energy sector has struggled with low investment, inadequate, and ailing 
infrastructure, which resulted in shortages and consequent rise in costs, access, and affordability to 
the vast majority of people. This situation is severe among more vulnerable women. In Nigeria, as within 
the ECOWAS region and most Sub-Saharan African countries, there is heavy dependence on 
traditional biomass, with 85% of people still cooking with charcoal and firewood. Biomass represents 
57% of the final energy consumed139.  
The primary energy source for most rural people in Nigeria is biomass, which may be sourced in some 
cases more than five kilometres away. This harms women in traveling long distances on foot, but 
women usually carry heavy loads of firewood on their heads, compromising physical health and 
wellbeing.  
On energy (electrification) access: i) there is differential access by men and women to electrification, 
possibly because of socioeconomic status; ii) women and men have different preferences for off-grid 
lighting products and appliances; iv) in patriarchal societies of which Nigeria is one, men usually make 
buying decisions within the household with men going for 'luxury' type goods (i.e., television) rather 
than domestic appliances that can help lessen the domestic chores of women. Also, men and women 
use electricity differently.  
Concerning access to ICT, according to a youth survey report issued by the National Bureau of 
Statistics, in Nigeria young men are almost twice as likely to have a career in computer science and 
technology-related fields as women. Also, no access to Information and Communications Technology 
 
138 WORD BANK: WORD DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS 
139 SITUATION ANALYSIS OF ENERGY AND GENDER ISSUES IN THE ECOWAS MEMBER STATES, 2015 
Page 270

=== PAGE 275 ===
88 
 
(ICT) infrastructure or to the internet for municipal use is not the only evidence of digital gender divide, 
education, lack of electrical infrastructure, income, and urban drift, and a variety of other social and 
political factors also contribute to Nigeria’s growing digital gender divide. The Nigeria’s DHS 2018 report 
showed that, internet has gradually become an important means of transacting business and sharing 
information through social media. Other forms of media organisations have also adopted the internet 
as a means of reaching people. There are currently online shopping platforms through which business 
is transacted on a daily basis in Nigeria. Also, some e-health platforms have started operating in the 
country. The internet has become a very important tool through which information is accessed. 
Overall, 30% of women and 31% of men age 15-49 use the internet at least once a week 
Socio-cultural 
The culture of Nigeria, is one of the oldest in West Africa, with several cultural practices from the many 
civilizations that have followed. However, some of the socio-cultural factors in the country pose a 
threat to the health and well-being of Nigerian women. These factors limit: the access of the girl child 
to education in some settings, women's access to decision making and their participation in the socio-
economic and political activities of the country. 
Similarly, the Nigerian society is traditionally patriarchal which places the man at the head of the family 
and dominates over the woman. This situation has a negative impact on women's participation in 
formal and informal decision making. Discrimination against women is one of the factors that limit their 
full capacity.  While the economic value of women is estimated to represent in 2015 about 30% of the 
gross national product (UNDP, 2015), the majority of them are paid less than men. In several regions of 
the country, especially in rural areas, women face cultural practices that oppress them (early 
marriage, female genital mutilation, widowhood practices, etc.). 
To date, several women's and vulnerable people's rights organizations are advocating for women-
friendly constitutions and legal frameworks and financial inclusion of women for their development. 
Policy and Legal framework 
Nigeria has developed a national gender policy (NGP) to replace an erstwhile National Policy on 
women, to actually; 
• 
Eliminate all bearers 
• 
Advance gender equality and reduce poverty levels 
• 
Not only economically empowering women through income earnings, but also consciously 
empowering them to own production assets. 
Various international instruments on the protection of the reproductive health rights of women has 
been signed and ratified by Nigeria: 
• 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 1948 
• 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 1966 
• 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) 1979 
• 
The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in 
Africa, 2005 
Gender based violence 
Page 271

=== PAGE 276 ===
89 
 
Gender-based violence remains one of the most persistent human rights violations in Nigeria, 
particularly in rural areas. These cases of violence are observed in homes, schools, health facilities, 
and administrative settings. Indeed, with the insurgent activities of armed groups in some parts of 
Nigeria, gender-based violence (GBV) is increasing astronomically. This violence ranges from forced 
and early marriages to physical, mental, and sexual assaults on women and minor female children. 
According to a 2013 Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey study, nearly 30% of Nigerian women 
experienced physical violence before the age of 15 (NDHS 2013). According to the 2018 Nigeria 
Demographic and Health Survey, the proportions of women aged 15-49 who are victims of 
emotional, physical and sexual violence are 31%; 9% and 6% respectively. While the country is taking 
steps to protect women, girls and vulnerable persons from violence in all its forms, it is clear that these 
cases of violence have increased in recent years. Indeed, there has been an increase in cases of 
violence against women since 2008. In fact, the prevalence of one or more of these forms of domestic 
violence was higher in 2018 than in 2008 (31%) and 2013 (25%)140. However, civil society organizations, 
women's rights and vulnerable persons' organizations, and the country's international partners have 
stepped up efforts to combat gender-based violence. This was the case with the project 
"Strengthening the Response to Sexual and Gender-Based Violence (SGBV) in Nine Nigerian States" 
funded by the United States Agency for International Development. Communities in these states were 
sensitized on SGBV141. 
Access to Finances 
In Nigeria, there is a large and growing gender gap in financial inclusion. In fact, there is a problem 
of difficult access for my women and especially those living in rural areas. In the late 2000s, Nigeria 
saw financial inclusion as a driver of economic development. As a result, in 2010, the exclusion rate 
fell to 46.3 percent due to improved efforts to facilitate access to credit and loans for women and 
populations, down from 53 percent in 2008. According to the results of the 2018 Improving Financial 
Innovation and Access study, financial inclusion nationwide stood at 59.1% for women versus 67.5% 
for men, a gender gap of 8.4%142.  
As in some African countries, there is a gender gap in access to financial services in Nigeria. However, 
the gender gap in Nigeria is relatively smaller and has been steadily decreasing over the past 10 
years. In fact, the gender gap in access to financial services is 8.4% in 2022, while in 2016 it was 9.7%. 
Since 2009, several surveys have been conducted in Nigeria by EFInA on access to financial services. 
The 2018 results reveal that 39.7 million (39.7% of the adult population) have access to a bank 
account. Compared to 2016 (36.9 million), this represents an increase of 2.6 million adults143. 
 
140
 Federal 
Republic 
of 
Nigeria, 
(2018). 
Demographic 
and 
Health 
Survey. 
https://www.dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR359/FR359.pdf  
141 Federal Republic of Nigeria, (2017). Strengthening the Response to Sexual and Gender-Based Violence 
(SGBV) in Nigeria. Online available: https://www.pathfinder.org/projects/strengthenig-the-response-to-sexual-
and-gender-based-violence-in-nigeria/  
142 Federal Republic of Nigeria, Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) ,(2020). Nigeria’s central bank advances 
women’s access to finance  Online available: https://www.afi-global.org/newsroom/blogs/nigerias-central-
bank-advances-womens-access-to-
finance/#:~:text=According%20to%20a%202018%20survey,9.8%20percent%20recorded%20in%202016.  
143 Enhancing Financial Innovation & Access (EFInA), (2018). EFInA Access to Financial Services in Nigeria 2018 
Survey. https://www.efina.org.ng/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/A2F-2018-Key-Findings-11_01_19.pdf  
Page 272

=== PAGE 277 ===
90 
 
Despite this increase in access to financial services, the goal of closing the gender gap in financial 
inclusion is far from being achieved. Thus, the country has developed a National Financial Inclusion 
Strategy (NFIS) to address the specific gaps and challenges that hinder Nigerian women's access to 
financial services and, at the same time, close the gender gap and reduce inequality. A 2019 study 
on assessing women's financial inclusion in Nigeria144 reveals that the majority of women excluded 
from the financial system have financial needs and ambitions. However, their low income limits their 
perceived need for financial services. 
Poverty 
In 2014, 53% of the Nigerian population lived in rural areas where poverty was particularly acute at 
44.9%145. The recession crisis (induced by the fall in oil prices) that the country experienced in 2016 
and the strong demographic growth exceeding the growth of the real GDP have plunged again 
some bangs of the population, especially those living in rural areas, into poverty. With the rise of local 
companies producing bananas, maize, cassava, cocoa, groundnuts, and the installation of large 
industries in petrochemicals, Nigeria observed a strong growth of its GDP (in purchasing power parity) 
in 2018. Thus, with the economic recovery, the ratio of poor people living on less than $1.90 a day 
was 39.1%. 
However, women remain the most affected by poverty. According to the study "Poverty among 
Women in Nigeria - Psychological and Economic Perspective" conducted in southwestern Nigeria, 
women account for over 60% of the poorest people in the country146. With over 87 million people in 
extreme poverty, Nigeria has about 52 million women struggling with extreme poverty (IMF, 2018). 
Furthermore, according to World Bank data, about 4 out of 10 Nigerians were living below the poverty 
line in 2019, or about 80 million people, while Nigeria aspires to lift all its people out of poverty by 2030. 
However, achieving this goal remains difficult because the country has gone through more or less 
complicated periods in recent years. Indeed, climatic and conflict shocks are phenomena that 
disproportionately affect the poor in Nigeria. A difficult situation for women with difficult access to the 
financial system and to this is added the COVID-19 crisis. 
 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In recent years, Nigeria has made significant progress in human development indicators. Nigeria has 
long been a patriarchal society, where social and legal organization is based on men holding 
authority to the explicit exclusion of women. This constitutes a major social and economic challenge 
to eliminate gender inequalities that hinder women's participation in the country's economic 
activities. At times, women are simply relegated to the background, with reduced power to act and 
decide in all areas - economic, social, security. According to the results of the Promoting Women's 
 
144 Enhancing Financial Innovation and Access (EFInA), (2019). Assessment of Women’s Financial Inclusion In Nigeria. 
https://www.cbn.gov.ng/out/2020/dfd/assessment%20of%20womens%20financial%20inclusion%20-%20exec%20summary.p
df  
145 FIDA, Federal Republic of Nigeria. Country Documents: Country strategic opportunities programme,. Online 
Available: https://www.ifad.org/fr/web/operations/w/pays/nigeria  
146 Onwuka Ifeanyi, Nwadiubu Anthony & Isiwu Prisca,(2018). Poverty among Women in Nigeria–Psychological 
and 
Economic 
Perspective: 
A 
Study 
Based 
On 
South 
West, 
Nigeria. 
https://ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/ijbm/article/download/0/0/41007/42365  
Page 273

=== PAGE 278 ===
91 
 
Decision Making and Empowerment Study in Ibadan, only 44% of Nigerian women participate in 
decisions about their own health care, compared to 82% of men147. 
On the national political scene, very few women are making their way into the country. Indeed, since 
2019 there are only 6.2% of women in both the Senate and the House of Representatives compared 
to 93.8% of men148. 
In infrastructure sectors such as transport, energy and industry, very few women hold positions of 
responsibility. In addition, the prohibition or lack of opportunity for women to work at night in an 
electricity company or gas plant, and the transportation of goods is a legal barrier to women's 
employment in these different sectors, which reduces their access to positions of responsibility and 
decision making. 
 
 
 
 
 
147 Sebany, M., OlaOlorun, F. and John, N. (2020). Toward gender equity in the household: promoting women’s 
decision-making and empowerment in Ibadan, Nigeria. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on 
Women. 
https://www.icrw.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Promoting-womens-decision-making-and-
empowerment-in-Ibadan-Nigeria_June2020_ICRW.pdf  
148PLAC (Policy and Legal Advocacy Centre), (2019). Legislative Bills on Improved Women’s Representation 
and 
Issues: 
A 
Review. 
https://placng.org/i/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Legislative-Bills-on-Improved-
Womens-Representation-and-Issues-A-Review-1.pdf  
Page 274

=== PAGE 279 ===
92 
 
4.16 Rwanda 
Demographics and human development 
Rwanda is a landlocked country in East Africa with an estimated population of 13,276517 of which 
over 50% are women. Covering an area of only 26,338 km², the country has one of the highest 
population densities in Africa at 538 inhabitants per km² and an annual population growth rate of 2.5% 
(World bank, 2021). 
In terms of human development, the country has made excellent progress as between 1990 and 2019, 
Rwanda's HDI value increased from 0.248 to 0.543, an increase of 119.0%149. Despite this progress, the 
country is classified in the low human development category, ranking 160 out of 189 countries and 
territories. 
Education  
Rwanda has long linked the modernization of the education system to the country's development 
process. In fact, over the years, the education budget has been increasing while the budget for other 
sectors such as social protection, health, public financial management, water and electricity also 
contributes to education. In the fiscal year 2021-2022, the Rwandan government has allocated 42.4 
billion FRW to various public institutions that indirectly contribute to education.  
Employment  
Considered one of the fastest growing economies in the world in recent years, Rwanda has clearly 
demonstrated its quality in socio-economic development. Already in 2007, the country adopted the 
National Employment Policy a long-term strategic vision "vision 2020" with key development pillars that 
would help Rwanda move from a very poor country to a middle-income country with employment as 
one of the fundamental pillars. The working population represents more than 50% (or 6,643,949) of the 
total population. Within this category, the proportion of women is approximately 51.6% of the active 
population, although this rate is down from 51.8% in 2019. 
According to the International Labor Organization's 2019 country report, less than 50% of the Rwandan 
working age population is currently employed, as the Employment to Working Age Population Ratio is 
only 43.77%. In addition, unemployment in 2019 affects more than 15% of the population. The three 
sectors that will employ the most people in Rwanda in 2020 are Agriculture (40%); Trade, restaurants 
and hotels (16%); and Construction (13%) 150 . The infrastructure sector such as transport, 
telecommunication, energy (electricity, gas, water) and manufacturing, together employ only 10.7% 
of the working population151. 
 
149 UNDP, (2020). Human Development Report: Rwanda https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/RWA.pdf  
150 Danish Trade Union Development Agency, (2022). Labour Market Profile Rwanda – 2021/2022 
https://www.ulandssekretariatet.dk/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/LMP-Rwanda-2021-Final.pdf  
151 Ibid 
Page 275

=== PAGE 280 ===
93 
 
Despite the orientation of investments in these infrastructures, they are for the moment less job creators 
compared to the other sectors. The vulnerability of some sectors, such as transport and industry, to the 
impacts of the climate could explain their low capacity to generate sustainable employment. 
However, further investment in resilient infrastructure is needed to address both the urgency of climate 
change and the country's economic development. 
Rwanda is a country vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, while some sectors essential to 
economic development, notably the transport sector and the manufacturing industry, are often 
affected and sometimes stopped. This situation naturally impacts the employment sector, which is 
reflected in the low contribution of these sectors to the employment of the active population. On the 
other hand, taking adaptation into account in projects to make infrastructure resilient could contribute 
to the creation of sustainable employment. 
Health 
In the aftermath of the political crises that Rwanda experienced, several works to rebuild the country's 
infrastructure were undertaken. In the health sector, considerable investments have been made to 
improve the health infrastructure, particularly in the country's major cities. As a result, maternal and 
child health has improved considerably over the past two decades and has exceeded the MDG 
targets. In addition, maternal mortality decreased by 80% between 2000 and 2014 while infant and 
child mortality decreased by over 70% over the same period152. Thanks to its rapid economic growth 
and strong development potential, Rwanda has improved the livelihoods of its people at all levels. Life 
expectancy has increased from 49 years in 2000 to 66.6 years in 2017 
 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications   
Despite the rapid growth of the Rwandan economy in recent years, the population's access to electricity remains 
low. Indeed, according to World Bank data, only 46.6% of the Rwandan population has access to electricity in 
2020. Thanks to the improvement of the Nyirabuhombohombo micro-hydro plant, as well as the commissioning of 
Giciye III, the total installed capacity of the country's electricity production has increased from 228.418 MW to 
238.37 MW between 2020 and 2021. 
In the transport sector, Rwanda has about 44,671 km of national road network, of which 1,973 km are 
paved. However, national roads account for 72% of the total. Similarly, the country has at least 97% of its 
paved national road network in good condition153. As of 2018, Rwanda has three airfields (Ruhengeri, 
Butare and Nemba), one national airport (Gisenyi) and two international airports (Kigali and Kamembe). 
 
152 Republic of Rwanda, (2020). 7 Years Government Programme: National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) 
2017-2024. https://www.nirda.gov.rw/uploads/tx_dce/National_Strategy_For_Trsansformation-NST1-min.pdf  
153 Republic of Rwanda; Ministry of infrastructure, (2021). national transport policy and strategy for Rwanda 
https://www.mininfra.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/Mininfra/Publications/Policies/Transport/NATIONAL_TRAN
SPORT_POLICY_AND_STRATEGY_APRIL_2021.pdf  
Page 276

=== PAGE 281 ===
94 
 
Through its partnership with the private sector, Rwanda has strengthened its telecommunications 
infrastructure, including the installation of 7,000 km of fiber optics and 4G LTE coverage of 95% of the 
territory 154. 
Overall, Rwanda has modernized its economic system, from production to marketing to industrial 
processing.  Rwanda is admitted to Alibaba's Electronic World trading platform.  Efficient 
transport/mobility solutions such as carpooling, electric mobility and assembly have been adopted. In 
addition, the country is one of the first countries in the world to offer drone delivery services for medical 
items. As the first smartphone manufacturing plant in Africa, currently operational in the Kigali Special 
Economic Zone with nearly 20,000 devices produced, Rwanda has been able to leverage these 
investments155. 
Sociocultural 
Rwandan society is characterized by a patriarchal social structure that underlies unequal social power 
relations between men and women, boys and girls. In fact, men have naturally assumed a form of 
domination and women a position of subordination. According to social and cultural rules, gender 
inequalities were not considered unjust, but as a social normality that especially women had to respect. 
However, women have long played a largely dominant role in Rwandan society, and certain positive 
trends existed within Rwandan culture that reinforced women's social role and ensured their autonomy. 
Indeed, women played a central role in the management of household resources and participated in 
decision making at various levels. 
Legal framework  
Rwanda has long been committed to promoting equality and equity among all Rwandans by ensuring 
that the vulnerable, socially and historically disadvantaged, especially women and children, are given 
the same opportunities as the rest of the population. According to Article 16 of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Rwanda of 2003 amended in 2015, "All Rwandans are born and remain equal in rights and 
freedoms", discrimination based on ethnic origin, skin color or race, gender, economic categories, 
economic status, physical or mental disability are prohibited and punishable by law. 
to achieve its objective in implementing the 2010 National Gender Policy, Rwanda has also put in 
place an enabling legal framework to strengthen GEWE, including among others156:  
• 
Organic Budget Law N° 12/2013, instituting gender responsive budgeting: This law applies 
accountability measures for gender responsive resource allocation in all sectors; 
 
154
The 
World 
Bank 
Group, 
(2021) 
 
Rwanda 
Economic 
Update 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/992631626808031540/pdf/Rwanda-Economic-Update-The-
Role-of-the-Private-Sector-in-Closing-the-Infrastructure-Gap.pdf 
155 Ibid 
156 Republic of Rwanda, (2021). Accelerating the Effectiveness of Gender Mainstreaming and 
Accountability 
for 
National 
Transformation. 
https://www.migeprof.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/Migeprof/Publications/Guidelines/Revised_National_Ge
nder_Policy-2021.pdf  
Page 277

=== PAGE 282 ===
95 
 
• 
Law No. 22/99 of 12/11/1999 on matrimonial regimes, gifts and inheritance, granting women the 
same inheritance rights as men; 
• 
Organic Law on Land N°08/2005: Equal access to land for men and women; 
• 
The Labor Law was published in the Official Gazette in 2009; 
• 
Strategic Plan for Women's Employment; 
• 
Guarantee and fund for women; 
In its commitment to ensure effective promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment, the 
Rwandan government has put in place a strong institutional framework known as the National Gender 
Machinery composed of the following four institutions: 
• 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF)  
• 
Gender Monitoring Office (GMO). 
• 
National Women’s Council (NWC) is a forum whose mission is to build women’s 
• 
Rwandan Forum for Women Parliamentarians (FFRP) 
List of regional instruments on women's and children's rights to which Rwanda is party (in chronological 
order):  
1. African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (1981); 
2. The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (1990); 
3. The New Partnership for Africa's Development (2001); 
4. The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women 
in Africa (2003); 
5. The Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa (2004); 
6. The African Youth Charter (2006); 
7. International Conference for the Great Lakes Region, Protocol on the Prevention and 
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and Children (2006); 
8. he Nairobi Declaration on Women's and Girls' Right to a Remedy and Reparation (2007); 
9. The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community as amended on 14/12/2006 
and 20/08/2007; 
10. The Gender Policy of the African Union (2008) 
Gender based violence  
In Rwanda, gender-based violence (GBV ) is widespread throughout the country and remains one of 
the problems that hinders not only the well-being of the population, but also the development of the 
country. The most frequent forms of violence are sexual violence and early marriage of young girls. 
According to a UN study conducted in 2019, 25% of girls and 10% of boys are victims of sexual violence 
before the age of 18. According to the Rwanda Bureau of Investigation's analysis report, the number 
of GBV cases increased by 19.6% during the 2019-2020 fiscal year compared to 2018-2019. In addition, 
10,842 GBV-related crimes were recorded in 2019 and 12,657 in 2020, the most cited being child 
defilement, assault and domestic violence. 
Page 278

=== PAGE 283 ===
96 
 
Access to Finances  
Despite the country's openness to large-scale investment, Rwanda has a low rate of bank 
penetration. However, up to 93% of the Rwandan population now has access to financial products 
and services to meet their needs for insurance, credit, savings, or financial transactions. Compared 
to 2012 (72%) and 2016 (89%)157, financial inclusion is on the rise in the country. The country has taken 
advantage of the digital revolution to allow cell phone subscribers to perform financial transactions 
and money transfers from their phones. The population now has a secure solution for storing cash, 
even for those working in the informal economy. On the other hand, the rate of formal financial 
inclusion and the rate of banking remain low, and are below the objective that the country has set 
through several initiative, programs and policies. Considered an indispensable tool for achieving its 
development and poverty reduction objectives, the country aims to reach 90% formal financial 
inclusion by 2024158. In Rwanda, there is a gender gap in financial inclusion. Despite the high rate of 
mobile money account ownership in Rwanda, it should be noted that the proportion of men is 
significantly higher than women (46% of men vs. 33% of women). In addition, women use informal 
mechanisms much more to conduct banking transactions; 24% for women versus 17% for men. 
In summary, the gender gap in financial inclusion in Rwanda narrowed from 14 percent in 2014 to 11 
percent in 2017, according to the Global Findex database. 
Poverty 
Thanks to its growing economies, Rwanda has been able to reduce inequality and poverty, 
supported by numerous investments in several areas including infrastructure and some changes in 
the employment structure. Indeed, the country adopted in 2001 the National Poverty Reduction 
Program in addition to vision 2020 allowing the country to contribute to economic development at 
all levels and social welfare of the population. According to World Bank data, the multidimensional 
poverty rate has been declining since 2010, from 44.4% to 28.7% in 2016159. However, the country is 
still in the low-income category.  
Despite the reduction in gender inequality, inequality according to place of residence is still 
significant. Indeed, poverty affects about 27% of the urban population, while in rural areas, the 
impact is much greater, with up to 63% of the rural population living in poverty160. In addition, the 
country is having difficulty achieving the objective of the National Poverty Reduction Program, while 
the weakness of the minimum wage system has slowed the pace of poverty reduction. In fact, based 
on the Sustainable Development Goals in Rwanda labor market issues, up to 44% of workers are living 
 
157 European Investment Bank,(2016). Le secteur bancaire en Afrique subsaharienne : tendances récentes et 
inclusion financière numérique. 
https://www.eib.org/attachments/efs/economic_report_banking_africa_digital_financial_inclusion_fr.pdf  
158  National Bank of Rwanda, (2022). Financial Inclusion. Online Available: https://www.bnr.rw/financial-
inclusion/ [Accessed on: 02/09/2022] 
159
 World 
Bank 
Group. 
Multidimensional 
poverty 
headcount 
ratio. 
Online 
Available: 
https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/indicator/SI.POV.MDIM?locations=RW. [Accessed on: 31/08/2022] 
160
World 
Bank 
Group, 
(2020) 
Poverty 
& 
Equity 
Brief 
Rwanda 
https://databankfiles.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-4AE2-ABC7-
AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_SSA.pdf  
Page 279

=== PAGE 284 ===
97 
 
below the poverty line in 2019 (population of workers living on less than $1.9/day)161. In addition, only 
3.2% of the population is effectively covered by a social protection system in 2016, including social 
protection floors. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In spite of the numerous laws and strategies in favor of women, they face enormous difficulties 
regarding their participation in the decision-making bodies of local and institutional governments.  
The exclusion of women from institutional power also prevents them from finding their place in 
informal networks. These networks support and reproduce the social systems that local governments 
use. 
Nevertheless, the constitution guarantees representation in Parliament for particular categories of 
Rwandans, including youth, women, people with disabilities and162 historically marginalized people. 
Clearly, the country's constitution confers at least 30%163 of positions to women in all decision-making 
bodies. Although women represent more than 50% of the population, they are less represented than 
men in decision-making bodies. In Rwanda, women represent more than 50% of the population, they 
are part of the decision-making bodies. With more than 61% in 2015 and 63% in 2019 of women in the 
Chamber of Deputies, the country leads the world. 
Rwanda recognizes the role of women in the country's development and promotes women's 
participation and leadership in decision making. However, efforts still need to be made to ensure that 
women hold positions of responsibility at the local and community levels. According to the report of 
the study on women's representation in local decision making bodies, women are very little included 
in decision making positions. According to this report, the gap between men and women who 
represent their villages in the Cell Council is 24.8% 164 in favor of men. Similarly, men are more 
represented in the positions of Executive Secretary and youth representatives. Despite the efforts of 
the Rwandan government to promote gender equality at all levels of the country's socio-political and 
economic life, the gap between women and men in rural areas remains significant. Indeed, only 17% 
of women own or run businesses in rural areas, compared to 83% of their male counterparts165. In the 
telecommunications sector, a woman was appointed in 2022 to head the pan-African 
telecommunications group MTN as managing director for its Rwanda subsidiary. 
 
 
 
 
 
161 Danish Trade Union Development Agency, (2022). Labour Market Profile Rwanda – 2021/2022 
https://www.ulandssekretariatet.dk/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/LMP-Rwanda-2021-Final.pdf  
162Republic of Rwanda, (2021). Accelerating the Effectiveness of Gender Mainstreaming and Accountability 
for National 
Transformationhttps://www.migeprof.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/Migeprof/Publications/Guidelines/Revise
d_National_Gender_Policy-2021.pdf. 
163 Ibid 
164 Republic of Rwanda, (2016). Study on the representation of women in local decision-making bodies at the 
local 
level. 
https://profemmes.org/IMG/pdf/low_female_representation_study_3_jan_2017_francais_-
_whole_.pdf. 
165 Gihana, D., Kooijman, A. (2020), Fiches thématiques par pays sur le genre et l’énergie — Rwanda, ENERGIA 
Page 280

=== PAGE 285 ===
98 
 
4.17 Sierra Leone 
Demographics and human development 
Sierra Leone's HDI value for 2019 is 0.452— which puts the country in the low human development 
category—positioning it at 182 out of 189 countries and territories. The rank is shared with Burkina Faso. 
Between 1990 and 2019, Sierra Leone's HDI value increased from 0.287 to 0.452, increasing 57.5 
percent. Sierra Leone's life expectancy at birth increased by 16.1 years, mean years of schooling 
increased by 2.1 years, and expected years of schooling increased by 5.2 years. Sierra Leone's GNI 
per capita decreased by about 6.0 percent between 1990 and 2019. 
Sierra Leone's 2019 HDI of 0.452 is below the average of 0.513 for countries in the low human 
development group and below 0.547 for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. From Sub-Saharan Africa, 
Sierra Leone is compared with Burundi and Guinea, with HDIs ranked 185 and 178. The 2019 female 
HDI value for Sierra Leone is 0.423 compared to 0.479 for males. 
Sierra Leone has a GII value of 0.644, ranking it 155 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. In Sierra 
Leone, 12.3 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 20.1 percent of adult women 
have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 33.0 percent of their male 
counterparts. Women of ages 15-19. Female participation in the labour market is 57.3 percent 
compared to 58.5 for men. 
Education 
The Government of Sierra Leone considers the issue of narrowing the gender gap as a key priority in its 
development programming activities. The Government introduced free education for girls in public 
primary schools to achieve gender parity at the primary level of education. Its Vision is that 'by 2035', 
90 percent of Sierra Leoneans should read and write its development programming activities. The 
Statistics Sierra Leone, 2015 Population and Housing Census results show that just over half of all people 
(51 percent) in Sierra Leone are literate but that men make up a much higher proportion of that 
number (59 percent) than women (44 percent). Data also shows the gender disparity of male and 
female enrolment from primary to senior secondary levels of education. At the primary level, more 
females are enrolled (Net Enrolment Rates (NER) for Primary Level of 67.1 for women and 63.5 for men). 
Still, there is a change as they move from the primary level to the junior secondary (21.2 for males and 
20.7 for females) and senior secondary levels (14.9 for men and 13.6 for women) of education. There 
is a drop for both sexes from primary level to junior secondary school. The drop is even sharper when 
pupils move from junior secondary to senior secondary. These findings highlight the challenges young 
girls in Sierra Leone face in their education. Young girls’ education is shrouded in challenges related 
to early marriage, teenage pregnancy, and parents not being ready to support girls in their 
educational pursuits. 
Employment 
The 2015 census results showed that there is a slightly higher proportion of women in the working 
population of Sierra Leone (ages 15-64 years), with 56.4 percent female compared to 54.8 percent 
male. However, there is a slightly higher proportion of males in the under 14 years age-dependent 
population but slightly more women in the 65 years plus age-dependent population. 
Page 281

=== PAGE 286 ===
99 
 
Health  
For every 100,000 live births, 1120.0 women die from pregnancy-related causes; and the adolescent 
birth rate is 112.8 births per 1,000. Overall, the sanitation situation is more or less critical compared to 
some countries in the sub-region. According to statistics, more than 67% of households have access to 
an improved source of drinking water. This situation is much more critical in rural areas, where more 
than 51% of the population does not have access to drinking water, compared to only 8% in urban 
areas.  
Moreover, climatic phenomena such as floods and tornadoes threaten the health of the population 
and particularly those living in rural areas. In 2017, for example, heavy rains, a mudslide and flash floods 
destroyed hundreds of homes and left many dead, injured and missing, particularly in the Western 
Area, Western Area Rural and Western Area Urban districts, as well as thirteen low-lying communities. 
In some areas, health centers were affected, which further aggravated the health situation of these 
populations, especially those of nursing and pregnant women.  
All in all, the country has the highest maternal mortality rate in the world and one of the highest under-
five mortality rates. For every 1,000 live births, more than 13 mothers and 111 children under the age of 
five die. In addition, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other partners, 
including the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, have provided technical and financial support to help 
the country achieve health security for its population166. This support will also help establish a national 
public health institute that will serve as the central structure for public health functions. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
Less than 10% of the population has access to electricity. About 87% of energy usage in the country is 
biomass, firewood, and charcoal. More than 80% of the population uses fuelwood or charcoal for 
cooking. Women and girls are responsible for collecting wood and fuel for domestic consumption. 
They have to walk long distances, which leads to fatigue and endangers their physical security and 
health. 
In Sierra Leone, only 13.0 percent of persons 10 years and older have access to the Internet. The 
proportion of males (16%) with access is higher than females (10%). The results clearly show that most 
women and men have no access to the Internet. The ICT policy launched in January 2011 focuses on, 
among other matters, how to include women in the country’s ICT agenda. The policy aims to create 
awareness about the use and benefits of ICT for women, create resource centres nationwide to train 
and encourage greater access to ICT for women, set up Internet access points throughout the country 
targeting women, use the capabilities of the Internet and e-commerce to facilitate women’s access 
to business and entrepreneurial opportunities and finally, disseminate national, regional and 
international policies, conventions and activities on gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
Socio cultural 
Sierra Leone is a highly patriarchal society where power is held solely by men. In fact, the country has 
strong institutional gender inequalities, which are the result of discriminatory customary practices with 
 
166
 Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention, 
(2021). 
Global 
Health 
– 
Sierra 
Leone. 
https://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/countries/sierra-leone/pdf/CGH_CountryFS_SierraLeone.pdf  
Page 282

=== PAGE 287 ===
100 
 
respect to marriage, property rights, inheritance, civil action, and sexual offenses. Sierra Leone has "one 
of the highest rates of female genital mutilation" in the world, with 90 percent of girls and women between 
the ages of 15 and 49 undergoing the violent procedure. There are discrete societies in the country that 
present themselves as important "cultural institutions" and which the population believes represent a form 
of protection for the community. Genital mutilation procedures "without anesthesia" are often performed 
by female community members using knives, razors, and even shards of glass.  
Policy and Legal framework 
The GoSL's approach and response to gender equality are informed and influenced by local and 
international commitments and frameworks. At the local level, the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, established in 2000 as one of the structures for national reconciliation, recommended the 
repeal of all statutory and customary laws that discriminate against women. At the international level, 
Sierra Leone ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) in 1988 and its optional Protocol in 20004. Sierra Leone is a signatory to the International 
Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCR), Child Rights Convention (CRC), International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights 
on the Rights of Women in Africa, the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and the Beijing 
Platform for Action, among others. 
Sierra Leone's policy framework for promoting gender equality and women's empowerment is guided 
mainly by its two national policies, the Gender Mainstreaming Policy and the National Policy on the 
Advancement of Women, both adopted by Parliament in 2000. The National Policy on the 
Advancement of Women aims to create an enabling environment to improve women's status and 
participation in the development process. The Gender Mainstreaming Policy reinforces the overall 
development objectives in the country. It emphasizes Government's commitment to gender-
responsive development and seeks to strengthen and provide a legal basis for gender-oriented 
sectoral policies. 
Gender based violence 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is a major and urgent concern in Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone is a country 
that has experienced periods of violent conflict resulting in forced displacement and family 
separation. This has influenced the nature and extent of gender-based violence in the post-conflict 
phase of the country. However, the state's support and consideration for women is insignificant in 
addressing the health, psychosocial, and economic consequences of sexual violence experienced 
during the war and the persistent discrimination they face.  
According to the 2019 Sierra Leone Demographic and Health Survey, 62 percent of women aged 15-
49 report having experienced physical or sexual/emotional violence167, while in 2018 this percentage 
was 19.8 percent168, suggesting an increase in the incidence of gender-based violence. The absence 
of a law, legal text, or mechanism to prosecute perpetrators of violence against women has 
contributed to a culture of impunity for crimes committed against women. 
 
167 Republic of Sierra Leone; Ministry of Health and Sanitation, (2020). Demographic and Health Survey. 
https://sierraleone.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/sldhs_2019.pdf  
168 UN Women, Sierra Leone. Online available: https://data.unwomen.org/country/sierra-leone  
Page 283

=== PAGE 288 ===
101 
 
Access to Finances 
Gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment are important objectives of Sierra Leone's 
national plan. Indeed, Sierra Leone is among the first countries in Africa to include a stand-alone pillar 
on gender equality in its national development plan. Despite the fact that over 52% of the Sierra 
Leonean population is dominated by women, women's access to economic assets remains low. 
Sierra Leone's private sector is characterized by a large number of micro-enterprises. In fact, at the 
private sector level, about 84 percent of rural women and 63 percent of urban women are involved 
in microenterprises such as small-scale agriculture, table trade, artisanal mining, and small-scale 
fishing169. However, women often face a number of challenges including: lack of development of 
the essential financial services they need; lack of business skills. However, financial inclusion of women 
and people living in rural areas is increasing according to a survey conducted by the World Bank 
(Global Findex 2017). 
Poverty 
Poverty is widespread in Sierra Leone. The country's first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP1) 
2005-2007 stated that 70% of the population is poor and 26% is food poor, i.e., they cannot afford a 
basic diet. Additionally, poverty was identified as a rural phenomenon, with the rural areas 
accounting for almost 73% of the country's poor, exceeding their population share of 66%.2 Urban 
poverty was more acute in the provincial centres at 64.9%, while in Freetown, the capital city, it was 
22.2% (AfDB, 2009). Although the GoSL has concentrated its development efforts since the end of the 
civil war on alleviating poverty, the current poverty level of 60% noted in its 2010 MDG Progress Report 
is still very high. While the report noted that some progress had been made in reducing poverty.The 
country's poverty profile shows that the main poverty indicators are inadequate food, poor housing, 
poor health, high infant and maternal mortality, high illiteracy, limited access to clean water, and 
lack of money. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Sierra Leone, girls and women have limited access to educational opportunities, decision-making, 
and government compared to boys and men. Indeed, women hold only 12.3 percent of 
parliamentary seats in 2021170. Societal barriers are among the obstacles that prevent women from 
entering politics and governance at the local, regional, and national levels. According to the report, 
promoting women's participation in decision-making, governance and politics, 70% of women said 
that their religion disapproved of their participation in politics171. Women make up 52 percent of the 
total population of Sierra Leone, but hold less than 20 percent of elected positions (USAID, 2022). Their 
visibility, active participation, decision-making, and representation in elected and appointed 
positions remain very low compared to men. In addition to these challenges, there is also a lack of 
 
169  Republic of Sierra Leone, (2014). National Study on Women’s Access to Financing in Sierra Leone. 
https://cherieblairfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/National-Study-on-Womens-Access-to-
Financing-in-Sierra-Leone.pdf  
170 UN Women, Sierra Leone. Online available : https://data.unwomen.org/country/sierra-leone  
171Republic of Sierra Leone, (2020). Promoting women's participation in decision-making, governance, and 
politics. 
https://www.sendsierraleone.com/Assets/documents/Cost%20of%20womens%20participation%20in%20politics
%20Report.pdf  
Page 284

=== PAGE 289 ===
102 
 
economic independence, high illiteracy, and entrenched customs and traditions in social and 
sometimes administrative practices. 
In the majority of Sierra Leonean communities, women were not allowed in some community 
meetings and were excluded from decision making. This is the case in Grima where the notion of 
women as leaders was not part of the culture of this community. When in 2015, the community began 
working with One Village Partners, women held only two leadership positions. as a result, women 
rarely attended community meetings or development activities and were confined to household 
chores 172. However, a new model of leadership that includes women, youth, and community 
members outside of the ruling families is beginning to emerge in some communities across the 
country, where women leaders are becoming more vocal in decision-making bodies 
 
 
 
 
 
172
 OneVillage 
Partner. 
Women’s 
Leadership 
is 
Born 
in 
Grimahttps://www.onevillagepartners.org/news/womens-leadership 
Online 
Available:  
https://www.onevillagepartners.org/news/womens-leadership 
Page 285

=== PAGE 290 ===
103 
 
4.18 Togo 
Demographics and human development 
According to the last survey on the Togolese household’s livelihood (EHCVM-TOGO, 2018- 2019) data, 
Togo’s population is estimated to be 7 635 896 inhabitants, of which 52.3 percent are women. This 
population is very young, with those under 15 years representing 43.5 percent of the total population and 
those over 64 are 3.4 percent. With an annual growth rate of 2.67 percent in 2021, this population will 
increase to more than 8.5 million (UNFPA, 2021), of which more than 70 percent are under 25 years old. 
Togo’s HDI value for 2019 is 0.515— which puts the country in the low human development category— 
positioning it at 167 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 1990 and 2019, Togo's HDI value increased 
from 0.406 to 0.515, increasing 26.8 percent. Between 1990 and 2019, Togo's life expectancy at birth 
increased by 5.2 years, mean years of schooling increased by 2.0 years, and expected years of schooling 
increased by 5.1 years. Togo's GNI per capita increased by about 21.7 percent between 1990 and 2019. 
Gender Inequality Index value of 0.573, ranking Togo 145 out of 162 countries in the 2019 index. In Togo, 
16.5 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 27.6 percent of adult women have reached 
a secondary level of education compared to 54.4 percent of their male counterparts. For every 100,000 
live births, 396.0 women die from pregnancy-related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 89.1 birth 
per 1,000 women of ages 15-19.  
Education 
The Integrated Regional Survey on Employment and the Informal Sector (ERI-ESI, Togo 2017) shows a 
literacy rate of 60.4 percent at the national level and highlights a big gender gap between men and 
women regardless of age group. Men are more literate than women at the national level, with 73.5 
percent of men and 49.2 percent of women literate. While most women and men went to primary 
school, differences in education are significant for secondary and tertiary education. More than 50% 
of men visited a secondary school. This is true for only 28% of women. Women are much less 
represented in tertiary education, accounting for only 40% of male persons benefitting from tertiary 
education. 
Employment 
According to the ERI-ESI, Togo 2017 survey report, the majority of Togolese (95,6  women find 
themselves in informal sector People and more employment vulnerability (87.4%),- i.e., workers for own 
account and family- than men (60.6%). Female participation in the labour market is 76.3 percent 
compared to 78.9 for men. (Human Development Report, 2019). The Togolese salary rate is 22.5 
percent. It is higher among men (36.0 percent) with the law prohibiting discrimination in employment 
and occupation based on gender. In the light of the law only covers workers in the formal sector, but 
in the informal sector where the Government did not effectively enforce the law, it confronts many 
challenges for women. For example, the salary rate below the minimum wage affects women (17.6%) 
more than men (9.8%). 
 Under traditional law, which applies to most women, a husband legally may restrict his wife's freedom 
to work and control her earnings. Gender discrimination in employment and occupation existed even 
though the country had laws prohibiting it. In Togo, the formal labor market is dominated by the public 
sector, which is rigid and uncompetitive and employs only about 9.7 percent of the workforce. In 
Page 286

=== PAGE 291 ===
104 
 
addition, there are three main areas of employment in Togo. These are the agricultural sector, the 
informal sector and the modern sector (public and private). 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications 
The rate of access to electricity in Togo is in progression (from 17 percent in 2000 to 35 percent in 2016) 
but with huge disparities between urban areas (access rate = 87 percent) and rural (access rate = 7 
percent). Renewable energies (solar, wind, etc.) are present in the country's electricity generation 
capacity. In the energy sector, women are less represented than men. Indeed, 2015 statistics show 
that, within the Compagnie Energie Electrique du Togo (CEET), only 140 of 818 employees (17%) are 
women173. 
According to the National Development Plan 2018-2022, The ICT is confronted with the inadequacy of 
communication infrastructures and equipment in relation to new conditions based, among other 
things, on the economy, business and social well-being: the administrative and technical buildings of 
the State infrastructure are in a state of advanced deterioration as well as equipment are obsolete 
and dilapidated resulting in unequal geographical coverage by ICT infrastructure. The establishment 
of a logistics hub of excellence and a first-class business center in the Sub Saharan-region, in particular 
through the improvement of existing infrastructure and multimodal connectivity and ICT is one of the 
first pillar of this agenda. 
Sociocultural 
According to The National Equity and Equality Policy (PNEEG), Togolese society is characterized by a 
patriarchal social structure based on unequal social and power relations between the sexes. 
Traditional values grant privileges to men, resulting in women's subordination in society. The man, head 
of the family, embodies the authority within the household. He establishes the rules, ensures the control 
and management of family assets, decides on the distribution of land assets family, and plans its use. 
It makes the capital decisions ensures the supply of livelihoods to household members. The woman 
owes him respect and obedience. The woman, mother, and wife remain the first educator responsible 
for transmitting moral and spiritual values. It has the social charge of the functioning of life 
domesticated. It also has the role of supporting man in his social mission at the family level, taking 
charge of everything that contributes to accomplishing this mission, including executing these 
decisions. It is the same when the man is in the situation of incapacity (absence, illness), where she will 
have to replace him in the realization exercise of its prerogatives. She becomes de facto "head of the 
family" without benefiting from the social recognition and the resulting privileges. Those sociocultural 
factors weigh heavily on women's status in the family and society, restricting their education chances 
limiting their ability to make decisions and participate in the management of public and private affairs 
of the community with the same opportunities as men. 
Policy and Legal framework 
In Togo, the principle according to which "men and women are equal before the law" enshrined in 
Article 11 of the Constitution is achieved through various actions combining the strengthening the 
 
173 ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE), (2015). Situation Analysis of Energy 
and Gender Issues in ECOWAS Member States. 
Page 287

=== PAGE 292 ===
105 
 
legal and institutional framework and implementing strategies aimed at reducing gender inequalities 
and empowering women to all levels among which we have:  
• The Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1983 
and, after the Beijing World Conference about women 
• The National Equity and Equality Policy (PNEEG) was adopted in 2011 to strengthen the integration 
of gender in the management of the development. 
• The double revision of the Personal and Family Code in 2012 and then in 2014 has made it possible, 
among other advances, to define the same marriage age for both sexes and to restore equality 
between the spouses by allowing them to jointly assume the moral and material responsibility in 
the common interest of the household and the children (section 99). This provision abolishes the 
status of the husband's reserved head of the family for a long time, resulting in an equal right to 
civil servants’ men and women to tax benefits. In addition, the new code establishes the custom 
as an exception rule in matters of succession when it complies with human rights and the 
fundamental principles of the Constitution (article 403), thus improving women's social and cultural 
status. 
• The Penal Code revised by Law No. 2015-10 of 24 November 2015 considers the provisions of the 
Children's Code strengthens the legal protection of women and girls by including specific 
provisions on genital mutilation, rape, pedophilia, and violence against women in all their forms.  
Gender based violence 
In Togo, violence against women and girls is multiform. They include domestic violence, sexual 
harassment, rape, forced marriage, levirate, female genital mutilation, food prohibitions, widowhood 
rites, internment in convents, etc. The study conducted on gender-based violence (GBV) in 2019 
reveals that out of 1,357 child victims of violence, abuse and exploitation, 862 (63.5 percent) are girls 
and 495 (36.5 percent) are boys 174 . In order to combat violence against vulnerable people, 
particularly women and children, the Togolese government has taken several initiatives to promote 
gender equality and has modernized several of the country's laws. Even though despite these efforts, 
the number of gender-based violence cases decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, women and 
female minors are still the most affected. In fact, of the 589 cases of violence recorded in 2020, 65.5 
percent were committed against women and minor children. 
Since 2015, Togo has put in place gender equity and equality coordination mechanisms, community 
justice structures and gender-based violence management structures for the implementation of the 
national gender policy. Thus, new codes and strategies have been adopted. These include a more 
egalitarian penal code; a land code that sweeps away the ambivalence of customary and modern 
texts that penalize women; a national strategy for integrating gender into development policies and 
programs; and a revised strategy to combat gender-based violence175. To reinforce these actions, 
the country has put in place various sectoral programs that encourage women to report cases of 
 
174  Republic of Togo, (2022). Gender Responsive Budget Document 2022 https://finances.gouv.tg/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/Document-budgetaire-sensible-au-genre-DBSG-2022-Togo-VF-publiee.pdf  
175
 Hervé 
Akinocho 
(Janvier 
2019). 
Gender 
equality 
in 
Togo: 
Progress 
and 
dark 
spots. 
https://www.afrobarometer.org/wp-
content/uploads/migrated/files/publications/Documents%20de%20politiques/ab_r7_policypaperno53_egalite
_genre_au_togo_1.pdf  
Page 288

=== PAGE 293 ===
106 
 
violence and denounce their aggressors. Finally, in terms of prevention, Togo has put in place 
provisions and mechanisms to prevent and punish all forms of discrimination against women. 
Access to Finances 
According to 2015 World Bank statistics on Togo, women represent more than half of the country's 
total population. However, women's access to the labor market and to bank financing for their 
development remains limited. The Togolese banking sector has since developed considerably and 
the country has progressively improved access to financing and credit for women and thus 
contributed to their financial inclusion. Thus, since 2014, Togo has implemented some social 
development instruments including the National Fund for Inclusive Finance (FNFI) which is currently 
deploying about ten projects in favor of youth; vulnerable women and farmers and artisans. These 
include Access to Financial Services for Youth (AJSEF), Access to Financial Services for Farmers 
(AGRISEF), Financial Inclusion Support Project for Vulnerable Women (PAIFF), Access to Financial 
Services for the Poor (APSEF), Seasonal Product (SP), Special Support Product (SSP), Formalization 
Support Product (FSP). Indeed, within the framework of the PAIFFV, the country benefited from a 
financing of about 1,532,846 dollars from the African Development Bank176. 
Poverty 
The incidence of poverty is lower in male-headed households than in female-headed households; it is 54.6 
percent in the former group and 57.5 percent in the latter. On the other hand, poverty among male-headed 
households decreased between 2011 and 2015 (from 59.6 percent to 54.6 percent), while female-headed 
households increased over the same period, from 54.3 percent to 57.5 percent. However, the World Bank 
believes that poverty remains far too high in the country. In rural areas, more than 69 percent of households lived 
below the poverty line in 2015. Moreover, women are the most vulnerable, as they have less access to economic 
opportunities. 
In Togo, as in some countries in the sub-region, the level of poverty is twice as high in rural areas (58.8%) as in 
urban areas (26.5%)177. Recurrent droughts sometimes cause water shortages for agriculture. At the same time, 
periods of heavy rainfall create flooding phenomena that ravage fields or damage the harvest season, which 
affects rural areas much more during the dry and rainy seasons. These factors aggravate the already difficult 
situation of rural populations, especially women. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
In Togo, women represent more than 50.2% of the population in 2020, however, they are less represented in 
decision-making bodies. Due to their status, the socio-cultural environment and the development mechanisms 
put in place by the country, women encounter difficulties, which not only limit their access to certain activities 
and slow down their promotion in the field of employment, but also accelerate their marginalization in the 
economic context of the country. Women have long been poorly represented in the country's decision-making 
bodies, although there have been gradual improvements in recent years. Indeed, the proportion of women . 
 
176 African Development Bank Group, (2016).Online available: https://www.afdb.org/pt/news-and-events/la-
bad-octroie-950-millions-de-francs-cfa-au-togo-en-contribution-a-lautonomisation-economique-des-femmes-
16268  
177
 The 
World 
Bank 
(2022). 
The 
World 
Bank 
in 
Togo. 
Online 
Available: 
https://www.banquemondiale.org/fr/country/togo/overview  
Page 289

=== PAGE 294 ===
107 
 
The proportion has risen from 1.2% in 1995 to 18.7% in 2020178. Better still, based on data from the World Bank, the 
proportion of women in the workforce will represent 48.8% in 2020, whereas it was less than 47% in 1995. 
Since 2011, Togo has developed a document on the National Policy for Gender Equity and Equality whose 
objective is to promote in the medium and long term, gender equity and equality, women's empowerment, and 
their full participation in decision-making at all levels of the country's development process. Despite the adoption 
of this policy at the national level, results have not followed. According to Togo's MDG monitoring report, women 
are poorly represented in decision-making bodies. Moreover, 39.4% of wage earners in the non-agricultural 
sector are women179. 
The proportion of seats held by women in parliament increased from 15.4% in 2014 to 18.7% in 2015180. These 
proportions are far from the MDG target of 50%, but the country has made remarkable progress. In 2015, 17.4% of 
women held the office of minister. In 2018, the office of the National Assembly has three women in addition to 
the President. Key ministerial positions traditionally held by men are now headed by women. 
In Togo, women play a leading role in the development of port activities, where they are promoted accordingly. 
However, their participation in decision-making positions is very low. In 2017, the Togolese port platform employed 
783 agents, 67 of whom were women, or about 9% of the staff181. Of this workforce, (9%), 49 women occupied 
positions of responsibility (i.e. 75%), including Human Resources, the Port Community (Alliance for the Promotion 
of the Port of Lomé), the Medical-Social Center and the General Administration. The head of the Study and 
Development Department is a woman engineer in Civil Engineering182. 
 
 
178
 UIP 
(International 
Parliamentary 
Union), 
(2020). 
Women 
in 
Parliament: 
1995-2020. 
https://www.ipu.org/file/8994/download 
179 Republic of Togo, (2019). Review of the implementation of the Beijing declaration and program of action 
commitments 
between 
2014 
and 
2019. 
https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Headquarters/Attachments/Sections/CSW/64/National-
reviews/Togo.pdf  
180  Inter-Parliamentary 
Union 
for 
Democracy 
for 
All, 
(2020). 
Women 
in 
parliament: 
1995-2020 
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwj4sfjf74L6AhUASvEDHd
9WBEoQFnoECBEQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ipu.org%2Ffile%2F8994%2Fdownload&usg=AOvVaw1p4BpjQ
iua2tGL_GseMlar  
181  Republic of Togo. The promotion of women in the maritime sector in Togo. Online available: 
https://www.togo-port.net/la-femme-dans-le-secteur-maritime-au-togo/  
182 Ibid 
Page 290

=== PAGE 295 ===
108 
 
4.19 Zambia 
Demographics and human development 
Zambia, a southern African state, and a member of the Commonwealth shares its borders with 8 
countries including the Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique, 
Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia and Angola. In 2021, the Zambian population is estimated at 
18,920,657 inhabitants of which nearly 51% are women (or 9,550,918 women). to World Bank 
population data, about 55 of Zambia's population lives in rural areas. According to World Bank 
population data, about 55 of Zambia's population lives in rural areas. 
In terms of gender inequality, the country is making considerable progress in promoting the rights 
of girls and women. However, much remains to be done to promote gender equality and achieve 
gender equity. Indeed, after a regression in the Gender Inequality Index (GII) where Zambia went 
from 0.517 in 2017 to 0.540 in 2018, the report records a slight decrease in 2019 in its gender 
inequality index which places it in 146th place out of 178 countries according to the Gender 
Inequality Index. 
When it comes to health, women and girls are at a disadvantage compared to their male 
counterparts. Indeed, in some parts of the country, particularly in rural areas, many women in 
pregnancy or childbirth suffer from the lack of health infrastructure, the lack of qualified and 
specialized personnel, the lack of operating equipment, etc. Over the period 2015-2016, the 
maternal mortality ratio (MMR) increased from 111 deaths per 100,000 live births to 252 deaths per 
100,000 live births in 2018, while the pregnancy-related mortality rate (PRMR) was 278 deaths per 
100,000 women. 
Education 
Zambia has made considerable progress in education, as enrolment and completion of primary 
schooling are almost universal. However, the country faces some challenges, particularly in terms 
of relevance, efficiency, equity and the shortage of qualified teachers. Clearly, women are 
disadvantaged compared to men in terms of education. From the quality of school infrastructure, 
to gender equity in schooling, to the quality of school and post training, Zambia has embarked 
on the modernization of its entire education system. Indeed; the country has developed 
professional standards for its teachers, with the aim of improving the efficiency and performance 
of schools. 
According to the 2018 Demographic and Health Survey report, the majority of Zambians have no 
formal education or only some primary education. Indeed, 60 percent of women and 54 percent 
of men aged 6 years and older have no or only some primary education. In 2017, the net 
secondary school enrollment rate increased by 25.4 percent in to 42.9 percent. At the same time 
the net enrollment rate in primary school decreased from 90.4 percent in 2016 to 87.9 percent in 
2017. 
Employment 
The statics of the Gender Inequality Index report show that there is an increase in inequalities that 
exist in women's participation in the labour market. In Zambia, the employment sector is 
dominated by men, while women make up about 50.5 per cent of the country's population. In 
2019, women's participation in the labour market declined from 77.7% to 35.3% in 2019. In 2021, 
only 26.7% of women participate in the labour market, compared to 44.8% of men. Women's 
participation in traditionally male-dominated industries remains remarkably low, at 20 per cent.  
While there has been progress in gender equality, inequalities persist in some areas. Women's labor 
force participation rate is 78.3 percent, compared to 95.0 percent for men. 
Page 291

=== PAGE 296 ===
109 
 
Renewable energy and transport infrastructure projects, including roads and rail voices, will 
increase the involvement of women, girls and vulnerable people in the country's workforce. 
Energy, transport, and telecommunications   
Zambia has extensive energy, transportation, industrial, and telecommunications infrastructure. 
However, Zambia's economic infrastructure is dominated by the industrial sector, particularly the 
extractive industry. Abundant energy resources, including hydropower, biomass, coal, and 
renewable energy (solar and wind) are available in Zambia. However, only 31% of the country's 
population has access to electricity. In Zambia, the majority rural population is particularly energy 
poor. Indeed, in rural areas, the rate of access to electricity is less than 11%. In recent years, 
Zambia has begun mainstreaming and monitoring gender in its development policies, particularly 
across key sectors such as infrastructure. Through a gender assessment of the energy sector 
conducted in 2018, Zambia through the Ministry of Energy has developed a gender 
mainstreaming strategy and action plan, which will inform the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) 
process. 
In Zambia, as in most African countries, women make up more than half of all road users. However, 
they are less involved in transport infrastructure construction and redevelopment projects. Gender 
mainstreaming in transport infrastructure in Zambia is a critical issue in the country. However, the 
impact of improved rural transport on women is significant. In recent years, Zambia has faced 
significant challenges including the impact of climate, economic conditions, and poorly 
maintained transport infrastructure. In this situation, the country requires additional investment to 
address these challenges. 
Sociocultural 
A predominantly patriarchal society whose customs and traditions often prohibit women's 
empowerment, in Zambia, gender inequalities are perceived at all levels, and at all levels of the 
country's population.  
In Zambia, there are certain socio-cultural beliefs that limit women's access to certain socio-
economic activities and are the root causes of gender-based violence. In the majority of the 
country's customs, women generally submit to marital demands in accordance with societal 
norms, regardless of their personal health and choice. 
Policy and Legal framework 
To promote gender equality and empowerment of women and girls and the vulnerable, Zambia 
has strengthened its policy and legal frameworks. Indeed, Zambia has been working with the 
United Nations for several years to incorporate international instruments into the country's national 
legislation. As regards the legal framework, the Constitutional (Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2016 
confirms the equal value of women and men.  Indeed, the country signed a new constitution in 
February 2016 that sets out an affirmative new framework for a 30 per cent gender equality rule 
for elected and appointed positions, while recognizing equal rights and establishing a Gender 
Equality Commission. 
A number of other progressive laws exist in the country and are among others: 
• 
The Gender Equity and Equality Act (GEEA) of 2015, which aims to incorporate into 
domestic law certain provisions relating to women's rights and gender equality 
contained in regional, continental and international instruments to which Zambia is a 
party. 
Page 292

=== PAGE 297 ===
110 
 
• 
The National Gender Policy formulated in 2014 is the main framework for the 
implementation of gender equality commitments. The policy also provides for equal 
opportunities for women and men to participate in and contribute actively to 
national development. 
• 
In 2005, the penal code was revised, making penalties for (sexual) violence against 
women and children more severe.  
However, effective implementation of these laws and policies has been slow and an acceleration 
of their implementation is desired. 
Gender based violence 
Gender-based violence is used by all social strata of the Zambian population and all age groups. 
According to police nation's 2021 annual report on gender-based violence, disaggregated 
annual data shows that 5,301 child victims of abuse across the country, accounting for 25.8% of 
all victims of gender-based violence. Of these 5,301 child victims of serious abuse, girls accounted 
for more than 77.6 per cent. In total, more than 25,000 cases of GBV were recorded in 2021. More 
than one-third (36%) of women age 15-49 have experienced physical violence at least once since 
age 15 and 14% have experienced sexual violence183.In short, women and girls are more 
vulnerable to the growing trend of "sextortion" in exchange for services and opportunities. 
In addition, to improve access to justice for victims of GBV and to ensure prompt resolution of 
cases, Zambia has established expedited courts for gender-based violence cases. 
Access to Finances 
Since the 1990s, Zambia has undergone extensive financial sector reforms. However, the 
expected benefits of a market-based banking system have not materialized. Indeed, more than 
40 percent of Zambian adults do not have access to quality financial products, and at the same 
time, about 60 percent of adults who do have access do not use them, according to Zambia's 
2017-2022 National Financial Inclusion Strategy document. 
Also, the population in rural areas is disadvantaged.  People in remote rural areas still rely on cash 
or barter, or use unregulated and unsecured channels, to make payments and store savings. Just 
like globally, women's financial inclusion is a top priority for Zambia. Indeed, women's access to 
banking services contributes to economic growth, economically empowers women and supports 
several Sustainable Development Goals in the country.  
In 2015, women's financial inclusion in Zambia was 30%. Through the use of mobile money, the 
gender gap in access to financial services has been reduced and up to 58% of women are 
financially included.  
Poverty 
The impacts of climate change are strongly felt among the Zambian population, especially in rural 
areas. In addition, human action such as deforestation combined with the negative effects of 
 
183 European Union, Zambia, (2021). EU GENDER ACTION PLAN III, 2021-2025 ZAMBIA COUNTRY LEVEL 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (CLIP). 
https://www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/Zambia%20Gender%20Country%20Lev
el%20Implementation%20Plan%20%28CLIP%29.pdf 
 
Page 293

=== PAGE 298 ===
111 
 
climate change such as drought increase the distances to collect firewood used for domestic 
energy, which has an impact on women and children who are usually responsible for collection. 
According to the European Union's report on the National Level Implementation Plan for Zambia, 
about 55.8% of the country's population is poor, and of these, 40.8% are extremely poor. 
According to World Bank data, poverty rates among Zambia's rural population were stubbornly 
high, reaching 78 percent of the population and disproportionately affecting adolescent girls and 
women. 
Unequal Participation in decision taking 
The statics of the Gender Inequality Index report show that there is an increase in the inequalities 
that exist in the number of women parliamentarians. Only 14.9% of parliamentary seats are held 
by women and even fewer women hold Cabinet positions at approximately 7%184. While women 
make up more than half of the population in Zambia, they are poorly represented in decision-
making and accountability bodies in public office. In 2016, the country signed a new constitution 
in February 2016 that establishes a new positive framework for a 30% gender equality rule for 
elected and appointed positions, while recognizing equal rights and establishing a Gender 
Equality Commission.  
In Zambia, many ethnic groups follow a matrilineal system, where women own the land and pass 
it on to the maternal line. However, ownership does not necessarily mean access, use and control 
of land. This remains a consequence of the failure to take women into account in decision-making 
facilities within local communities. Women are very limited in their participation in the energy and 
industrial value chain in the country, especially as entrepreneurs or business owners in renewable 
energy or heavy industries. Many Zambian women have better qualifications, however, they are 
not considered for higher positions in higher institutions and strategic positions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 European Union, Zambia, (2021). EU GENDER ACTION PLAN III, 2021-2025 ZAMBIA COUNTRY LEVEL 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (CLIP). 
https://www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/Zambia%20Gender%20Country%20Lev
el%20Implementation%20Plan%20%28CLIP%29.pdf  
Page 294

=== PAGE 299 ===
112 
 
V. GENDER DISPARITIES TO INFRASTRUCTURAL ACCESS AND 
SERVICES AND CONTRIBUTION OF THE PROJECT 
Owing to growing social science and interdisciplinary research on the effects of infrastructure 
disruption in time of disasters185, it is possible to understand gender and social inclusion considerations 
of climate resilient infrastructures. Despite many important research gaps, it’s still possible to 
understand how infrastructure disruption can affect populations and economies, considering 
gender specificities. 
Such research has established the criticality of electric power and telecommunication services in 
advancing gender equality and the heightened vulnerability of certain population groups to 
infrastructure disruption. While the importance of understanding and reducing infrastructure 
disruption impacts is well-established, omitting the socioeconomic impacts of infrastructure 
disruptions can lead to underinvestment in mitigating the consequences of the disruption.  
When extreme events damage infrastructure, the impact materialises not only in term of physical 
damages, but also the socio-economic impacts. For example, when a road or a bridge damages, 
it disrupts connectivity and prevents access to school, hospital. This prevents women in developing 
countries from receiving urgent medical care and could result in maternal death, defined as deaths 
while pregnant or within 42 days of giving birth. Lack of resilient transport infrastructure can also 
negatively impact girls' school enrolment; limit women access critical urban infrastructure and 
services and prevent their access to more activities that generate remuneration. Beyond access to 
medical care and other education and livelihood opportunities, inadequate transport systems are 
shown to be an enabler of gender-based violence. 
The promotion of climate resilient infrastructure will help achieve universal energy access, 
environmental sustainability, and gender equality in the energy sector, leading to positive 
developmental outcomes for all. The lack of access to electricity affects women and girls 
disproportionately because non-existent or irregular electricity supply can considerably increase 
their time poverty, reducing the number of productive hours in a day and increasing the unpaid 
domestic work burden. The responsibility for collecting biomass fuels for cooking such as wood, dung, 
and crop residues falls on women and girls in low-income rural households. On average, they spend 
long hours per week on these activities due to the need to travel long distances in search of fuel. 
Furthermore, women and girls disproportionately suffer from adverse health outcomes due to indoor 
air pollution caused by unclean, combustible fuels for household energy, accounting for 6 out of 10 
of the 4.3 million premature deaths globally in 2012 .  
By promoting sustainably, the transition to clean energy, ICRF is critical to contribute to a better 
access for all including women and reduce gender inequalities by helping lengthen the day by one 
to two hours, allowing women to spend more time on productive, income-generating, or leisure 
activities. Through the program, the role of women is reaffirmed as key for improving electricity 
access.  
In today's world, access and control over information increasingly symbolise empowerment. Digital 
communications infrastructure is instrumental in enabling knowledge sharing and creating more 
inclusive and empowered societies. However, within the digital divide – 52 percent of the world's 
 
185 Insights into these impacts derive from a variety of information sources, including surveys, field 
observations, analysis of secondary data, and computational models. 
Page 295

=== PAGE 300 ===
113 
 
population is without access to the Internet – there is a wide gap between male and female digital 
communications users. There is an estimated Internet usage gap of 11 percent globally, which 
increases to 23 percent in Africa and 31 percent in the least developed countries. The divide also 
extends to the use of mobile phones. In low- and middle-income countries, women are 10 percent 
less likely to have a mobile phone and 26 percent less likely to have a smartphone than men. The 
likelihood of having access to mobile Internet is about 34 percent lower in Sub-Saharan Africa. . 
Multiple causes reinforce this gender divide. The cost of digital communications technology and the 
significant number of women living in poverty are considered the greatest barriers to accessing 
digital communications services and the Internet. Women are usually paid less than men for equal 
work and have more difficulties accessing financial assets, consequently limiting their ability to own 
or use any type of technology, including digital communications. 
Furthermore, illiteracy among women and girls, who make up nearly two-thirds of the world's illiterate, 
and the lack of knowledge of English in rural areas, which is the primary language of the Internet, 
are significant obstacles to closing the digital gender gap. This program can have significant positive 
outcomes in multiple dimensions of development as it increases access to digital communications 
technology for women. First, it can improve access to education for women and girls, giving the 
wide range of learning opportunities, content, and tools available on the web. Second, it can trigger 
new economic and employment opportunities for women and women-owned businesses by 
increasing access to international markets and online service-based industries, where women are 
more likely to work. Third, digital communications infrastructure can also positively impact the 
reduction of gender-based violence and insecurity through mobile applications where women can 
report unsafe areas, quickly reach emergency services, and share their position to ensure their safety. 
Especially during times of crisis, digital communications can be a critical lifeline by providing access 
to emergency services. For example, gender-based violence against women has increased 
worldwide due to COVID-19. Technology can facilitate the reporting of incidents in cases like this. 
In all of ICRF's target countries, there are major challenges and setbacks to gender equality. In 
addition, women and men are distinctly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Therefore, 
specific intervention strategies for each target group are needed. Across critical infrastructures, 
opportunities have been identified to contribute to and increase positive gender relations through 
equitable actions. In short, in the analysis of gender and socio-economic indicators, it appears that 
countries do not have the same characteristics in terms of gender mainstreaming at all levels of 
socio-economic, cultural and political life. However, ICRF's areas are essential and targeted to 
contribute effectively to the improvement of people's living conditions and above all to reduce 
gender inequalities and discrimination against women and vulnerable people. 
In addition, the project for the rehabilitation and installation of resilient infrastructure remains an 
opportunity for countries and an excellent way for better gender mainstreaming through 
development projects and the effective and active participation of women in the national 
development process. 
Energy: The installation or expansion of renewable energy plants such as solar, wind, etc. offer 
significant potential to support the development of women-owned microenterprises, especially in 
rural areas. The project therefore aims to extend the electricity network to areas not covered in order 
to provide women and vulnerable people with opportunities to develop and use technologies that 
require energy such as cell phones. As a result, vulnerable populations, especially women, will be 
able to seize opportunities to access credit and training and solve the financial inclusion problem 
faced by most countries. The Solar Power Plant Project requires maintenance, upkeep, cleaning and 
verification.  Thus, the planned training programs will allow a significant participation of women and 
youth in order to strengthen their professional skills, to increase their employability and to reinforce 
their social and economic power. In rural areas, two factors increase exposure to violence against 
Page 296

=== PAGE 301 ===
114 
 
women and girls. These are poor lighting in villages; countryside; hamlets, etc. and the social 
expectation that women and girls collect firewood. Thanks to the projects of installation or extension 
of power plants, these areas will be connected, which will avoid the search for wood for girls. The 
lighting of these areas will allow both women to exercise or develop activities requiring energy while 
young people will spend more time to learn their lesson. 
Transport: Through the construction or upgrading of road transport facilities, isolated populations, 
especially those in rural areas, will be provided with access to economic opportunities, health care, 
education, and other services and infrastructure needed to improve their well-being. Finally, the 
agricultural community in these areas, sometimes dominated by women, will be able to access the 
domestic market for the sale of their products with significant benefits. In addition to their major 
contribution to economic growth and the creation of economic opportunities for vulnerable groups; 
transport also contributes to increasing women's productivity and promoting gender equality. In line 
with the gender requirements and the increase in the number of women in decision making that 
AFC is committed to implementing throughout the project, women; women's groups or women-led 
businesses will be represented at every stage of the planning and design process of transport project 
investments. The women's groups; community associations; and NGOs that have been identified 
and consulted already constitute a structured approach to understanding women's needs. 
Industry: The industrial platform projects offer an excellent way to reduce gender inequality and 
especially to reduce cases of gender-based violence (GBV). In addition to the direct and indirect 
employment opportunities that these industrial platforms offer to women and youth, the project also 
encourages the establishment of cooperative farmers and breeders to deliver products in quantity 
and quality. This strategy will not only protect girls and women from need through various income-
generating activities, but also reduce or eliminate the socio-cultural practices they suffer from. The 
industry projects targeted by ICRF are oriented towards job creation, manufacturing, services and 
innovation. In addition, women-owned businesses will be further included in the manufacturing 
value chain. Thus their capacities will be strengthened to assume new roles in the transition to 
industry and consequently increase their share in decision making. 
Page 297

=== PAGE 302 ===
115 
 
VI. RESULTS OF SURVEY THE GENDER PERCEPTIONS IN ICRF 
COUNTRIES 
To find out the level of gender mainstreaming as well as the degree of women's participation in all 
stages of the infrastructure life cycle, an online survey was conducted from April to June 2022 on 
gender and social inclusion for infrastructure projects in countries covered by the ICRF project, 
including Benin; Cameroon; Chad; Côte d'Ivoire; Djibouti; DRC; Gabon; Gambia; Ghana; Guinea; 
Kenya; Mali; Mauritania; Namibia; Nigeria; Rwanda; Sierra Leone and Togo. 
This section presents a summary of the results of the survey, which was designed to determine the 
level of gender mainstreaming in infrastructure projects, particularly in transport, energy, heavy 
industry and telecommunications. This section completes the presentation of the gender 
mainstreaming and social inclusion framework in ICRF countries. The report draws on responses and 
information from the questionnaire sent to women's groups and associations, and officials of 
implementing agencies and institutions on how to mainstream gender into environmental policies, 
programs and infrastructure projects in ICRF countries. Thus, information on the level of women's 
participation throughout the infrastructure life cycle was collected as well as information on the 
national gender strategy of these countries. 
It should be noted that the questionnaire is organized into different sections including project 
objectives and target groups; access, control of resources and impacts of infrastructure projects; 
women's participation and consultation strategies; women's role as decision-makers; and finally sex-
disaggregated data on infrastructure. As such, the analysis covers the areas of transportation; 
energy; industrial platforms; and telecommunications in the context of climate change. 
6.1 Project objectives and target group 
According to the survey, the design of the infrastructure project recognizes that women and men 
have different needs and priorities in their use of the infrastructure, but more often than not women's 
needs are not taken into account or are only partially taken into account. For women's groups, the 
constraints and obstacles to women's participation in infrastructure project activities and access to 
project benefits remain gender-based discriminatory practices; reluctance to assign work to women; 
reluctance to include women in the workforce in certain sectors; lack of anti-discrimination 
protections; lack of gender-specific policies and benefits, etc.  
According to the responses of one Sierra Leonean agency that responded to the questionnaire, the 
gender mainstreaming strategy has been developed, but the effective implementation of gender 
policies and programs through infrastructure projects remains problematic. The tasks performed by 
women are affected, particularly in the area of transport, where the redesign of a road slows down 
or sometimes stops their income-generating activities. For this reason, women's groups or women's 
promotion agencies have not been consulted and/or involved in the decision-making process 
concerning the "location and timeframe" of the work. 
6.2 Resource control and impacts of infrastructure projects 
Gender equality is an important aspect in the development process of countries but is largely 
neglected in the planning and provision of infrastructure. Consultation and involvement of women 
or women's groups in decision-making regarding the location or type of infrastructure provided in 
the locality and/or region of the country remains very limited in some ICRF countries. 
Page 298

=== PAGE 303 ===
116 
 
According to the survey results, the participation of women, especially rural women, in public works 
as wage labor is hindered by some major factors. In Namibia, for example, the division of domestic 
labor usually assigns women the primary responsibility for childcare and other domestic tasks. This 
limits the time they can devote to productive activities, and often means that they can only 
participate in work done in their locality. For the National Network of Rural Women's Associations 
RENAFER in DRC, identifying women's groups and integrating them into the management of 
infrastructure in a formal way will help overcome the often traditional constraints and obstacles that 
hinder women's participation in leadership positions. 
Opportunities for women to be employed and trained in the construction and operation of 
infrastructure exist but are mostly limited to the labor force. Indeed, support services for women such 
as childcare and health centers to encourage their participation in infrastructure projects are either 
lacking or simply not considered. 
Similarly, women have been very little involved in infrastructure projects but they benefit from their 
installation. In Nigeria, for example, roads have been built to enable women to transport their 
agricultural products to markets in the nearby city. It should also be noted that women are not 
integrated at all stages of the life cycle of infrastructure projects. For some associations, the 
imposition of quotas for women at all levels of design and implementation of infrastructure projects 
remains the best strategy to ensure that they participate and are not disadvantaged by these 
projects. Therefore, gender action plans and assessments must be considered at all phases of the 
project cycle. Women must be integrated into the infrastructure project in the planning and 
implementation stages. 
According to the DRC-based National Network of Rural Women's Associations RENAFER, women are 
not sufficiently integrated into infrastructure projects. According to RENAFER, the main constraints 
and obstacles to women's participation in infrastructure activities remain gender-based 
discriminatory practices and the lack of education and training opportunities. 
6.3 Strategies 
for 
women's 
participation 
and 
consultation 
in 
infrastructure projects 
Strategies for gender mainstreaming in the development process exist, but they have not been 
identified to overcome barriers to women's participation and benefits from infrastructure projects. 
Indeed, the majority of ICRF countries have a national strategy or action plan on gender equality 
and/or gender mainstreaming at all levels. In most cases, sector ministries/agencies are responsible 
for implementing these national strategies or plans. In the case of Chad, Namibia, Nigeria, and Togo, 
for example, the country's gender mainstreaming strategies are led by the Ministry of Women, Family 
and Child Welfare; Namibia's Ministry of Women's Affairs and Child Welfare; the Federal Ministry of 
Women's Affairs and Social Development; and the Minister of Social Welfare and Women's 
Development, respectively. 
Regarding equal access between men and women to infrastructure projects, women suffer more 
than men from the lack of access to quality infrastructure. For the associations, it is essential that 
women take part in the definition of priorities in terms of design and operation of infrastructures so 
that they effectively contribute to both development and the benefit of women. Despite the 
implementation of these national strategies and plans, there are constraints and obstacles to 
women's participation in infrastructure projects. Moreover, the respondents emphasize a lack of 
monitoring of the implementation of the strategy throughout the life cycle of the infrastructure. As a 
Page 299

=== PAGE 304 ===
117 
 
result, there is a gap between the main directions of the decisions taken within the technical 
ministries and the implementation of actions to fully integrate gender into infrastructure projects. 
Moreover, the implementation of these strategies sometimes remains concentrated in one area 
without covering all areas. In Nigeria, for example, in order to implement the national gender 
strategy in the area of environment, the Federal Ministry of Environment first developed the National 
Action Plan on Gender and Climate Change followed by the development and validation of its 
implementation strategy. On the other hand, the underdeveloped gender-blind infrastructure is one 
of the main factors preventing women and girls from accessing basic services to promote their 
upward social mobility and reduce gender disparities. 
In Sierra Leone, there are no specific gender mainstreaming guidelines for infrastructure, but there is 
a national gender empowerment policy. However, the government has developed policies and 
laws to build women's capacity, awareness and empowerment opportunities. In Côte d'Ivoire, most 
ministries and structures show a clear commitment to gender mainstreaming and have fully 
implemented the national gender strategy, but there is a lack of tools and specialized human 
resources. In some sectors, economic and social infrastructures have been designed, planned and 
implemented without taking gender concerns into account. However, the ICRF's major concern is 
to take into account the gender dimension in infrastructure projects: roads, bridges, railroads, ports, 
air transport, energy, telecommunications and heavy industry. 
6.4 Women's role as decision makers in infrastructure projects 
Regarding the role of women in decision-making, particularly through infrastructure projects, there 
is little opportunity for the project to support women as infrastructure managers in either a formal or 
informal way. When asked whether women and women's groups are often consulted and involved 
in decision-making regarding the location or type of infrastructure provided in their locality/region, 
the majority of responses were no. However, women's groups are organized in a way that allows 
them to participate in the decision-making process. However, women's groups are organized to 
participate in various key project activities. 
Furthermore, the possibilities for the project to support women as infrastructure managers in a formal 
or informal way must go through the identification of women's groups and their integration into the 
management of infrastructure in a formal way. With regard to the practical needs and strategic 
interests of women that need to be taken into account in infrastructure projects, the creation of a 
women's boarding school near industrial infrastructures and the training of "gender officers" 
responsible for implementing and monitoring the action plan and supporting gender mainstreaming 
in infrastructure projects would be an asset for these women. In this regard, the majority of 
respondents emphasize that the issue of "practical and strategic gender interests" is becoming more 
widespread in communities where project promoters, especially infrastructure projects, are linking 
women and sustainable development. For the respondents, there are many ways to achieve these 
objectives, and setting up monitoring and data collection mechanisms disaggregated by sex would 
be a step towards achieving these objectives. 
According to some of the agencies interviewed, gender inequality issues in infrastructure projects 
depend on the sector or area of infrastructure. In the energy and transport sectors, for example, the 
challenge of gender inequality in this sector stems almost entirely from the absence of gender 
considerations in the planning process. In fact, society has traditionally granted (and in some regions 
or localities continues to grant) differential rights based on gender, in the sense that women could 
not perform tasks in certain areas of activity. This also resulted in a traditional and economic legacy 
in which people, based on their gender, had different opportunities to access the labor market, 
Page 300

=== PAGE 305 ===
118 
 
financial capital and human capital. These inequalities have ended up being transposed into the 
various policies and plans for energy, transport and industry. Work in these sectors is thus 
approached in a gendered manner. 
For example, women's groups emphasize the need to build childcare, maternity facilities, schools, 
and health care facilities near industrial centers. In Nigeria, for example, both men and women are 
involved in the decision-making process, particularly with regard to infrastructure, but not at all 
stages of the infrastructure life cycle. In fact, taking gender into account throughout the 
infrastructure life cycle will further promote gender equality in Nigeria. 
6.5 Gender-disaggregated data on infrastructure. 
Climate change considerations that need to be taken into account throughout the life cycle of 
infrastructure should be thoroughly analyzed at the project planning stage. And the essential tool 
for monitoring any project is data collection. However, it should be noted that there is a lack of 
collection and centralization of gender-disaggregated data related to infrastructure projects in 
most countries. For the survey participant representing the Federal Ministry of Environment in Nigeria, 
synergy between environmental agencies and institutions with the National Bureau of Statistics to 
collect such data would be an asset for future plans or initiative in gender disaggregated data 
collection. In Namibia, for example, data is regularly collected in the areas of infrastructure, energy 
(electricity, oil, gas), and telecommunication through geographic information. Although the 
majority of respondents reported a lack of data collection in their country, countries are conducting 
research on the gender dimensions of climate-resilient infrastructure that incorporates the differential 
needs and use of infrastructure by women and men. 
Ultimately, this survey highlighted the provisions of the gender equality and social inclusion policy in 
the transport, energy, telecommunications and industrial platform sectors. The development of 
practical tools to facilitate gender mainstreaming in sustainable infrastructure project interventions 
will be used for both monitoring and collecting sex-disaggregated data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 301

=== PAGE 306 ===
119 
 
VII. SUMMARY 
OF 
CONSULTATIONS 
UNDERTAKEN 
WITH 
GENDER 
AND 
WOMEN'S 
ORGANIZATIONS 
The different actors, organizations and groups that participated in the consultation are part of the stakeholders that have been previously identified 
among the following categories of actors : 
Competent national ministries; Regulatory bodies; Relevant research institutions; Non-governmental organizations (NGOs); Civil society organizations 
(CSOs); Meteorological agencies; Indigenous peoples' organizations; Official CVF observers. 
These stakeholders were selected based on the target sectors within the host countries of the proposed project and classified into the 
following groups: 
• 
Anglophone West Africa: Ghana, the Gambia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone 
• 
Eastern and Southern Africa: Kenya, Rwanda, Namibia 
• 
Francophone Central Africa: Cameroon, Chad, Djibouti, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon 
• 
Francophone West Africa: Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Togo. 
 
Table 2 Table of gender consultations: 
Country 
Type of Actor 
Organisation 
Contacts 
Cameroon 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
Forum des Femmes Autochtones du 
Cameroun (FFPAC) 
+237 672 101 577 
ffac@ffacameroon.org/ 
www.ffacameroon.org 
 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples 
Réseau Camerounais des 
Organisations des Droits de l’Homme 
/Cameroon Network of Human 
Rights Organizations 
Joseph Desire Zebaze 
zebyjodes@gmail.com 
 
Mbororo Social and Cultural 
Development Association 
(MBOSCUDA) 
contact@mboscuda.org 
Page 302

=== PAGE 307 ===
120 
 
Country 
Type of Actor 
Organisation 
Contacts 
Santa Mbororo Youths Association 
(SAMUSA) 
mboyascam@yahoo.com 
Chad 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
ONG Nirvana 
contact@ongnirvana.org  
Indigenous Peoples 
Association des femmes peules et 
peuples autochtones du Tchad 
hindououmar@gmail.com  
DRC 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
ONG Femme main dans la main 
pour le développement intégral 
contact@fmmdi.org 
+243 977 367 571   
+243 810 350 586 
Women for Women International 
NA 
Equateur Magazine Association   
Hornela Mumbela 
Action Aid DRC 
NA 
 
CREDDHO 
+243 999 922 088 
+243 822 078 694 
info@creddho-rdc.org / 
 creddhocoordin@gmail.com 
Indigenous Peoples 
FDAPID-Hope for indigenous peoples 
+243 810127090, 998401598 
info@fdapid-hopeip.org 
,fdapidrdc@gmail.com, coordination@fdapid-
hopeip.org 
Dynamique des Groupes des 
Peuples Autochtones (DGPA) 
info@dgpardc.org 
contact@dgpardc.org 
+243 895 111 616 
Centre d’Accompagnement des 
Autochtones Pygmées et Minoritaires 
Vulnérables 
camvorg@yahoo.fr 
+ 243 997 706 371   
+ 243 853 793 160 
Gabon 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups  
Agir Pour le Genre 
+241 770 625 77 
agirpourlegenre_gab@yahoo.fr 
 
 
Association pour le développement 
de la culture des peuples pygmées 
du Gabon (ADCPPG) 
 
Page 303

=== PAGE 308 ===
121 
 
Country 
Type of Actor 
Organisation 
Contacts 
Indigenous Peoples 
representatives  
Mouvement National des Minorités 
Autochtones et Pygmées du Gabon 
+ 241 078 925 90 / + 241 062 860 55 
+ 241 073 513 32/ odambol@yahoo.fr  
Djibouti 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
Organisation de Bender Djedid Pour 
le Developpement Socio-
Economique 
ongbenderdjedid@yahoo.fr 
+253 21 357 565 
 
 
 
Kenya 
GCF Observers 
Ogiek Peoples’ Development 
Program (OPDP) 
Daniel M. Kobei / Lilian Maina 
lilianmaina@ogiekpeoples.org 
Indigenous Peoples 
Pastoralist Women for Health and 
Education. (PWHE) 
 
IL’Laramatak Community Concerns 
(ICC) 
 
 
 
Namibia 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
Ywca -Young Womens Chirstian 
Association 
 
Indigenous Peoples 
Nama Indigenous People's Forum In 
Namibia (NIPFIN) or !Nunisen 
 
Nyae Nyae Conservancy 
 
Rwanda 
Indigenous Peoples 
African Initiative for Mankind 
Progress Organization (AIMPO) 
Richard Ntakirutimana 
info@aimpo.org 
 
Action pour la Promotion des Droits 
des Minorités Autochtones en 
Afrique Centrale (APDMAC) 
Adrien Sinafasi Makelo 
Godefroy Batano Chubolire 
 +243 998 611 352 / 997 706 362 
apdmac2000@yahoo.fr sinamake@yahoo.fr 
Gambia 
 
Agency For The Development of 
Women & Children 
ADWAC 
+220 572 0106 / 572 0075 / 990 1991 / 991 5217 
adwac@qanet.gm 
Ghana 
 
African Women's Development Fund 
Hamda Zakaria 
AWDF@awdf.org or grants@awdf.org 
+ 233 242700881 
Nigeria 
GCF Observers 
Niger Delta Women’s Movement for 
Peace and Development 
 
Indigenous Peoples 
Movement for the Survival of the 
Ogoni People (MOSOP) 
mosop@phca.linkserve.co 
Legborsi Saro Pyagbara  
(+234) 84 233907 
Page 304

=== PAGE 309 ===
122 
 
Country 
Type of Actor 
Organisation 
Contacts 
Sierra Leone 
 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
Sierra Leone Association of NGOs 
(SLANGO) 
Joseph Rahall; (+232) 22 220 400 / +232 76 601 
979 
josephrahall@gmail.com  
greengreenscenery@gmail.com 
Benin 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
ONG ESAM 
+229 95 01 01 95 
esam_benin@yahoo.fr 
 
 
Organisation pour le 
développement des activités des 
femmes (ODAFEM) 
YO épse DRO Henriette 
(+225) 20 38 20 43 
(+225) 07 40 65 85 
Côte d’Ivoire 
 
National Union of Disabled Women 
of Côte d'Ivoire (UNAFEHCI) 
YO épse DRO Henriette 
(+225) 20 38 20 43 
(+225) 07 40 65 85 
Guinea 
 
 
 
Mali 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups (2 - 4) 
 
COFEM - Collectif des Femmes du 
Mali 
Djeneba HAIDARA 
djenebahaidara1@yahoo.fr 
Fédération Nationale des Femmes 
Rurales du Mali (FENAFER) 
 
Togo 
 
NGOs and Civil Society 
Organisations (CSOs), including 
gender groups 
Femme De Demain (FDD) 
+228 90 06 02 22 
fdd_tg@yahoo.fr 
ONG CASE TOGO 
Email: info@casetogo-an.org  
Phone: +228 90 26 16 56 
Phone: +228 96 06 16 01 
Association pour l'accès à 
l'éducation et à la formation 
(AccEd) 
+41 22 940 02 80 
Email: info@acced.ch 
Page 305

=== PAGE 310 ===
123 
 
 
Page 306

=== PAGE 311 ===
124 
 
VIII. INTRODUCTION TO ICRF 
 
Current and future infrastructures in Africa face risks associated with climate change which is often 
not a key consideration in infrastructure planning, design, financing, commissioning and 
construction. Climate-resilient infrastructure would help provide the quantity, quality and 
accessibility to infrastructure and the associated services to connect people and enhance the 
quality of life. 
The Africa Finance Corporation (AFC) wholly-own Capital Partners is establishing the Infrastructure 
Climate Resilient Fund (ICRF) to offer tailored financial products (concessional equity and 
parametric insurance) to finance climate-resilient infrastructure and reduce the impact of climate 
hazards on the physical infrastructures in the selected African nations. The ICRF will be supported by 
targeted technical assistance and policy interventions to ensure a long term and systematic 
approach towards infrastructure financing in Africa. 
This analysis is prepared to assess potential Gender and Social inclusion Risks that might be 
associated to the implementation of the ICRF in the targeted countries, with the view to propose an 
action plan to ensure a gender-responsive implementation of the ICRF. 
The proposal targets 19 countries in Africa and is structured around three (3) components. 
• 
Component 1 – Financial instruments to reduce market failure and attract investment in 
Climate Resilience;  
• 
Component 2 – Strengthening capacity, systems and networks to improve understanding of 
current and future risks; and  
• 
Component 3 – Policy interventions to support investments in Climate Resilient Infrastructure. 
 
Page 307

=== PAGE 312 ===
125 
 
IX. ENTRY POINTS FOR GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION 
CONSIDERATIONS IN ICRF 
Activities requiring mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion in the program.  
Outcome 1 - Blended finance at scale and innovative climate risk insurance products are deployed 
for CRI Asset Classes investments in the beneficiaries' African countries 
 
 
 
Entry 
point 
Proposed interventions 
Responsible / relevant 
actors 
Estimated 
Budget 
and 
budget 
Source  
Output 1.1  
 
Activities  
 
ICRF is fully operational and raised capital at the fund level  
 
1.1.1 ICRF structure 
and registration 
 
Yes  
Commitment to gender equality in 
ACP and ICRF design structure186 
AFC and ACP senior 
management  
 N/A 
1.1.2 
Consummate 
Initial closing at the 
Fund level with GCF 
as Anchor Investor 
 
No 
 
 
 
1.1.3 
Prepare 
ICRF 
teaser, IM, evaluate 
Fund suitability; 
 
No 
 
 
 
1.1.4 Hold roadshows 
with 
commercial 
capital 
providers 
(pension 
funds, 
insurance 
funds, 
family offices, private 
banks, philanthropies, 
high 
net 
worth 
individuals, and other 
institutional investors); 
No 
  
 
 
 
186 As a good starting point the CEO of ACP and ICRF is a woman.  
Page 308

=== PAGE 313 ===
126 
 
1.1.5 Negotiate and 
close 
LPs 
commitments.  
Yes  
Commitment to collaborate with 
partners 
that 
hold 
high 
ESG 
standards including commitment 
to Gender equality and social 
inclusion 
 
ACP and ICRF team  
N/A 
Output 1.2 Activities  
ICRF de-risks CRI Asset Classes mobilizing commercial capital at scale 
 
1.2.1 
Source 
CRI 
pipeline and launch 
investment process  
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.2 
Conduct 
analysis 
to 
support 
de-risking 
financial 
mechanisms   
1.2.3 
Conduct 
first 
level due diligence  
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.4 
Structure 
the 
pipeline through SPVs 
and 
investment 
platforms  
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.5 Engage with the 
market 
proponents 
for capital raising at 
the pipeline level 
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.6 
Prepare 
documentation 
for 
Investment 
Committee  
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.7 Financial closure 
for CRI Asset Classes 
projects 
 
No 
 
 
 
1.2.8 
Pipeline 
management  
 
No 
 
 
 
Page 309

=== PAGE 314 ===
127 
 
1.2.9 Reporting on the 
program results and 
holding ICRF annual 
audit.  
 
No 
 
 
 
Output 1.3 
Activities  
 
ICRF launches climate-risk parametric insurance (CRPI) scheme for CRI Asset Classes. 
 
1.3.1 
Implementing 
standards 
and 
climate 
data 
analytics 
into 
CRI 
projects 
risk 
assessment at ICRF; 
 
No 
1.3.2 Engaging with 
insurance companies 
to 
negotiate 
premiums 
and 
payouts 
for 
CRPI, 
simplifying access for 
the market; 
 
Yes 
• 
Commitment to collaborate 
with partners that hold a high 
ESG 
standards 
including 
commitment 
to 
Gender 
equality 
• 
Encourage 
the 
insurance 
industry to develop a better 
awareness 
of 
gender 
differences in designing their 
products 
and 
distribution 
channels  
• 
Ensure that equal opportunities 
are provided to women and 
men in Experts appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages women to apply 
and also by advertising through 
various channels 
ACP and ICRF team 
ICRF 
Partners 
and 
consultants 
Include in 
the 
outcomes 
2 and 3 
budget 
1.3.3 
Negotiating 
long-term agreement 
on CRPI for ICRF  
 
No 
1.3.4 
Piloting 
CRPI 
scheme 
in 
ICRF 
investments  
 
 
1.3.5 Integrating CRPI 
in 
ICRF 
investment 
process 
No 
 
Page 310

=== PAGE 315 ===
128 
 
Outcome 2 - Improved climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for CRI Asset Classes and 
improved capacity for scaling up CRI in Africa;  
 
 
Entry 
point 
Proposed intervention 
Responsible  
Estimated Budget 
and Source  
Output 2.1 Activities  
 
Deployment of climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for ICRF 
investments in CRI Asset Classes and improved capacity for scaling up 
investments in CRI in Africa 
 
2.1.1 Procurement of 
technical 
firms 
for 
detailed climate risk 
assessments, 
CRPI 
recommendations, 
engineering 
assessments 
of 
climate adaptation 
solutions 
for 
each 
ICRF projects 
 
Yes  
• 
References 
to 
commitment 
to 
gender equality in the 
tender document 
• 
Ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are 
provided to women 
and men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and 
also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various 
channels 
ACP & ICRF Team  
N/A 
2.1.2 
Capacity 
building for ICRF and 
AFC on climate risk 
assessment, 
adaptation solutions, 
and 
CRPI 
requirements for CRI 
Asset Classes 
 
Yes  
• 
Commitment 
to 
prioritize 
women 
qualified 
consultants 
and to include the 
need 
for 
gender 
disaggregated data – 
wherever possible- in 
the various terms of 
reference 
ACF & ICRF Team 
and consultants 
Included in the 
outcome 
2 
budget  
2.1.3 
1st 
level 
assessment for CRI 
Asset Classes project 
selection 
for 
ICRF 
investments, by the 
technical firms incl. 
climate 
risk 
assessment, 
embedding climate 
risk analytics, design 
for 
adaptation 
solution, incremental 
cost for 
adaption, 
economic 
and 
financial 
analysis, 
Yes 
• 
Commitment 
to 
prioritize 
women 
qualified 
consultants 
and to include the 
need 
for 
gender 
disaggregated data – 
wherever possible- in 
the various terms of 
reference 
• 
For 
all 
recruitment, 
ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are 
provided to women 
and men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
ACF & ICRF Team 
and consultants 
included in the 
outcome 
2 
budget  
Page 311

=== PAGE 316 ===
129 
 
and 
CRPI 
requirements 
 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and 
also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various 
channels 
2.1.4 
Managing 
development of the 
selected CRI Asset 
Classes projects for 
financial 
closure 
preparation 
incl. 
feasibility 
studies, 
economic 
and 
financial 
analysis, 
CRPI 
T&C 
recommendations 
 
No 
 
 
Included in the 
outcome 
1 
budget 
2.1.5 Issuing RFP and 
support 
management of EPC 
open 
tender 
procurement  
 
Yes  
• 
Commitment 
to 
collaborate 
with 
partners that hold a 
high 
ESG 
standards 
including commitment 
to Gender equality  
• 
References to gender 
equality in the tender 
documents  
• 
Commitment 
to 
support 
women 
led 
company 
wherever 
possible 
• 
For 
all 
recruitment, 
ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are 
provided to women 
and men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and 
also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various 
channels 
ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team  
N/A 
2.1.6 
Overseeing 
construction 
and 
implementation 
of 
ICRF 
projects 
to 
ensure 
adaptation 
solutions deployed  
 
Yes 
 
• 
Commitment 
to 
promote 
gender 
equality  
• 
Commitment 
to 
collaborate 
with 
partners that hold a 
high 
ESG 
standards 
including commitment 
to Gender equality 
ACF 
Technical 
assistance 
Included in the 
outcome 
1 
budget 
Page 312

=== PAGE 317 ===
130 
 
• 
Commitment 
to 
secure 
women 
ingenieur in the various 
teams- 
wherever 
possible 
• 
For 
all 
recruitment, 
ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are 
provided to women 
and men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and 
also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various 
channels 
2.1.7 
Reassessment 
of CRPI requirements 
during 
construction 
and implementation 
phases 
 
No 
 
 
 
2.1.8 Lessons learned 
are captured from 
ICRF CRI investments 
and 
roadmap 
for 
replication across the 
continent 
 
No 
 
 
 
 
2.1.9 
Training 
and 
knowledge 
sharing 
for 
public 
and 
private sector to raise 
awareness 
about 
existing and future 
climate change risks, 
and 
de-risking 
methodologies 
based 
on 
ICRF 
investments 
 
Yes 
• 
Commitment 
to 
collaborate 
with 
partners that hold a 
high 
ESG 
standards 
including commitment 
to Gender equality 
• 
Commitment 
to 
ensure 
gender 
balance participation 
in 
the 
capacity 
building and trainings 
activities 
• 
For 
all 
recruitment, 
ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are 
provided to women 
and men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
ACF 
and 
ICRF 
Team  
Technical 
assistance service 
providers; Gender 
expert 
included in the 
outcome 
2 
budget 
Page 313

=== PAGE 318 ===
131 
 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and 
also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various 
channels 
Output 2.2 
Implementation of M&E, EMSF, Gender Action plan for ICRF program  
 
Activities  
2.2.1 
Onboarding 
experts 
for 
M&E, 
EMSF, Gender Action 
plan implementation 
for 
ICRF 
program 
including 
Components 
1, 
2, 
and 3.  
 
Yes 
For all recruitment ensure 
that equal opportunities 
are provided to women 
and 
men 
in 
Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women to apply and also 
by 
advertising 
through 
various channels 
ACF consultants 
Included in the 
outcome 
2 
budget 
2.2.2 
Design 
and 
approval 
of 
M&E, 
EMSF, Gender Action 
plan implementation 
 
Yes 
Integrate 
a 
gender-
sensitive 
approach 
into 
baseline surveys, indicators 
and 
methodologies 
for 
continuous 
project 
monitoring 
and 
impact 
assessments 
ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants 
in 
collaboration with 
Women 
Affairs 
and 
Social 
Development and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
of 
respective 
countries  
= 10.000 *12  
=120 000 USD  
 
ICRF action plan 
in PMC 
2.2.3 Implementation 
of 
M&E, 
EMSF, 
Gender Action plan 
implementation 
 
Yes 
Collect and present sex-
disaggregated statistics to 
measure 
enhanced 
access 
for 
women 
to 
assets, inputs and financial 
products, 
including 
insurance.   
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants 
in 
collaboration with 
Women 
Affairs 
and 
Social 
Development and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
of 
respective 
countries 
= 10.000 *12  
=120 000 USD 
 
ICRF action plan 
in PMC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 314

=== PAGE 319 ===
132 
 
Outcome 3 -  Strengthened regulatory framework and enabling environment for investments in CRI 
Asset Classes in Africa. 
 
 
Entry point 
Proposed 
intervention 
Responsible  
Estimated Budget 
and Source  
Output 
3.1 
- 
Activities  
 
Regulatory framework for new CRI Asset Classes and enabling environment are 
strengthened through standards, construction codes, and CRPI policies 
3.1.1 
Procure 
consortium of legal 
and 
policymaking 
firms for improving 
regulatory 
framework for CRI 
Asset Classes and 
CRPI, and capacity 
building 
in 
the 
Program States 
 
Yes  
 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants 
in 
collaboration with 
Women 
Affairs 
and 
Social 
Development and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
of 
respective 
countries 
 
3.1.2 Engage with 
key 
proponents, 
public and private 
sector participants, 
civil 
societies 
to 
identify 
the 
regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI 
Asset Classes, CRPI 
and 
initiate 
consultation process 
for 
recommendations 
report;  
 
Yes  
Collaborate in  
partnerships 
with 
Public and private 
sector 
actors 
to 
develop delivery  
channels 
that 
enhance 
the 
accessibility 
to 
financials asset  
to 
women, 
for 
example through a 
women’s group or 
via  
digital 
distribution 
channels 
that 
overcome 
women’s  
mobility constraints. 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil 
societies/ 
women's 
associations 
 
3.1.3 Create a work 
group 
from 
the 
consortium of legal 
and 
policymaking  
firms for new CRI 
Asset Classes and 
construction codes 
implementation  
 
Yes  
Provide 
equal 
opportunities 
to 
women and men 
participation 
in 
expert groups 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants 
in 
collaboration with 
Women 
Affairs 
and 
Social 
Development and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
of 
 
Page 315

=== PAGE 320 ===
133 
 
respective 
countries 
3.1.4 
Create 
and 
share 
recommendation 
reports for improving 
regulatory 
framework for CRI 
Asset Classes and 
CRPI per country 
 
No 
 
 
 
3.1.5 Support legal 
regulatory 
and 
policy 
making 
process for CRI Asset 
Classes 
to 
implement 
the 
recommendations 
according to each 
country needs 
3.1.6 Publish reports 
on 
achievements 
and the roadmap 
for 
further 
strengthening 
regulatory 
framework 
per 
country for CRI Asset 
Classes and CRPI 
 
No 
 
 
 
3.1.7 
Knowledge 
sharing 
with 
the 
public and private 
sector participants 
 
Yes  
• 
Ensure 
knowledge 
product 
include lessons 
learnt 
on 
gender 
and 
social 
considerations 
in ICRF  
• 
Provide equal 
opportunity for 
participation of 
men 
and 
woman in the 
events 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants  
 
 
Output 3.2 Activities  
 
 
Opportunities for fiscal incentives are explored for CRI Asset Classes 
Page 316

=== PAGE 321 ===
134 
 
3.2.1 Procure fiscal 
regulatory 
framework 
and 
policymaking 
firms 
for promoting fiscal 
incentives 
for 
CRI 
Asset Classes in the 
Program Countries 
 
Yes  
• 
Commitment to 
collaborate 
with 
partners 
that hold a high 
ESG standards 
including 
commitment to 
Gender 
equality  
• 
References 
to 
gender equality 
in the tender 
documents  
• 
Commitment to 
support women 
led 
company 
wherever 
possible 
• 
For 
all 
recruitment, 
ensure 
that 
equal 
opportunities 
are provided to 
women 
and 
men in Experts 
appointment 
and 
recruitment 
through 
advertisement 
that 
strongly 
encourages 
women 
to 
apply and also 
by 
advertising 
through various 
channels 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants  
 
 
3.2.2 Engage with 
key 
proponents, 
public and private 
sector participants, 
civil 
societies 
to 
identify 
the 
regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI 
Asset Classes and 
initiate consultation 
process 
for 
recommendations 
report 
 
Yes  
Ensure 
consultations 
process 
engage 
both 
men 
and 
woman actors 
 
Budget 
for 
recruitment 
of 
gender 
and 
women at national 
level 
to 
support 
these consultations 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants  
 
=USD 10000*12  
=USD  120000 
 
ICRF action plan  
PMC  
Page 317

=== PAGE 322 ===
135 
 
3.2.3 
Create 
and 
share 
recommendation 
reports per country 
for CRI 
 
Yes  
Commitment 
to 
capture lessons on 
gender 
considerations 
in 
ICRF  
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team  
 
Included 
in 
the 
outcome 
3 
budget 
3.2.4 Support legal 
regulatory 
and 
policy-making 
process 
to 
implement 
the 
recommendations 
according to each 
Country’s needs  
 
Yes  
Commitment 
to 
capture lessons on 
gender 
considerations 
in 
ICRF 
 ACP 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants 
in 
collaboration with 
Women 
Affairs 
and 
Social 
Development and 
relevant 
stakeholders 
of 
respective 
countries 
Included 
in 
the 
outcome 
3 
budget 
 
 
Page 318

=== PAGE 323 ===
136 
 
X. GENDER ACTION PLAN 
At the beginning of each project, further gender analyses will be undertaken by the promoters to 
identify (i) gender disparities that may affect the success of these projects; (ii) the opportunities 
offered by projects to improve women's access to essential infrastructure, economic opportunities 
and, above all, decision-making, which they are often victims of; and (iii) at the end of specific 
indicators, or other mechanisms to ensure that women and men are included at and benefit from 
all stages of the project. 
For the implementation of the action plan described below, a call for tenders will be launched to 
establish a shortlist of reputable companies covering a wide range of expertise in order to strengthen 
AFC's sustainability practices. Thus, gender will be covered as part of the expertise mobilized. From 
this process, the AFC will have a roster of gender equality experts to review gender assessments 
submitted by sub-project proponents. The criteria for competition of experts will be identified by 
applying the principles of inclusion, equal opportunity and non-discrimination with regard to the 
selection of consultation files. 
However, for equitable access to procurement opportunities for women-owned businesses, an 
invitation to these women-led stakeholder companies or those committed to gender and the 
advancement of women to apply – will be duly taken into account in the selection process to ensure 
equal opportunities. At the same time, an activity (2.1.5.) is devoted to issuing calls for tenders and 
supporting the management of open tenders. Companies are selected on a rigorous competitive 
basis and on the basis of their track record in infrastructure construction. 
Over the life of the Fund (20 years), ICRF will have to invest in 15 to 20 projects. Thus, for each project 
to be approved by ICRF, the project proponent will submit a comprehensive documentation that 
will include a detailed gender and social inclusion assessment and an action plan including a 
budget for the implementation of the associated action plan. This will be the gender analysis at the 
project level.  
 
Page 319

=== PAGE 324 ===
137 
 
 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
Impact Statement: Increased climate resilience of infrastructure in the ICRF African countries optimizing the opportunity of the program to address gender 
inequalities by increasing women's access to reliable energy, transportation and telecommunication services.  
 
Outcome Statement: In addition to promote infrastructure that will advance gender equality but will be implemented through a strong gender approach ensuring 
equal opportunity,  equal voice, balance representation, use of disaggregated data are mainstreamed in the implementation of the program. AFC, ACP and ICRF 
Team will advocate and raise awareness of women's empowerment at different levels of engagement. Lessons learnt from gender consideration in ICRF will be 
captured and documented as part of the knowledge products prepared under ICRF. In addition to the Fund’s budget, additional budget from sub projects 
sponsors will be assigned to ensure dedicated gender experts are hired to ensure effective gender consideration in implementation. 
 
Output(s) Statement: ICRF will focus on 4 key areas (Climate Resilient Transportation and Logistics; Climate-Resilient Energy Systems; Climate-resilient economic 
zones; and Climate Resilient Digital and Telecommunications Infrastructure) and pursues the following outcomes: 
(a) Strengthen the capacity of the ICRF to raise capital at the fund level for investments in resilient infrastructure 
(b)  Eliminate risk to the IRC asset classes by raising large-scale commercial capital. 
(c) Launch a parametric climate risk insurance (CRPI) system for IRC asset classes. 
(d) Collaborate with a partner that holds strong ESG standards including commitment to gender equality 
Outcome x :  
Output 1.1 - Parametric insurance: ICRF launches climate-risk parametric insurance (CRPI) scheme for CRI Asset Classes. 
 
1.1.1 ICRF structure and registration 
 
1.1.1.1 Total and share of women-
led organizations listed as ICRF 
inventors  
Prior 
and 
during 
The 
project implementation 
Year 1 to Year 10 
Executing entity (EE) and ACP 
senior management; 
 
N/A 
Page 320

=== PAGE 325 ===
138 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
Target [On best effort] 
1.1.1.2. % of suppliers included in the 
project;  
1.1.1.3 % of policies adopted and 
of; GCF funding received 
1.1.5 Negotiate and close LPs 
commitments. 
1.1.5.1 Total and share of women-
led partners collaborating with ICRF 
(women as the head of the 
institutions and or as the lead 
contact 
person 
on 
ICRF 
engagement) 
Target [On best effort] 
1.1.5.2. Number of women included 
in the negotiation of commitments 
On 
a 
rolling 
basis, 
as 
subprojects come through 
Year 1 to Year 10 
 
ACP and ICRF team  
N/A 
1.3.2 Engaging with insurance 
companies 
to 
negotiate 
premiums and payouts for CRPI, 
simplifying 
access 
for 
the 
market; 
1.3.2.1 Total and share of women on 
ICRF Committees and Board (ACP to 
provide) 
Target [30% to 50%] 
1.3.2.2Total and share of women-
led partners collaborating with ICRF 
(women as the head of the 
institutions and or as the lead 
contact 
person 
on 
ICRF 
engagement) 
Target [30% to 50%] 
 
Prior and during the project 
implementation 
Year 1 to Year 20 
ACP and ICRF team 
ICRF Partners and consultants 
Include 
in 
the 
outcomes 2 and 3 
budget 
Output 2.1: Deployment of climate risk assessments and adaptation solutions for ICRF investments in CRI Asset Classes and improved capacity for scaling up 
investments in CRI in Africa 
Page 321

=== PAGE 326 ===
139 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
Technical assistance (TA) to 
sponsors in the integration of 
climate risks into the design and 
construction of projects; in the 
development of standardized 
codes 
for 
climate-resilient 
infrastructure. 
The 
systematic 
and 
long-term 
approach 
to 
infrastructure 
financing 
in 
Africa 
is 
ensured 
through ethnic assistance; 
Gaps are identified and filled and 
capacity to collect, disseminate 
data on climate risk and climate 
change is strengthened; 
Climate 
risk 
assessment 
and 
adaptation solutions with climate 
innovations for CRI asset classes are 
deployed; 
Creating an enabling environment 
for IRC expansion in Africa 
Year 1 to Year 20 
Collection, 
processing, 
and dissemination of data 
on 
climate 
risks 
and 
climate change. 
 
GCF 
Included 
in 
outcome 2 budget 
2.1.1 Procurement of technical 
firms for detailed climate risk 
assessments, CRPI 
recommendations, engineering 
assessments of climate 
adaptation solutions for each 
ICRF projects 
 2.1.1.1 Total and share of women-
led partners collaborating with ICRF 
(women as the head of the 
institutions and or as the lead 
contact 
person 
on 
ICRF 
engagement 
Target [30% to 50%] 
2.1.1.2. % of women-led technical 
firms for climate risk assessment and 
adaptation solutions. 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 5 
ACP & ICRF Team 
 
 
N/A 
 
 
2.1.2 Capacity building for ICRF 
and AFC on climate risk 
assessment, adaptation solutions, 
and CRPI requirements for CRI Asset 
Classes 
2.1.2.1 
Number 
of 
trainings 
and 
workshops for designated CFA and 
CRPI teams; 
 
 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 20 
Executing entity (EE) & ICRF 
Team and consultants 
Included 
in 
the 
outcome 2 budget 
Page 322

=== PAGE 327 ===
140 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
2.1.2.2. Total and share of women in 
top-level positions in AFC and ACP 
(ACP to provide) 
Target [30% to 50%] 
 
2.1.3 1st level assessment for CRI 
Asset Classes project selection for 
ICRF investments, by the technical 
firms incl. climate risk assessment, 
embedding climate risk analytics, 
design for adaptation solution, 
incremental cost for adaption, 
economic and financial analysis, 
and CRPI requirements 
2.1.3.1 Total and share of women-
led partners collaborating with 
ICRF (women as the head of the 
institutions and or as the lead 
contact person on ICRF 
engagement)  
Target [On best effort] 
2.1.3.2. % of women on the ICRF 
Investment Committee for project 
selection  
2.1.3.3. % of women involved in 
making recommendations on 
adaptation solutions for CRI asset 
classes 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 5 
 
 
 
Year 2 to Year 20 
 
 
 
EE 
& 
ICRF 
Team 
and 
consultants 
 
 
 
 
 
EE 
& 
ICRF 
Team 
and 
consultants 
 
2.1.5 Issuing RFP and support 
management of EPC open tender 
procurement  
2.1.5.1. 
Number 
of 
women-led 
enterprises recruited; 
2.1.5.2. 
Number 
of 
female-led 
technical firms contributing to the 
EPC bidding for ICRF projects; 
 2.1.5.3. Total and share of women 
on ICRF Committees and Board 
(ACP to provide).  
Target [20% to 50%] 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 5 
 
 
 
Year1 to year 20 
 
EE & ICRF Team 
EPC; Gender expert 
 
 
 
 
 
EE 
 
Page 323

=== PAGE 328 ===
141 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
2.1.5.4. % of women on the EPC 
contract 
review 
team 
for 
deployment of adaptation solutions 
 
Year1 to year5 
EPC; Gender expert 
 
2.1.6 Overseeing construction and 
implementation of ICRF projects to 
ensure adaptation solutions 
deployed  
2.1.6.1 Total and share of women as 
speakers and participants invited or 
selected for training, 
 
2.1.6.2. Number of policies 
strengthened or developed with 
respect to gender equality and 
climate change; 
2.1.6.3. % of technical enterprises run 
by women to oversee the construction 
and completion phases of 
acceptance 
 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 5 
 
Year 2 to year 20 
 
 
Year 1 to Year 5 
 
 
EE Technical assistance 
service providers; 
 
2.1.7 Reassessment of CRPI 
requirements during construction 
and implementation phases 
2.1.7.1 conferences, panels, and 
workshops (review of the speakers-
participants list)  
Target [40% to 50%] 
2.1.7.2.Gaps are filled and the capacity 
of the actors involved is strengthened 
Year 1 to Year 20 
 
Annual evaluation 
EE and ICRF Team  
Technical 
assistance 
service providers; 
Gender expert; 
included 
in 
the 
outcome 2 budget 
Page 324

=== PAGE 329 ===
142 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
2.1.9 Training and knowledge 
sharing for public and private 
sector to raise awareness about 
existing and future climate change 
risks, and de-risking methodologies 
based on ICRF investments 
2.1.9.1 Total and share of women 
consultants contracted for ICRF 
implementation 
Target [40% to 50%] 
2.1.9.2. Number of women-led 
enterprises or women's 
organizations that have benefited 
from the training and participated 
in the collaborative process 
2.1.9.3. Annual/country reporting on 
CRI investments for replication 
 
Year 2 to Year 20 
Annual evaluation 
 
 
Annual 
data 
will 
be 
disaggregated on climate 
risk 
assessments 
and 
adaptation solutions 
EE and ICRF Team  
Technical 
assistance 
service providers; 
Gender expert; 
All countries 
 
included 
in 
the 
outcome 2 budget 
 
Output 2.2: Implementation of M&E, EMSF, Gender Action plan for ICRF program  
2.2.1 Onboarding experts for M&E, 
EMSF, Gender Action plan 
implementation for ICRF program 
including 
2.2.1.1 Number of monitoring and 
assessment report including gender 
analysis 
Target [100%] 
% of women gender experts included in 
the evaluation 
 
Year 1 to Year 20 
 
during 
the 
project 
implementation  
EE and ICRF Team 
Gender expert; 
ACF consultants;  
All countries 
 
 
 
 
included 
in 
the 
outcome 2 budget 
= 10.000 *18  
=180 000 USD  
ICRF action plan in 
PMC 
2.2.2 Design and approval of M&E, 
EMSF, Gender Action plan 
implementation 
 
2.2.2.1 Percentage of 
projects/programs that have 
integrated gender expertise into 
project preparation, monitoring, 
and evaluation; 
2.2.2.2. Number of reports showing 
sex-disaggregated data  
during 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 5 
 
 
Year 2 to Year 20 
ACP and ICRF team and 
consultants in collaboration 
with 
Women Affairs and Social 
Development and relevant 
stakeholders of respective 
countries; Gender Expert 
 
Page 325

=== PAGE 330 ===
143 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
2.2.2.3 Percentage of monitoring 
and evaluation reports that include 
a gender perspective. 
ACP Program 
Output 3.1 Regulatory framework and enabling environment: Regulatory framework for new CRI Asset Classes and enabling environment are strengthened through 
standards, construction codes, and CRPI policies 
3.1.2 Engage with key proponents, 
public and private sector 
participants, civil societies to 
identify the regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI Asset Classes, 
CRPI and initiate consultation 
process for recommendations 
report;  
3.1.2.1 Preparation of the initial 
mapping of relevant organizations 
and networks engaged in 
infrastructure and climate change in 
Africa. Identification of organizations;  
3.1.2.2. Total and share of women 
women's organizations participants 
engaged in consultations 
3.1.2.3. % of women-led businesses in 
stakeholder groups Identified to hold 
consultations on gaps and 
opportunities to improve the 
regulatory framework for CRI asset 
classes by country; 
During the project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 3 
Throughout the project: 
 
For years 2 to the last year 
of the project, a regional 
meeting will be organized 
for the sharing of 
experiences 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
3.1.3 Create a work group from the 
consortium of legal and 
policymaking firms for new CRI 
Asset Classes and construction 
codes implementation  
 
3.1.3.1 Number of gender focused 
capacity building workshops for all 
countries 
3.1.3.2. The legal and regulatory 
capacity of ICRF States in the area of 
building codes is strengthened. 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
Page 326

=== PAGE 331 ===
144 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
3.1.3.3. Terms of reference for 
tendering in accordance with FTA's 
procurement policy are issued 
3.1.3.4. Number of women-led expert 
firms selected for capacity building. 
3.1.7 Knowledge sharing with the 
public and private sector 
participants 
3.1.7.1 Capacity building and new 
experience for 100% of women-led 
partners collaborating with ICRF  
3.1.7.2. 20-50% of women-led 
businesses benefit from knowledge 
sharing. 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
Output 3.2: Opportunities for fiscal incentives are explored for CRI Asset Classes 
3.2.1 Procure fiscal regulatory 
framework and policymaking firms 
for promoting fiscal incentives for 
CRI Asset Classes in the Program 
Countries 
3.2.1.1 Percentage of women-led 
firms responsible for developing 
policies to promote tax incentives 
for CRI asset classes in participating 
countries 
3.2.1.2. Number of women-led firms 
applying for tender 
3.2.1.3. Number of women-led firms 
selected. 
 
During the project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 3 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
 
Page 327

=== PAGE 332 ===
145 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Timeline  
Responsibilities  
Costs  
3.2.2 Engage with key proponents, 
public and private sector 
participants, civil societies to 
identify the regulatory gaps for 
investments in CRI Asset Classes 
and initiate consultation process for 
recommendations report 
3.2.2.1 Number of project proposals 
which have included ‘gender’ 
 
3.2.2.2. Number of consultation 
reports with key proponents of IRC's 
asset classes; 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 3 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
3.2.3 Create and share 
recommendation reports per 
country for CRI 
3.2.3.1 Country ownership capacity 
is increased 
 
3.2.3.2. % of experts are women for 
the recommendation report 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 3 
 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
3.2.4 Support legal regulatory and 
policy-making process to 
implement the recommendations 
according to each Country’s 
needs  
3.2.4.1.Total and share of women 
as speakers and participants 
invited or selected for training, 
conferences, panels, and 
workshops (review of the speakers-
participants list) 
3.2.4.2. % of women in country 
offices and in the AND team 
3.2.4.2.% Formulation of policy 
recommendations for CRI asset 
classes 
During 
the 
project 
implementation  
Year 1 to Year 3 
 
EE 
and 
ICRF 
team 
and 
consultants; 
Gender expert; 
civil societies/ women's 
associations 
All countries 
 
 
Page 328

=== PAGE 333 ===
ANNEXES 
Annexe 1  
Gender and social inclusion survey for Infrastructure Projects (This questionnaire is intended for 
groups or associations of women beneficiaries of the ICRF project.) 
 
Section A: General information 
Code 
Description 
Response 
A01 
Please name your organization or association 
_________________________________________________ 
 
A02. 
Please put the e-mail of the organization if possible 
_________________________________________________ 
 
A03 
Please enter the date ___________________________ 
 
A04 
Please select your country of residence or location of the 
survey 
________________________________________________ 
 
A05 
Which industry are you directly or indirectly engaged in? 
 
1- Transport (port, airport, public works ( road, bridges) 
2- Telecommunications 
3- Industry (essentially industrial parks, Heavy Industry) 
4- Energy 
 
 
 
|__| 
 
 
Section B-1: Project Objectives and Target Group 
 
Note.  Throughout this questionnaire, please refer to the following infrastructure: Transportation 
infrastructure (Roads; Railroads; Ports; Airports; Bridges); Energy infrastructure (power grids, 
photovoltaic plants; solar thermal; Wind power; Geothermal energy); Industrial infrastructure(Cement 
 
Page 329

=== PAGE 334 ===
factories; electronic industries; electrical industries; textile industries; chemical industries); 
Telecommunication infrastructure (fiber optics, cable trays). 
B01 
Does the infrastructure project design acknowledge that 
women and men may have different needs and priorities in 
their use of infrastructure? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
 
B02. 
Do you think that women's need was considered in the 
infrastructure design in your country, region or locality? 
 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
If B2 is 
No, 
go 
to B4 
B03 
If yes, please list some of the needs that have addressed. 
 
 
B04 
What are the constraints and barriers to women's 
participation in infrastructure project activities and access 
to the benefits of these projects? 
 
1. Gender-based discriminatory practices 
2. Lack of educational and training opportunities. 
3. Lack of gender-specific policies and benefits 
4. Reluctance to include women in the workforce 
5. Lack of anti-discrimination protections 
6. Other 
 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
 
 
B05 
If there are other constraints and barriers, please add them 
here. 
_________________________________________________ 
 
 
B06 
Do infrastructure projects in your country/region/locality 
take into account the tasks performed by women that 
could be affected (such as transporting food and other 
goods to market, collecting fuel and water)? 
 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
 
 
|__| 
If B6 is 
No, 
go 
to 
section 
C 
Page 330

=== PAGE 335 ===
B07 
Have women or groups of women been consulted and 
involved in decision-making about the location or 
infrastructure that is provided in your area? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
 
|__| 
 
B08 
If yes, give one or more examples of infrastructure projects 
where women were consulted. 
 
 
 
Section C. Access;  control of resources; control of the benefits and project impacts 
C01 
Are there opportunities for women to be employed and trained in the 
construction and operation of infrastructure in your country? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
C02. 
Will infrastructure construction restrict women's access to resources 
needed to carry out their tasks? 
 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
C03 
Will location, price, and other resources necessary for using the 
infrastructure restrict poor women's access? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
C04 
Have support services for women to encourage their participation in 
infrastructures projects been considered? (e.g., childcare, health care, 
a nearby school) 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
C05 
Please add additional information to your answer if possible 
________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Page 331

=== PAGE 336 ===
Section D: Participation and consultation strategies 
 
D01 
Have strategies been identified to address constraints to 
women's participation and benefits in infrastructure projects? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
If D1 is 
No, go 
to D4 
D02. 
If so, what are these strategies? 
 
1. Capacity building and women's empowerment 
2. Develop mechanisms to visualize the positive image 
of women in the implementation of infrastructure 
projects 
3. To constitute a data bank on all women capable of 
occupying positions of responsibility throughout the 
different life cycles of the infrastructures; 
4. Capacity building for women involved in decision 
making at all stages of the infrastructure life cycle 
through training in decision making, leadership, and 
development 
5. Improved capacity of institutions and organizations in 
governmental and non-governmental mechanisms 
that work for women 
6. Adoption of human resource policies and practices to 
promote a balanced workforce when installing or 
building infrastructure 
7. Implementation of procurement policies to ensure 
that women or women-led organizations can 
participate in the infrastructure value chain (transport, 
energy, industry, telecommunications) 
8. Other 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
 
 
D03 
If there are other strategies, please add them here 
________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________ 
 
 
D04 
Have women been both participants and beneficiaries of 
infrastructure projects in your country or locality? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
 
Page 332

=== PAGE 337 ===
D05 
If so, give some examples of projects 
_________________________________________________ 
 
|__| 
 
D06 
Do women and men have equal access to infrastructure 
projects and decision-making? 
 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
 
D07 
How do women or women's groups participate in planning 
infrastructure projects without being disadvantaged by the 
project? (Please provide more information and detail in your 
response) 
________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
List any separate activities that you feel are necessary for 
women to ensure that they participate and are not 
disadvantaged by the infrastructures projects? (Please provide 
more information and detail in your response) 
________________________________________________ 
 
 
Page 333

=== PAGE 338 ===
Section E: Women's Social Status and Role as Decision Makers 
E01 
Are women and women's groups consulted and involved 
in decision-making about the location or type of 
infrastructure 
that 
is 
provided 
in 
your 
locality/region/country? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
|__| 
E02. 
What opportunities does the project have to support 
women as infrastructure managers in formal or informal 
ways?(Please provide more information and detail in your 
response) 
________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________ 
 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
|__| 
E03 
What practical needs and strategic interests of women 
are addressed in the infrastructure projects developed in 
your region? 
1. The establishment of practical tools to facilitate 
the consideration of gender in interventions 
related to sustainable infrastructure projects 
2. Establishment of a women's boarding school near 
industrial infrastructures 
3. The training of "gender officers" in charge of 
implementing and monitoring the action plan 
and 
supporting 
gender 
mainstreaming 
in 
infrastructure projects 
4. Other 
 
E04 
Is there one or more ongoing consultations with 
community groups, including women's groups, directly or 
indirectly involved in infrastructure projects in the 
country/region or locality? 
1. Yes 
2. No 
 
 
Page 334

=== PAGE 339 ===
REFERENCES  
Abay, K. A., K. Tafere, and A. Woldemichael. 2020. “Winners and Losers from COVID–19: Global 
Evidence from Google Search.” Policy Research Working Paper 9268, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33852#:~:text=https%3A//openknowledge.
worldbank.org/handle/10986/33852%20License%3A%20CC%20BY%203.0%20IGO 
  AFD, (2016). Gender Profile Democratic Republic of Congo. https://plateforme-elsa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/02/Profil-Genre-RDC.pdf  
Cameroon (2015). Country Report of Gender Profile. Japan International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA) Public Policy Department. 
https://openjicareport.jica.go.jp/pdf/1000026850.pdf 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (2017).Country Gender Profile. Final Report. 
https://www.jica.go.jp/english/our_work/thematic_issues/gender/background/c8h0vm0000anjqj6-
att/drc_2017.pdf  
ECREEE (ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency) (2015). Situation Analysis of 
Energy and Gender Issues in the ECOWAS Member States. 
https://www.seforall.org/sites/default/files/Situation-Analysis-of-Energy-and-Gender-Issues.pdf 
EIF (Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia) (2018). 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gender-assessment-sap001-eif-
namibia.pdf 
Madgavkar, A., O. White, M. Krishnan, D. Mahajan, and X. Azcue. (2020). “COVID-19 and Gender 
Equality.” McKinsey Global Institute.: https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-
work/covid-19-and-gender-equality-countering-the-regressive-effects 
Nigeria Solar IPP Support Program, May 2019. 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/funding-proposal-fp104-afc-
nigeria.pdf 
PNUD (2020). Gender Inequality Index. 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2020_statistical_annex_table_5.xlsx 
PNUD (Program des Nations Unies pour le Développement). (2021). Éducation de qualité. 
Repiblic of Djibouti, (2018). Study on the evolution of the situation of women in Djibouti 2000 to 2018 
https://famille.gouv.dj/uploads/publications/113b43e1476ef467385dd83c71f5d766.pdf  
Republic of Mali (2020). WFP, Draft Mali country strategic plan 2020-2024. 
https://www.wfp.org/operations/ml02-mali-country-strategic-plan-2020-2024 
Page 335

=== PAGE 340 ===
Republic of  Namibia (2011). Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA), Population and Housing Census 
Basic Report, Windhoek, NSA. 
https://cms.my.na/assets/documents/p19dmn58guram30ttun89rdrp1.pdf 
Sustainable Energy FOR ALL. AFRICA HUB. https://www.se4all-africa.org/seforall-in-africa/country-
data/togo/  
Republic of Gabon, (2015). Decennal plan for the empowerment of gabonese women 2015-2021. 
https://gabon.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-
pdf/Brochure%20Auto%20femme%20Gab%20-%20FINALISATION.pdf  
Togo. Rapport final : Enquête Régionale Intégrée sur l’Emploi et le Secteur Informel (ERI-ESI). 2017. 
http://www.uemoa.int/sites/default/files/bibliotheque/rapport_final_togo_0.pdf. 
Republic of Gambia, (2020). Demographic and Health Survey  2019-2020. 
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR369/FR369.pdf  
 Republic of the Gambia, (2018). Stem & Gender Advancement (saga); the Gambia country 
report. https://www.moherst.gov.gm/sites/default/files/2021-12/Gambia-
SAGA%20Country%20Report-DRAFT02.pdf  
The world Bank. Ratio of poor population living on less than $1.90 per day (2011 PPP) (% of 
population).: https://donnees.banquemondiale.org/theme/pauvrete?locations=CD  
Republic of the Gambia, (2019). Finscope’s: Consumer Survey Highlight. 
https://finmark.org.za/system/documents/files/000/000/147/original/FinScope-Gambia_Pocket-
guide-28-11-2019_Final.pdf?1594135120  
Republic of the Gambia, (Juin 2019). PoWER assessment of Women’s Economic Empowerment in 
The 
Gambia.https://www.uncdf.org/Download/AdminFileWithFilename?id=9423&cultureId=127&filena
me=091019-wee-thegambia-powerpdf  
UN World Food Program, Gambia.  https://www.wfpusa.org/countries/gambia/ 
UN Capital Development Fund.: https://mm4p.uncdf.org/article/7460/launching-gambias-nfis. 
[Accessed: 23-06-2022] 
UNESCO (2019) Nigeria Country Data, http://uis.unesco.org/country/NG 
UNESCO, Institute for Statistics as reported by World Bank data. 
UNDP. Republic of Benin: progress to be made for the equitable representation of women in 
decision-making positions in Benin. https://www.undp.org/fr/benin/actualites/des-progres-faire-
pour-la-representation-equitable-des-femmes-aux-postes-de-prise-de-decision-au-benin 
United Nations Development program (2019). Human Development Reports. 
https://hdr.undp.org/en/content/latest-human-development-index-
ranking?utm_source=EN&utm_medium=GSR&utm_content=US_UNDP_PaidSearch_Brand_English&
utm_campaign=CENTRAL&c_src=CENTRAL&c_src2=GSR&gclid=CjwKCAjw0a-
SBhBkEiwApljU0l0PPsaK7dPI_aZQAJEFwvW0nleVSDAJgT1fN7Esj1sJleFB-yw1TxoCGWQQAvD_BwE 
WEST AFRICAN POWER POOL: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, 2013. 
https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2013/WAPP.pdf 
Page 336

=== PAGE 341 ===
Word Development Indicators (2020). https://datatopics.worldbank.org/world-development-
indicators/ 
The World Bank, (2019) https://www.banquemondiale.org/fr/country/drc/overview 
World Bank, (2021) Investing in rural income growth, human capital, and resilience to support 
sustainable poverty reduction. 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/623761633424786706/pdf/Chad-Poverty-
Assessment-Investing-in-Rural-Income-Growth-Human-Capital-and-Resilience-to-Support-
Sustainable-Poverty-Reduction.pdf  
World Health Organization. Department of Public Health, Environmental and Social Determinants 
of Health (PHE).Burning Opportunity: Clean Household Energy for Health, Sustainable 
Development, and Wellbeing of Women and Children. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/204717/9789241565233_eng.pdf;jsessionid=62002F6
01879601102C8AAC84B3A4581?sequence=1 
World Bank. n.d. “COVID-19 High-Frequency Monitoring Dashboard.” The World Bank Group. Wash-
ington, DC.  
HTTPS://PUBDOCS.WORLDBANK.ORG/EN/589511605042232186/COVID-19-HIGH-FREQUENCY-MONITORING-
DASHBOARD-DATA-DICTIONARY.XLSX 
Zambia Final Report. 
https://www.jica.go.jp/english/our_work/thematic_issues/gender/background/c8h0vm0000anjqj6-
att/zambia_2016.pdf 
 
 
Page 337

=== PAGE 342 ===
AFC CAPITAL PARTNERS 
CLIMATE-PROOFING 
AFRICAN INFRASTRUCTURE 
Page 338
