=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
producer: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
creationDate: D:20230312205833+09'00'
modDate: D:20230312205833+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
13 – 16 March 2023 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 11 
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
13 March 2023 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP200 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission
Reductions Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest
landscape management (Project 2)";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.
It is noted that some modifications have been made in gender documentation to reflect the
revised language.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
131 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
132 
Secretariat’s assessment 
136 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
155 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
171 
Gender documentation 
173

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2) 
Country(ies): 
Lao PDR 
Accredited Entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ) GmbH 
Date of first submission: 
2022-04-16  
Date of current submission  
2022-09-05 
Version number 
V.008

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
  
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
80 % 
90 % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Forestry and land use 
80 % 
90 % 
Adaptation total 
20 % 
10 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
10 % 
5 % 
☐  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
10 % 
5 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Project 2* (4 years) 4.6 million 
t CO 2 eq** 
 
Programme (7 years)2 11.7 
million t CO 2 eq 
 
Project 1*** (4 years) 
7.1 million t CO 2 eq)3 
 
*Initially the Programme was 
planned as a single project 
which had to be reframed into 
3 projects due to the limited 
funding available in 2019 (GCF 
Replenishment 
Process). 
Therefore, 
this 
Funding 
Proposal refers to Projects 2+3 
(hereafter Project 2) which is 
embedded in the Programme 
(FP 117) approved by the 
Board at B.24. 
**figures are based on revised 
Forest Reference Level (FRL) 
for the ER-Programme under 
the FCPF Carbon Fund. 
***5.6 CO 2 eq as of FP117 + 
1.5 CO 2 eq as of footnote 3. 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Programme:  
997,082 total beneficiaries (498,541 
men and 498,541 women direct and 
indirect beneficiaries) 
 
Project 2:  
486,690 total beneficiaries (243,345 
men and 243,345 women, direct & 
indirect beneficiaries) 4 
Programme: 
273,700 direct 
beneficiaries 
(136,850 men 
and 136,850 
women) 
 
Project 2:  
153,700 direct 
beneficiaries 
(76,850 men and 
76,850 women) 
Programme: 
723,382 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(361,691 men 
and 361,691 
women) 
 
Project 2: 
332,990 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(166,495 men 
and 166,495 
women) 
 
 
Programme:  
3.8% of the 
national 
population (direct 
beneficiaries) 
 
Project 2:  
2.15% of the 
national 
population (direct 
beneficiaries) 
Programme:  
10% of the 
national 
population 
(indirect 
beneficiaries) 
 
Project 2:  
4.6% of the 
national 
population 
(indirect 
beneficiaries)

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the 
funding proposal. 
2 Project 1 and Project 2 will overlap for one year, resulting in a total programme length of 7 years (i.e. from the year Project 1 started until 
the end of Project 2).  
3 During the development of the Feasibility Study, the ex-ante programme and project estimates of emission reductions were revised. Project 
1 generates a larger amount of emission reductions during the programme due to the fact that removals/enhancements of forest carbon 
stocks are calculated over a 7-year period, whereas for Project 2 they are only estimated over a 4-year period. 
4 Population data is based on Lao Population and Housing Census Data 2015 (https://lao.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/PHC-ENG-
FNAL-WEB_0.pdf); direct beneficiaries are all villagers in all target villages, indirect beneficiaries are all rural villagers in the target districts 
without direct beneficiaries. More detail is provided in Chapter D.1 and within the Logframe in Section E.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance5)  
74.08 million Euros  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
32.82 million Euros 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
Euro 32.82 million 
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
4 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
 
20 years6  
 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
5/30/2022 
A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
 
The Programme “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management” (FP117) 
was approved by the GCF Board in 2019 at B.24. Initially, FP117 was conceptualized as 
a pure mitigation single project which had to be reframed as a programme, with 3 Sub-
Projects due to limited GCF funding available. GCF Funding Proposal 1177 explicitly 
outlined a programmatic approach with Project 18 covering 3 out of 6 provinces of the 
Lao Emission Reductions Programme (ER-Programme) under the Forest Carbon 
Partnership Facility (FCPF) and the subsequent Sub-Projects 2 and 3 (hereafter Project 
2) to expand the programme intervention area the remaining 3 provinces (approx. 240 
villages) covered by the ER-Programme, as well as 50 additional villages (totalling the 
number of the villages to 530 at programme level) in the current project location9 to fully 
reach the envisioned transformational change of forest and land management in the 
uplands of the Lao PDR.10 More information is provided in Section B.1 below.  
 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, besides 
being the Accredited Entity (AE) of the project, acts as well as an Executing Entity (EE). 
Besides GIZ, there will be the following Executing Entity: 
▪ 
The Government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR or the Host 
Country), represented by Lao PDR Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and 
Lao PDR Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) as co-chair and 
chair of the Environment Protection Fund (EPF) board 11

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
A.21.1 Country context 
1. Lao Peoples Democratic Republic (PDR) is a landlocked Least Developed Country (LLDC) where the economy is 
dependent on natural resources, especially forestry, agriculture, electricity generation (especially hydropower) and 
mining. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for 16% of gross domestic product (GCP) and employ 64% of 
the Lao workforce.12 Forests are among the most important economic sectors, providing income, a source of 
nutrition, and livelihoods for the rural population and, in particular, the rural poor.  
2. Northern Lao PDR is particularly at risk of climate change due to its high exposure, low capacities, and high 
sensitivity (as further described in Chapter B.1). This region is among the poorest in the country, and villagers in 
the region are largely dependent on rainfed upland agriculture to maintain their livelihoods. The mountainous terrain 
is highly sensitive to climate change due to its sloped terrain, which is naturally prone to erosion events and 
landslides. At the same time, high rates of deforestation and forest degradation further exacerbate the northern 
regions’ vulnerability to climate change. Six provinces in Northern Lao PDR (Bokeo, Houaphan, Luang Prabang, 
Luang Namtha, Sayabouri and Oudomxay) experienced more than 40% of the country’s deforestation and forest 
degradation during the period from 2005-2015. 1 Deforestation and forest degradation exacerbate the risk of 
climate-related natural hazards (drought, flooding, forest-fires), and reduce the provision of key ecosystem services 
that could otherwise strengthen the coping capacity of local ecosystems and the persons who depend on them. 
3. Deforestation and forest degradation also contribute to increases in global emissions. Overall, the agriculture, 
forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector in Lao PDR is critical for the country’s mitigation efforts, as it is 
responsible for 78% of all emissions in the country. Laos has embraced REDD+ to address its principal source of 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Lao PDR has been a partner country in the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
(FCPF) since 2008. Its Emission Reductions Programme Document (ER-PD) was accepted into the FCPF Carbon 
Fund in June 201813 and an Emission Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA) was signed in December 2020 for 
8.4 million tCO2eq and up to USD 42 million in results-based payments.14 However, the ER-PD clearly highlights 
the needs for additional financial and technical support to implement measures and support the country to achieve 
emission reductions.  
A21.2 Overview of the overarching programme 
4. This project is embedded in the overarching programme ‘Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management’ (Funding Proposal (FP) 
117), which was approved by the Green Climate Fun (GCF) Board at its 24th board meeting (B.24) in 2019.15 The 
objective of the overarching programme is to support the Government and people of the Lao PDR transition to 
sustainable and climate resilient management of forests and landscapes at scale. This will reduce approximately 
11.7 million tCO2eq and directly increase the resilience of more than 273.000 villagers and 2,112,000 ha of 
ecosystems over the 7-year implementation period of Projects 1 and 2. The programme contributes to the 
successful implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme (ER-Programme) under the FCPF in 
the aforementioned six provinces covered by the ER-PD.   
 
5 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF. 
6 Impacts are calculated over a 20-year period, except for mitigation results which are calculated only for the duration of the project. Mitigation 
results are calculated against a sub-national Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL) for Lao PDR’s Emission Reductions Programme 
and thus are not extrapolated for the 20-year lifespan of the programme. 
7 https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp117.  
8 Project 1 which was approved under FP 117 reached effectiveness on 19th May 2020. Since then, the Project has made significant progress. 
More details on the specific progress can be found under the Annual Performance Reports (APR) in Annex 18 (a-c). 
9 “The programme consists of 3 projects: Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang 
Prabang, which contain the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area; Project 2 (mid-2024 to end-
2029) scales-up the number of participating communities in the same geographical area; and Project 3 (2022 to end-2029) extends the 
geographical reach of the programme to the 3 additional provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay.” (GCF FP 117, page 3). 
10 FP 117 A.21.1 Programme Executive Summary: “This Funding Proposal presents a stand-alone GCF project (Project 1) for Board approval. 
Two subsequent stand-alone projects, embedded in the same programmatic context and theory of change as this project, will be submitted 
at a future date for Board approval. Board approval for the project presented in this Funding Proposal is wholly separate from, and does not 
pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.” 
11 The Environment Protection Fund (EPF) under the MoNRE will continue to act as a fund manager of the Climate Change Funding Window, 
already established an operationalised under FP117. The Funding Window will therefore continue to be utilised as a financial delivery 
mechanism for this project in the entire project area. More information is provided in Chapters B.3 and B.4 below.  
12 World Bank. N.d. Data Bank. Available online: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart. 
13 For more information refer to: https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/carbon-fund-eighteenth-cf18-june-20-22-2018-paris. 
14 For more information refer to: Carbon Fund of the Forest Carbon Fund Partnership Facility – Emission Reductions Payment Agreement – 
Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR Program. 
15 “The programme consists of 3 projects: Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and 
Luang Prabang, which contain the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area; Project 2 (mid-2024 to 
end-2029) scales-up the number of participating communities in the same geographical area; and Project 3 (2022 to end-2029) extends the 
geographical reach of the programme to the 3 additional provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay.” (GCF FP 117, page 3).

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
5. Initially, FP117 was conceptualized as a pure mitigation single project which had to be reframed as a programme, 
with 3 Sub-Projects due to a limitation in available GCF funds at the time of board approval. FP11716 explicitly 
outlined a programmatic approach with Project 117 covering 3 out of 6 provinces of the Lao ER-Programme 
(Houaphan, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri), and the subsequent Sub-Projects 2 and 3 (hereafter Project 2) 
expanding the programme intervention area to all six provinces covered by the ER-Programme to fully reach the 
envisioned transformational change of forest and land management in the uplands of the Lao PDR.18 
6. Project 1 (FP117) laid the ground for the transformational change in the project area, including supporting policy 
mainstreaming, strengthening the regulatory framework, and implementing and improving the measurement, 
reporting and verification (MRV) system, among others. It also supported interventions on the ground in 3 provinces, 
namely: Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang. However, to fully reach the paradigm shift towards low-
emission and climate resilient forest and land use practices outlined in the programmatic approach within FP 117, 
additional support is needed.   
A.21.3 Overview of project 2 
7. Project 2 aims to further advance and consolidate the programme’s objective of supporting the Government and 
people of Lao PDR transition to sustainable and climate resilient management of forests and landscapes at scale. 
Project 2 is comprised of three components19 (see Figure below):  
• 
Component 1 addresses barriers at the national and sub-national levels, including measures that aim to scale-
up climate-informed participatory land use planning, strengthen land tenure security, improve forest law 
enforcement and monitoring, and scale-up and ensure access to sustainable financing for the AFOLU sector.  
• 
Component 2 builds on the enabling environment (Component 1), and addresses key drivers of deforestation 
and degradation within the agricultural sector. It delivers emission reductions at scale through reducing the 
expansion of agricultural activities into forested landscapes, and promotes climate resilient agricultural 
practices that increase the resilience of local farmers and agri-ecosystems. 
• 
Component 3 builds on the enabling environment (Component 1),20 and will reduce emissions and strengthen 
the resilience of local livelihoods and forest ecosystems through sustainable forest landscape management 
and the promotion of Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR), with a focus on village and conservation forests.21 
Figure 1: Overview of project 2 components, outputs and activities 
 
 
16 The full proposal is available on the GCF website: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp117.  
17 Project 1 which was approved under FP 117 reached effectiveness on 19th May 2020. Since then, the Project has made significant progress. 
More details on the specific progress can be found under the Annual Performance Report (APR) in Annex 18bc. 
18 The following excerpt is from FP 117’s Programme-level Executive Summary: “This Funding Proposal presents a stand-alone GCF project 
(Project 1) for Board approval. Two subsequent stand-alone projects, embedded in the same programmatic context and theory of change 
as this project, will be submitted at a future date for Board approval. Board approval for the project presented in this Funding Proposal is 
wholly separate from, and does not pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.” 
19 Project 1 used the term ‘outputs’ instead of components. In order to ensure alignment with the GCF Integrated Results Management 
Framework and new Funding Proposal Template, the term ‘component’ is applied under Project 2. 
20 Specifically, Activities under Component 3 that are subject to Component deliverables are: 
For Activity 3.1: Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAG) must be in place after Village Forest Management (VFM) planning is concluded, 
to provide funds for the implementation of annual plans; Land use planning and improved tenure security – Land Use Plans have to be in 
place as a precondition for VFM, ensuring full compliance with the project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Ethnic 
Group Development Plan and Gender Action Plan. Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is required, where the procedures are outlined 
in detail within Chapter B.3 of the Funding Proposal, and within the ESMP located in Annex 6b. 
For Activity 3.2: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new VFAGs to channel climate finance to target villages – VFAGs must be 
in place after National Protected Area (NPA) management planning is concluded, to provide funds for the implementation of annual plans. 
Again, full compliance with the ESMP and FPIC procedures are required.  
21 Conservation forests will focus on 5 national protected areas (NPAs) and 1 national park within the project area.

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
 
8. Project 2 is complementary and additional to project 1. Together both projects will facilitate a paradigm shift in the 
forestry and land use sector in Lao PDR that will be sustained by unlocking additional sources of results-based 
payments, as well as public and private finance managed through national funds and institutions with strengthened 
capacities for mobilizing and channelling climate finance. Project 2 has been revised and re-designed as a cross-
cutting intervention, strengthening synergies between REDD+ and activities that build the resilience of ecosystems 
and local rural livelihoods, in full alignment with Lao PDR’s latest Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2021) and the country’s draft Climate Change Strategy 
(2021). It will scale up investments in climate-resilient and deforestation-free agriculture and forestry practices 
across six provinces, building on the strengthened regulatory framework and utilizing the tools and guidelines 
developed under Project 1.  
9. Project 2 is anticipated to result in emission reductions of approximately 4.6 million tCO2eq over its duration of 4 
years, and directly strengthen the resilience of over 273,700 direct beneficiaries and 2,100,000 ha of ecosystems.22 
It will further generate additional environmental, social and economic benefits that contribute to Lao PDR’s national 
Green Growth Strategy to 2030, and the country’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.  
 
 
 
22 For more detailed information on projects mitigation and adaptation benefits, refer to Chapters D.1 and E.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
23 “The programme consists of 3 projects: Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and 
Luang Prabang, which contain the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area; Project 2 (mid-2024 to 
end-2029) scales-up the number of participating communities in the same geographical area; and Project 3 (2022 to end-2029) extends the 
geographical reach of the programme to the 3 additional provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay.” (GCF FP 117, page 3). 
24 Each of the six provinces has developed Provincial REDD+ Action Plans (PRAPs), which analyse key drivers of deforestation and forest 
degradation, major barriers and proposed actions and measures to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. 
25 Each target province shares an international border with one of the surrounding countries of Thailand, Myanmar, China and Viet Nam. The 
northern region of Laos is characterized by hilly topography, remote accessibility and limited public and industrial infrastructure, unique 
ethnic communities, and a persistent prevalence of poverty. Of the 50 districts in the six provinces, 29 districts have been selected for 
programme support. The selected districts cover 72% of the remaining high-carbon-stock area in the six target provinces (3.1 million ha out 
of 4.3 million ha). The selection process for the districts combined detailed quantitative and qualitative considerations, which are described 
in Chapter 2.5 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) and shown in the map. 
26 For more information refer to: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp117.  
27 Project 1 which was approved under FP 117 reached effectiveness on 19th May 2020. Since then, the Project has made significant progress. 
More details on the specific progress can be found under the Annual Performance Report (APR). 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
B.1.1 Note on the Project Structure and Linkage to GCF FP 117 
10. The Programme “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved governance 
and sustainable forest landscape management” (FP117) was approved by the GCF Board in 2019 at B.24.23  The 
overarching programme contributes substantially to the successful implementation of the Lao PDR Emissions 
Reduction Programme (ER-Programme) under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) in six provinces of 
Northern Lao PDR: Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay (see Figure 2).  
The programme area constitutes approximately 35% of the national territory and 32% of the country’s forest cover. 
Around 40% of total national deforestation and degradation (in area terms) takes place within the selected six 
provinces, which are also among the most vulnerable provinces to climate change in Lao PDR (see B.1.3).24  
 
Figure 2: a) Programme/Project Area in Lao PDR, and b) forest type map of selected districts25 
 
 
11. Initially, FP117 was conceptualized as a mitigation-focused single project. Due to limited GCF funding available at 
the time of submission, it was reframed as a programme, with 3 Sub-Projects. GCF Funding Proposal 11726 explicitly 
outlined a programmatic approach with Project 1 27 covering 3 out of 6 provinces of the Lao ER-Programme 
(Houaphan, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri), and the subsequent Sub-Projects 2 and 3 (hereafter Project 2)

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
28 FP 117 A.21.1 Programme Executive Summary: “This Funding Proposal presents a stand-alone GCF project (Project 1) for Board approval. 
Two subsequent stand-alone projects, embedded in the same programmatic context and theory of change as this project, will be submitted 
at a future date for Board approval. Board approval for the project presented in this Funding Proposal is wholly separate from, and does not 
pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.” 
29 The Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) and Laos is used synonymously throughout the Concept Note.   
30 Project 2 will, upon request from the GCF Secretariat, include adaptation measures to enable the transition to sustainable and climate-
resilient forest and land management in the uplands of Northern Lao PDR. Although the project area has certain climate vulnerabilities (see 
section B.1.3 on Climate Risk and Vulnerability below, as well as the detailed CRVA in Annex 2d) the main issue in the under Project 1 and 
2 selected area is still deforestation. 
31 Continued support for the villages included under Project 1 will not include additional funding support, but instead will focus on technical 
backstopping (e.g. related to the implementation of annual activity plans, and monitoring of land use plans and changes in forest cover), in 
addition to the deepening of linkages to private sector companies for sustainable deforestation free, climate resilient and low-emission value 
chain investments (for select commodities). This will be necessary as many crops selected from the White List will only enter production 
stage 2-4 years after initial establishment. Continued technical and extension support by Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office (PAFO) 
and District Agriculture and Forestry Offices (DAFO) will further strengthen the sustainability of Project 1, and is part of the project’s 
coordinated exit strategy. Funding for the annual forest management plan implementation and investments in sustainable agriculture for 
these villages will come from bonus payments to the Village Forestry and Agriculture Grant (VFAG) accounts after 2 years of successful 
forest management which will be fully disbursed by the end of Project 1. 
expanding the programme intervention area to all six provinces covered by the ER-Programme to fully reach the 
envisioned transformational change of forest and land management in the uplands of the Lao PDR (Figure 3).28  
  
 
Figure 3: Phased approach to implement the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme 
 
 
 
12. This Funding Proposal (FP) refers to Project 2 of the aforementioned GCF Programme, which provides a strategic 
opportunity to fully achieve the paradigm shift towards a low-emissions and climate resilient forest and land-use 
sector in Lao PDR29 already initiated with Project 1. While Project 1 was approved as a mitigation only project, Project 
2 has been reframed as a cross-cutting project, with climate change adaptation mainstreamed through all activities.30  
13. Project 2 will scale up project activities in all six ER-Programme provinces. Specifically, it will: 
• 
Implement activities in 12 districts (240 villages) in Luang Namtha, Oudomxay and Bokeo, which are provinces 
that were not included under Project 1. This support will include scaling up successfully implemented approaches 
to forest restoration and management in village and conservation forests, as well as deforestation free and climate 
resilient agriculture and agroforestry on agricultural land.  
• 
Implement activities in an additional 50 villages in Houaphan, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri Provinces (the 
provinces covered under Project 1), to support replication and upscaling that maintains the momentum for 
sustainable low-emission and climate resilient land use.  
• 
Support the continuation of activities in the 240 target villages located within 17 districts included under Project 
1 (after 06/2024 when Project 1 ends).31  
14. To achieve such a paradigm shift, the Programme already outlined in FP 117 (in which Project 2 is embedded) will:

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
32 Project 1 developed a revised template and improved approach for PLUP that Project 2 will utilize, based on the successful experiences 
and lessons learned from Project 1. 
33 Considering national parks (NPs), national protected areas (NPAs) and village forests. See Section E for more detailed information on the 
indicators and assumptions.  
• 
Strengthens the enabling environment for REDD+ through the following means: enhancing the availability of 
financing investments in climate resilient and deforestation free agriculture, forestry and land use – including  
channelling investments for climate change adaptation and mitigation under the Environmental Protection Fund’s 
(EPF) Climate Change Funding Window established under Project 1 (Project 2); revising and strengthening the 
legal and regulatory framework for forestry (completed under Project 1); and improving the enforcement of the 
new regulatory framework (both Project 1 and 2). Project 2 will further strengthen the framework to improve the 
implementation of cross-cutting measures, with both climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits, in line 
with the latest Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nation’s Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC). This will include ensuring land use and forestry planning are climate-informed, and 
selected measures not only support reducing deforestation and reducing emissions, but further are informed by 
climate information and strengthen the resilience of local livelihoods, ecosystems and/ or strengthen food 
security.  
• 
Unlocking results-based payments and mobilizing additional public and private climate finance: Project 
2 is needed to build on the efforts of Project 1, while scaling up climate resilient, low-emission and deforestation 
free agriculture and forestry practices across all six provinces. The Programme will help the country unlock up to 
USD 42 million in results-based payments for emission reductions (ERs) under the FCPF Carbon Fund (as per 
the ERPA), the proceeds will be used to strengthen the implementation of activities under the GCF programme 
and sustain them beyond implementation lifespan. It also builds on the lessons learned from Project 1 and 
includes additional targeted measures to facilitate the mobilization of additional sources of public and private 
public finance for climate action. Supporting these efforts, it further includes measures to strengthen the 
capacities of national institutions (Forest Protection Fund and the EPF) to mobilize additional climate finance and 
efficiently and effectively channel funds for investments in climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
• 
Supports further implementation of integrated and improved participatory land use planning processes 
(Projects 1 and 2),32 which include local level planning while ensuring plans are climate informed and feed into 
broader landscape level planning. This will ensure an ecosystem-based approach to adaptation (EbA), where 
measures such as resilient agricultural practices, forest landscape restoration and sustainable forest 
management will contribute to strengthening the resilience of local communities and ecosystems, with a focus 
on strengthening their resilience to increasing temperatures, droughts and extreme heat, and wildfires, as well 
as extreme precipitation events and floods. 
• 
Supports the scaling up of deforestation free and climate resilient agriculture and agroforestry by 
promoting climate resilient value chains and agricultural interventions (e.g. agroforestry, intercropping), 
enhancing productivity, strengthening farmers’ adaptive capacities, increasing farmers’ integration into resilient 
and low-emission agricultural value chains, and improving access to finance and private sector participation in 
economic activities that reduce pressure on forests (Project 2). As agricultural expansion and the pioneering 
shifting cultivation are among the main drivers of deforestation, this intervention targets major underlying causes 
including access to technology and finance, inadequate incentives for agri-micro, small and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs), market access, and monitoring and enforcement, among others. The project will also support farmers 
with income diversification, promoting diverse agricultural commodities and farming systems that are suitable for 
the varied contexts, as well as diverse bio-geophysical and climatic conditions in Northern Lao PDR. Project 2 
builds on the lessons learned from Project 1, and identified the need to target agri-MSMEs, where there is a 
notable absence of incentives for agri-MSMEs to adopt and invest in more sustainable, climate resilient and 
deforestation free practices and support value chain development. With over 800 MSMEs in the project area, 
they are often left out of discussions on sustainability, and as a result are insufficiently integrated in deforestation 
free and sustainability-oriented value chains, limiting the involvement of a critical actor at the intersection of 
deforestation, production systems and value chains. 
• 
Supports the implementation of Sustainable Forest Landscape Management (SFM) and Forest Landscape 
Restoration (FLR) of approximately 1,422,000 ha of degraded forest lands (Projects 1 and 2). 33 Climate-
informed management plans for village forests and national protected areas (NPAs) will be developed and 
implemented by the project considering measures for reducing deforestation and forest degradation, enhancing 
forest restoration and rehabilitation, and identifying opportunities to strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems 
and communities within the watershed through ecosystem-based adaptation (e.g. restoring riparian zones and 
gully areas, reducing sedimentation through increasing vegetative cover, among other practices). Project 2 will 
further strengthen climate change awareness raising and include an enhanced emphasis on climate risk and 
vulnerability and resilience building within forest management plan development, implementation and monitoring 
processes for village forestry and protected areas.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
34 Lao Statistical Bureau. 2015. Results of Population and Housing Census. 
35 World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart. 
36 HDI takes into account three dimensions to assess the level of development of a country: a long and healthy life (life expectancy at birth), 
knowledge (expected years of schooling, mean years of schooling), and a decent standard of living (GNI per capita). Additional information 
can be found at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi. 
37
 UNDP 
(2018), 
Human 
Development 
Indices 
and 
Indicators: 
2018 
Statistical 
Update: 
http://www.hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018_human_development_statistical_update.pdf. 
38 World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart. 
39 NAFRI (2006), Improving Livelihoods in the Uplands of Lao PDR – A Sourcebook,. 
40  see https://www.cepf.net/our-work/biodiversity-hotspots/indo-burma and MAF (2010): Fourth National Report to the Convention on 
Biological Diversity.   
41 A detailed climate risk and vulnerability assessment (CRVA) is available in Annex 2d.  
42 Lao PDR ranked 45/180 countries analysed in 2019, and 52/180 countries analysed for the period from 2000-2019. For more information 
see Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L. 2021. Global Climate Risk Index 2021.  
43 Government of Lao PDR. 2012. Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
Vientiane, Lao PDR.  
44 EM-DAT in World Bank. 2011. Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile: Lao PDR. 
45 IPCC 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, 
M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In Press. 
46 Müller, D., Suess, S., Hoffmann, A.A., Bucholz, G. 2013. The Value of Satellite-Based Active Fire Data for Monitoring, Reporting and 
Verification of REDD+ in the Lao PDR. Human Ecology, 41: 7-20. 
47 DDMCC 2005 in Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming] Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC)   
48 FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2021. Climate maps for the Lao People´s Democratic Republic. Available 
online: http://www.fao.org/3/cb3688en/cb3688en.pdf; and Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming] (Draft) Third National Communication to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)   
• 
Project 1 laid the ground for the transformational change in the project area, However, to fully reach the paradigm 
shift towards low-emission and climate resilient forest and land use practices, additional support is needed – as 
outlined in the programmatic approach within FP 117 and throughout this proposal.   
B.1.2 Country and regional context 
15. Lao PDR is a landlocked Least Developed Country (LLDC) with an area of 23.68 million ha, has a population of 6.9 
million34 and an average per capita income of USD 2,490.35 The country has a human development index (HDI)36 of 
0.613, ranking it 137th (out of 189) globally.37 The country’s economy is dependent on natural resources, especially 
forestry, agriculture, electricity generation (especially hydropower) and mining. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries 
account for 16% of GDP and employ 64% of the Lao workforce.38 Forests are among the economically most important 
sectors, providing income for the rural population and, in particular, the rural poor and providing a source of nutrition 
and livelihoods. Approximately 80% of the population are heavily reliant on forests for timber, food, fuel, shelter, 
medicines, and spiritual protection39. Laos’ forests are at the heart of the globally recognised Biodiversity Hotspot 
Indo-Burma.40 
 
B.1.3 Climate Risk and Vulnerability41  
16. Lao PDR is among the top 25-30% of countries in terms of climate change vulnerability, and already experiences 
the effects of climate change.42 It is exposed to multiple climate-related natural hazards, including floods, droughts, 
wildfires, cyclones, and landslides. During the period from 1966-2009, flooding was the most frequent hazard with an 
occurrence of 50% of all climate-related hazard in the country; followed by storms and droughts with 14% occurrence 
each.43 During the period from 1980-2010, at least 33 natural hazard events occurred, affecting approximately 9 
million persons, and resulting in damages and losses exceeding USD 400 million.44 The Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) in its latest AR6 report noted that the south-east Asia region has had medium impacts in its 
agriculture and food systems driven by changes in precipitation regime and droughts.45 Northern Lao PDR where the 
project’s provinces are located is particularly vulnerable to wildfires, where it experienced the most intense wildfires 
in the country during the period from 2003-2010.46 
 
Overall climatology 
17. Lao PDR has a tropical climate with two distinct seasons: i) the rainy or monsoon season (May to mid-October), and 
ii) the dry season (mid-October to April).  The average annual temperature ranges from around 20oC in the Northern 
and Eastern mountainous areas and plateaus, whereas the plains in the central and southern region have an average 
temperature in the range of 25 to 27oC.47 Precipitation ranges from 1,300 to 3,000 mm, with the highest rain 
concentrated in the far south, and in the north-central region of the country (especially Luang Prabang, Xiengkhuang 
and Vientiane, Figure 4).48  The northern mountainous areas (above 1,000m) were the target area is mostly situated

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
49 Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming] (Draft) Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC)   
50 Statistical Information Service 2019 in Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming] (Draft) Third National Communication to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)   
51 World Bank. 2021. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Country: Lao PDR; Current Climate>Climatology. 
52World Bank, 2021. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Lao PDR>Current Climate>Climatology. 
53 World Bank. 2022. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Country: Lao PDR; Current Climate>Climatology. 
54 World Bank. 2022. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Country: Lao PDR; Current Climate>Climatology. 
55 NCA, Norwegian Church Aid. 2009. Growing Resilience: Adapting for climate change in upland Laos. 
56 World Bank. 2022. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Country: Lao PDR; Current Climate>Climatology. 
are described as having “a montane temperature and hilly sub-tropical climate”.49 They have an average rainfall 
between 1,400 to 2,000mm, and average temperatures ranging from 23-28oC.50 
 
Figure 4: Lao PDR’s observed climatology of a) mean temperature, b) precipitation, and c) min-temperature, 
mean-temperature, max-temperature and precipitation, for the period 1991-2020  
 
Source: World Bank 202151 
 
Observed trends 
18. The country’s average annual rainfall trend during the period 1901-2020 shows a decline, particularly during the last 
30 years (Figure 5).52 During the period 1971-2020, most of the central and northern provinces have experienced 
negative changes in precipitation, while southern provinces, specially Salavan and Xekong, have had a positive 
change in rainfall between 1971 and 2020 (Figure 6a).53 Focusing on the past 30 years (1991-2020), the country 
experienced declining trends in precipitation in the northwest provinces, particularly in Bokeo, Luang Namtha, 
Phongsali, Sayabouri, Oudomxay, Luang Prabang, Vientiane, and Xiengkhouang. 54  Seasonal decreases in 
precipitation were particularly noticeable in Northwest Lao PDR, especially during the planting season from June until 
August, which has impacted farmers dependent on rainfed agriculture.55   
 
Figure 5: Lao PDR’s observed average annual precipitation for the period 1901-2020 
 
Source: World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal 202156

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
Figure 6: Trends in annual precipitation a) map of Lao PDR showing trend per decade and b) graph of 
precipitation trends per decade for the period from 1971- 2020 
a)
b) 
 
Source:  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal 2021 
 
 
19. In terms of temperature, during the period from 1971 to 2020 Lao PDR experienced an increase in temperature in 
the range of 0.1°C and 0.8°C (Figure 7a). The mean-temperature annual trend in the last 3 decades (period between 
1991-2020) has been increasing faster in comparison with the other two trends for the periods 1971-2020 and 1951-
2020 (Figure 7b). The average monthly minimum temperature over the last 30 years displayed less variability; while 
max-temperature experienced a higher monthly variability with a peak value of 30.92°C and 30.72°C during the 
months of April and May, respectively. 
 
 
Figure 7: Trends in a) mean temperature and b) mean-temperature annual trends with rends per decade for the 
period from1971- 2020 
a) 
 b)  
           
Source: World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal 2021 
 
 
20. According to the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal (2021), average monthly temperatures are 
expected to increase by up to 2.15oC by the end of the century under SSP2- 4.5, and up to 4.53oC under SSP5-

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
57
 World 
Bank, 
No 
Date. 
Climate 
Change 
Knowledge 
Portal, 
Country 
Laos. 
Available 
online: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/laos. 
58 This assessment is mostly comparable with the results that will be presented in the forthcoming Third National Communication (TNC) to 
the UNFCCC. Within the draft TNC, mean maximum temperatures are projected to increase by 1.3-1.5oC in Northern Lao PDR under the 
RCP 4.5 scenario, experiencing the largest increases in the country during this period. In terms of precipitation, it also projects an increase 
in mean annual rainfall, with majority of the increase occurring in the rainy season. It further highlights Northern Lao PDR is expected to 
experience different trends, with parts of Sayabouri and Houaphan experiencing among the largest increases in the country with a projected 
increase in seasonal precipitation, yet Luang Prabang is projected to experience amongst the lowest precipitation increases in the country. 
More detailed information will be provided within the TNC upon its publication in 2022.; Government of Lao PDR (forthcoming). (Draft) Third 
National Communication to the UNFCCC. 
59 Inagaki et al., 2011 in EcoLao. 2012. Scoping Assessment of Climate Change Adaptation Priorities in the Lao PDR. Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation Knowledge Platform for Asia, Partner Report Series No. 6. Stockholm Environment Institute, Bangkok. Available online 
at www.asiapacificadapt.net.  
60 WWF Deutschland 2016. FORESTS ABLAZE. Causes and effects of global forest fires. 
61 WWF Deutschland 2016. FORESTS ABLAZE. Causes and effects of global forest fires. 
62 World Bank Data Bank. n.d. Employment in agriculture (% of total employment) (modelled ILO estimate) - Lao PDR. Available online: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS?locations=LA. 
63 Agricultural Census Office 2012 in FP117 Feasibility Study. 
8.5.57 The biggest increases are projected to occur in the North, especially under SSP5-8.5 projections. In terms of 
precipitation from 2020-2039, both SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5 project minor changes with slight decreases in average 
monthly precipitation in Northern Lao PDR and Central Lao PDR. However, after 2040 annual precipitation is 
projected to increase in the majority of the country under SPP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5. SSP2- 4.5 sees the largest 
increases in precipitation in the Central and Northern provinces of the country, while under SSP5-8.5 the country 
could experience increases above 100mm in the provinces bordering Vietnam, China and Myanmar (see Figure 8).58  
 
 
Figure 8: Projected Changes in a) Monthly Mean Temperature and b) Mean Monthly Precipitation under SSP2-4.5 
and SSP5-8.5 (Baseline Data from 1986-2005) 
a)
b) 
 
Source: Compiled from World Bank Climate Knowledge Portal, n.d. 
21. With the aforementioned climate change projections, climate-related hazards are also expected to increase, where 
“dry seasons will get longer, there will be more intense rainfall events, and more frequent and severe droughts 
and floods”.59 In addition, forest fires are likely to become more frequent and affect a greater area.60 While most 
fires are initiated by humans, e.g. through the use of fire for shifting cultivation, the continued use of business as 
usual land clearing practices is expected to trigger more fires in the future due seasonal increases in dry conditions 
and droughts.61  
 
Climate change exposure, vulnerability and risk  
22. Exacerbated climate related hazards as noted within the draft Third National Communication (TNC) to the 
UNFCCC are projected to have detrimental impacts on local livelihoods and the ecosystems upon which local 
communities in the project area depend. Many households in Lao PDR are dependent on the highly vulnerable 
agricultural sector, where the agricultural sector is the primary source of employment for the majority of people in 
Lao PDR, with 61% of the working population employed in the sector in 2019 (63% of female employment).62 Northern 
Lao PDR is particularly exposed to climate change, where many households are dependent on upland rainfed 
agriculture, characterized by its low productivity, for their subsistence and livelihoods. In the project area, rain-fed 
(lowland and upland) paddy rice, maize and vegetables are among the key agricultural crops grown.63 Changes in 
temperature, precipitation patterns and the occurrence or intensity of climate-related hazards are expected to have

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
64 World Bank. 2011. Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile: Lao PDR.  
65 UNDP. 2021. Trends and simulated future changes in climate and crop suitability in Lao PDR. [unpublished, forthcoming report]. 
66 Government of Lao PDR. 2005. Forestry Strategy to the Year 2020. Vientiane.  
67 World Bank. 2011. Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile: Lao PDR; Government of Lao PDR. 2010. Strategy on Climate Change of 
the Lao PDR.; It should be nonetheless noted that there remain major information gaps related to the impact of climate change on forests 
in Lao PDR. The 2010 climate change strategy states the following on the matter: “Due to the complexity of ecosystem interactions, there 
are many uncertainties in respect to the impact of climate change on Lao PDR’s forestry sector”, Government of Lao PDR 2010 P. 10 
68 Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming], In terms of sensitivity the Third National Communication assessed the following variables: 
population density, dependency ratio, % of economically active population, sex ratio of economically active population, % of population 
employed off-farm, % of population who are unemployed, retired, sick or too old to work, household access to clean water, household 
access to sanitation, % of protected area in region. (Lao PDR, forthcoming). In terms of adaptive capacity, the following variables were 
assessed in the Third National Communication: literacy, educational level achieved, percentage of population with a fixed phone line or 
telecommunication,  % of mobile phone used in districts, percentage of computer or internet used in the district, radio access in the district, 
percentage of television users in the district, road density, electricity access/ coverage, water pipeline coverage, coverage of health care 
facilities, percentage of villages with a land use plan. It should be noted the Third National Communication uses the AR4 definition of 
vulnerability.  
69 FP117 Feasibility Study. 
70 FP117 Feasibility Study. 
71 Thomas, I. L. 2015. Drivers of Deforestation in the Greater Mekong Subregion - Lao PDR Country Report.   
72 World Bank. 2020. Lao PDR Forest Note: Toward Sustainable Forest Landscapes for Green Growth, Jobs and Resilience.  
73 Thomas, I. L. 2015. Drivers of Deforestation in the Greater Mekong Subregion - Lao PDR Country Report.   
detrimental impacts on agri-ecosystems and smallholder farmers resulting in: 64  changes in planting/ growing 
seasons, productivity, outbreaks of pests and disease, crop damage and losses, among other impacts. Focusing on 
some of the main crops in the region, the following impacts are projected:65 
• 
Maize, one of the main crops in the region, is projected to be negatively impacted by climate change. A study by 
UNDP found there may be short-term improvements until 2040, but afterwards there will be long-term negative 
impacts due to increasingly unsuitable climatic conditions for maize production, especially in Northern Lao PDR. 
• 
Upland rice is projected to have either no changes or slightly negative changes in suitability in Northern Lao PDR, 
depending on the location. A study by UNDP projects a negative change in suitability especially in Houaphan 
Province, for both the near future and mid-century scenarios.  
• 
Cassava is expected to have slight increases in suitability in Northern Lao PDR. A study by UNDP notes that 
during 2021-2040 by shifting the planting period by up to 2 months earlier it could maximize the suitability of 
growing conditions.  
23. Households in Lao PDR are further highly dependent on forests for their livelihoods. Approximately 80% of the 
population relies on forests for their income, food, shelter, medicine and other uses.66 As such, households will be 
highly exposed to any climate change induced changes on forest ecosystems (e.g. increased frequency and intensity 
of forest fires, biodiversity loss, changes in species composition and/ or productivity, degradation and disease, among 
other potential impacts).67  
 
Deforestation and forest degradation exacerbate climate risk and vulnerability in Northern Lao PDR 
24. Northern Lao PDR is particularly vulnerable to climate change due to low capacities (coping capacity and adaptive 
capacity), and high sensitivity to climate change.68 The forthcoming Third National Communication to the UNFCCC 
ranked Northern Lao PDR among the most vulnerable areas in the country. The region has a prevalence of shifting 
cultivation practices and is one of the poorest regions in the country.69 The mountainous terrain is highly sensitive to 
climate change due to its sloped terrain, which is naturally prone to erosion events and landslides (particularly in 
deforested or degraded areas). At the same time, high rates of deforestation and forest degradation exacerbate the 
northern regions’ vulnerability to climate change. Six provinces in Northern Lao PDR (Bokeo, Luang Namtha, Luang 
Prabang, Oudomxay, Sayabouri, and Houaphan) experienced more than 40% of the country´s deforestation and 
forest degradation (in area terms) during the period from 2005-2015,70 which exacerbates the risk of climate-related 
natural hazards (drought, flooding, forest-fires), and reduces the provision of key ecosystem services that could 
otherwise strengthen the coping capacity of local ecosystems and the persons who depend on them. The situation 
regarding forest degradation – which encompasses reductions in forest stocking, changes in species composition 
and size structure, loss of wildlife and plant habitats, and declines in wildlife and plant populations – is as concerning 
as deforestation.71 The main drivers of deforestation and forest degradation are agricultural expansion, shifting 
agriculture, unsustainable harvesting of wood and non-timber forest products, and infrastructure development (a 
more detailed description is provided in B.1.3 below).  
25. Deforestation and forest degradation also impact the hydrological cycle, and limit water recharge and storage 
affecting both water quality and quantity for both local and downstream communities.72 This not only exacerbates the 
risk and vulnerability to flooding, but also droughts and forest fires. Deforestation and forest degradation increase the 
exposure of soils to mass erosion events and landslides, given the mountainous terrain in most of the northern 
provinces.73 Erosion contributes to sedimentation and river bank rise, which contribute to reduced water quality (for

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
74 World Bank. 2020. Lao PDR Forest Note: Toward Sustainable Forest Landscapes for Green Growth, Jobs and Resilience.  
75 Government of Lao PDR 2020. National Report on Land Degradation Neutrality Target Setting Programme, October 2020. 
76 World Bank. 2020. Lao PDR Forest Note. 
77 Pimhidzai et al. 2014 in UNDP 2015 in FP117 Feasibility Study. 
78FP117 Feasibility Study. 
79 Impacts on some of the main crops in the region are as follows: 
Maize, one of the main crops in the region, is projected to be negatively impacted by climate change. UNDP (forthcoming) notes that there 
may be short-term improvements until 2040, but afterwards there will be long-term negative impacts due to increasingly unsuitable climatic 
conditions for maize production, especially in Northern Lao PDR. 
Upland rice is projected to have either no changes or slightly negative changes in suitability in Northern Lao PDR, depending on the location. 
UNDP (forthcoming) projects a negative change in suitability especially in Houaphan Province, for both the near future and mid- century 
scenarios.  
Cassava is expected to have slight increases in suitability in Northern Lao PDR. UNDP notes that during 2021-2040 by shifting the planting 
period by up to 2 months earlier it could maximize the suitability of growing conditions. 
80 Lao PDR (forthcoming). [DRAFT] Strategy on Climate Change of the Lao PDR. Vision to the year 2050, Strategy and Programs of Action 
to the year 2030.  
81 Vientiane Times. 2018. Flooding Threatens Rice Harvest Target in Laos. 31 July. 
82 Evidence of the impact of climate change on forests and trees itself in Lao PDR is limited.  
83 NDC of the Lao PDR 2021. 
84 NDC of the Lao PDR 2021. 
85 Government of Lao PDR [forthcoming]. Third National Communication to the UNFCCC. Vientiane, Lao PDR 
human consumption, aquatic life), and an increased risk of flooding downstream where sediments are deposited.74 
75 Healthy forests would otherwise help reduce flood peaks due to increased vegetative cover that can slow down 
flooding, increase soil infiltration and water detention, and reduce erosion and sedimentation), but also droughts 
(trees would otherwise contribute to microclimate buffering, increased water recharge, reduced soil evaporation, and 
improved water retention, among other benefits).76 
26. The following lists the two most serious risks posed by climate change in the project region and which will be 
addressed by Project 2 (see section on Climate Change Exposure, Vulnerability and Risk in the Feasibility Study in 
Annex 2a or the CRVA in Annex 2d for a more extended list of risks and a more detailed overview of the main hazard-
related risks addressed by Project 2): 
• 
Risk of reduced agricultural production and food insecurity: An estimated 25% of rural households in the 
region are food poor.77 A major limitation for ensuring food security is the region’s mountainous terrain, and 
limited valley space for growing rice paddy.78 Local households cultivate upland rice for subsistence; however, 
yields are low, cultivation requires challenging physical labour, and unsustainable practices can further 
exacerbate climate change vulnerability (e.g. creating conditions for landslides, mass erosion events, 
sedimentation, and riverbank cutting downstream etc.). At the same time, climate change poses a risk for future 
yields of upland rice in some Provinces, such as Houaphan. Moreover, the majority of farmers in the region are 
dependent on rainfed agriculture, and changes in precipitation patterns could have devastating impacts on food 
security and agricultural livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, especially where key crops such as maze are posed 
to be negatively impacted by climate change.79 The draft Lao Climate Change Strategy (forthcoming)80 notes 
that droughts and floods, among other climate related hazards, are expected to cause losses and damages to 
agricultural production. It further highlights how flooding has affected rice harvesting, with losses of 30,000 ha 
(130,000 tons of rice) due to floods in 2017.81 Investments are urgently needed in ecosystem-based adaptation, 
and climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural systems based on climate-informed and holistic 
planning. Such investments will help strengthen the resilience of agroecosystems and smallholder farming 
households, while also reducing greenhouse gas emissions and strengthening broader ecosystem resilience 
(given the current role of agriculture as a main driver of deforestation and forest degradation and which include 
forest ecosystems, agroecosystems, among others) and the livelihoods that depend on them.  
• 
Risk of loss of reduced provision of ecosystem services82: Lao PDR´s updated NDC notes that “changes 
in temperatures and precipitation will trigger variations in hydrology and deteriorations of flood conditions, 
perturbations for biodiversity, ecosystems and ecosystems services.”83 The increase in temperatures may 
increase the frequency of forest fires, and pests and diseases that contribute to forest degradation.84 Flooding 
may lead to substantial erosion, watershed degradation and massive landslides. It further highlights the risk of 
changes in climatic conditions that could affect the growing conditions and distribution of flora and fauna.85 
Investments in nature-based solutions to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems, including forest landscape 
restoration, are needed to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems against climate change. 
B.1.4 Deforestation and forest degradation  
Greenhouse gas emissions due to deforestation and forest degradation 
27. Lao PDR’s historical greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to deforestation and forest degradation amounted to 
40.01 million tCO2eq/year in the period 2005-2014, 38.33 million tCO2eq/year in the period 2015-2016 and 37.29 
million tCO2eq/year in the period 2017-2018. Carbon removals due to reforestation and forest restoration accounted

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
86 Technical Annex to the Biennial Update Report 2020. https://unfccc.int/documents/274307. 
87 Technical Annex to the Biennial Update Report 2020. 
88 https://redd.unfccc.int/files/2018_frel_submission_laopdr.pdf. 
89 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes and 
Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-
Clean.pdf. 
90 The Government of Lao PDR clearly distinguishes between two types of shifting cultivation practices in the uplands of Lao PDR, namely: i) 
rotational (haimounviang) and ii) pioneering practices with encroachment into (designated) forest land (at village level) (thangpha hed hai). 
The primary focus of this project is to stabilize the landscape and reduce/avoid so-called pioneering shifting cultivation practices. Rotational 
shifting cultivation has a long tradition, especially for ethnic groups in northern Laos, and will be respected. Cleary distinguished boundaries 
between agricultural and forest land are key success factors for landscape stabilization, which will be facilitated through participatory and 
inclusive processes. For more information refer to Chapter B.3 below, as well as the project’s Ethnic Group Development Plan within the 
Annex 6d.  
91 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes and 
Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-
Clean.pdf. 
for -7.53 million tCO2eq/year during the period from 2005-2014, and 8.00 million tCO2eq/year during the period from 
2015-2018.86 Overall, the AFOLU sector is responsible for 78% of all emissions of Lao PDR. 
 
Table 1: FREL/FRL of the Lao PDR87 
 
 
 
28. The project accounting area encompasses six provinces of northern Laos (8.1 million ha, of which 4.3 million ha is 
natural forest in 2015). The baseline Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions scenario has been analysed thoroughly as 
part of Lao PDR’s engagement with REDD+ (the UNFCCC Forest Reference Emission Level - FREL),88 and the 
FCPF Carbon Fund (the Reference Level (RL) of the ER-P).89 The RL estimates net GHG emissions of 8.5 million 
tCO2eq per year from the forest sector in the six northern provinces that constitute the Programme area, driven 
primarily by forest degradation (6.8m tCO2eq/year) and deforestation (3.8m tCO2eq/year), which are only partially 
offset by slight gains from reforestation (-1.4m tCO2eq/year) and forest restoration (-0.5m tCO2eq/year). 
 
29. Indicative MRV data for the 6 ER-Programme provinces between 2015-2019 show annual emissions of 6.5 million 
tCO2eq and 0.7 million tCO2eq removals. Compared to the 2005-2014 baseline scenario the provinces already show 
some progress in reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. A province by province assessment 
shows substantial results being achieved in Houaphan, where BMZ through GIZ and KfW is engaged in Participatory 
Land Use Planning (PLUP) and Village Forest Management (VFM) since 2012, which is the basis for scaling-up 
proven approaches through GCF investment. This demonstrates the importance of sustained engagement resulting 
in the gradual scaling of proven practices combined with investments in developing capacities, establishing a 
conducive policy and regulatory framework and monitoring support.  
 
Drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation 
30. Pioneering shifting cultivation90 is the greatest single proximate driver of deforestation and forest degradation in the 
project area, responsible for 22% of forest disturbances greater than 5 hectares in size. Agricultural land expansion 
(19%) and plantation agriculture development (13%) are also significant contributors. Other drivers include road 
construction (12%), selective logging (10%) and the establishment of tree plantations (7%).91 
31. Shifting cultivation, if managed properly (including control of fires), can be sustainable (i.e. rotational shifting 
cultivation). However, a number of underlying factors are transforming it into an unsustainable, and highly damaging, 
practice in northern Lao PDR (i.e. pioneering shifting cultivation): 
• 
Economic factors: With increasing competition for land from cash-crops, combined with a growing population, 
fallow periods are becoming shorter, leading to lower productivity, increased soil degradation and the need to 
clear more forests for subsistence purposes. Expanding agriculture – notably upland rice, an important 
subsistence crop in northern Lao PDR– into forest areas through slash and burn practices is typically a last resort 
among poor families with no other livelihood options. In this respect, shifting cultivation practices act as a safety 
net for poor and vulnerable groups.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
92 Linquist, B., Saito, K., Keoboualapha, B., Phengchan, S., Songyikhansutho, K., Phanthaboon, K., Vongphoutone, B., Navongsai, V., Horie, 
T. (2005), ‘Improving Rice-Based Upland Cropping Systems for the Lao PDR’, in: Shifting Cultivation and Poverty Eradication in the Uplands 
of the Lao PDR: Proceedings, National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute (NAFRI): p.299-313. 
93 Wildlife Conservation Society and GIZ (2015), Report on the Assessment of Drivers of Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Houaphan 
Province, https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Houaphan-Drivers-of-Deforestation-Report.pdf. 
94 FCPF Carbon Fund (2018), Emission Reductions Programme Document: Promoting REDD+ through Governance, Forest Landscapes and 
Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR, https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2018/May/LaoPDR_ER-PD_FinalDraftMay.2018-
Clean.pdf. 
95 Detailed analysis of these barriers can be found in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). 
96 National Green Growth Strategy of the Lao PDR till 2030 (2018). 
• 
Agro-technological factors: Upland agricultural yields are often limited by seasonal precipitation. For example, 
upland rice is highly susceptible to drought, weed infestations and a lack of soil conservation practices to limit 
erosion, which contribute to low productivity. Continual planting of upland rice without intercropping can lead to 
significant reductions in soil fertility – as much as 80% over 5 years.92 This reduction of yields drives villagers to 
clear new forest land that is more productive after clearance. After a few years, the productivity declines again 
and places pressure on other forest areas.  
• 
Policy and institutional factors: Insufficient and inappropriate land use planning is a major underlying cause of 
deforestation, either because of the complete absence of plans or through a lack of compliance with plans (which, 
in the past, have often been designed in a top-down manner involving limited consultation with villagers). The 
absence of integrated spatial planning and watershed planning, as well as village-level participatory land use 
planning in some villages, is a major underlying cause of deforestation from pioneering shifting cultivation. 
Uncertainty regarding land uses and border demarcation can lead to unclear rules and gradual encroachment 
into forests. Even when village land use plans have been developed, without adequate incentive mechanisms to 
encourage implementation, or sanctions discouraging non-compliance, plans often are ignored. Monitoring the 
overall compliance with land use plans is weak in many villages and districts, and often areas under cultivation 
are under-reported, as many areas are illegally cleared.93 Unclear land and resource rights and land allocation 
remain a challenge. Land allocation processes, especially in rural areas, have been hindered by a lack of 
government capacities, resources and equipment.94  
32. The expansion of agricultural land (permanent agriculture) and plantation agriculture in the project area is driven by: 
• 
Economic factors: Strong regional markets, especially in neighbouring countries, continue to drive the 
production of key agricultural export commodities such as rubber, sugar cane, maize and cassava. Demand from 
Chinese and Vietnamese markets is increasing and incentivises the clearing of forests for agriculture. Lao agri- 
MSMEs play an important role in these supply chains, as they typically act as traders between Lao producers 
and Chinese and Vietnamese markets. A further analysis of the role of markets and MSMEs can be found in 
Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) and in the summary of the recently conducted market assessment 
(Annex 2j). Cultivation of cash crops is seen as a direct route out of poverty for households and as an important 
economic pillar for provincial governments. While such commodities and markets are important for economic 
development in Lao PDR, weak land use planning, law enforcement and agro-technological factors contribute to 
unsustainable conversion of forested land for agricultural cultivation. At the same time, dependence on one cash 
crop can make households particularly vulnerable to climate change (e.g. if conditions lead to crop failure, losses, 
or pests and diseases). 
• 
Agro-technological factors: The use of low-yield crop varieties, a lack of appropriate management practices 
and nitrogen loss in soil due to continual planting of crops lead to additional forest being cleared for agriculture. 
While yields have improved with the adoption of contract farming systems, which have provided farmers with 
improved maize varieties and agricultural inputs, challenges associated with mono-cropping on steep slopes are 
still common. 
• 
Policy and institutional factors: Land use plans and targets established in provincial and district Socio-
Economic Development Plans (SEDPs) are often unaligned, and lead to an inability to monitor and enforce 
compliance with plans, policies and regulations. Inconsistencies in master planning and zoning are a major 
underlying cause of deforestation, as these plans are not reflective of the actual land use activities that are 
implemented.  
33. The primary barriers to sustainable forestry management and reforestation include gaps in forest governance and 
regulation, poor land use planning, lack of long-term financing for forest management, and insufficient skills and 
experience in sustainable forest management.95  
 
B.1.5 Priorities for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in the Agriculture, Forestry and other Land Use 
Sector in Lao PDR 
34. The importance of climate action and sustainable land management are enshrined in the country’s highest-level 
policies, including the 9th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (9th NSEDP 2021-2025) currently being 
finalized, the National Green Growth Strategy 203096, the Strategy on Climate Change with a vision to the year 2050

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
97 Prime Minister’s Office of the Lao PDR, Decree on Climate Change, 19.09.2019. 
98 Resolution of the Party’s Central Committee on the Enhancement of Land Management and Development in New Period, No 026/CC, 
03.08.2017. 
99 Land Law of the Lao PDR. 
100 INDC of the Lao PDR 2015, NDC of the Lao PDR 2021. 
101 Government of Lao PDR [2020]. Draft Climate Change Strategy. p.30. 
102 The National Adaptation Programme of Action (2009) included priority measures for the agriculture, forestry, water resource and health 
sectors for the period from 2010-2020. Key measures relevant for this project include: promoting and building capacities on sustainable 
forest management and village forestry, promoting tree planting in areas prone to flooding, raising awareness and building capacities on 
forest fire prevention and management, establishment of forest-fire protection buffer zones, supporting land use planning in hazard prone 
and affected areas, promote crop varieties that are better adapted in hazard prone areas, promote soil improvement, develop appropriate 
bank erosion protection systems for agricultural land in flood prone areas, promote integrated pest management, among others.  
103 Lao PDR 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution. 
104 The AFD Sustainable Micro-Watershed Management Project in Northern Uplands of Laos (SWAN) will be implemented in four provinces 
(Xieng Khouang, Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Phongsaly) from 2021-2026 focusing on watershed planning, improvement of water resources 
and water infrastructure management. The planned GCF project entitled “Promoting Climate Resilient Food Systems for Improved Food 
and Nutrition Security Among the Most Vulnerable Communities in Lao PDR (CRFS)” of UNDP is an adaptation project focusing, amongst 
others, on early warning systems. 
and a Strategy and Programs of Action to the year 2030, the 2019 issued Decree on Climate Change97, the Central 
Party’s Resolution on Land (2017)98 and the new Land Law which is effective since June 201999, the new Forest Law 
which has been revised and adopted by the National Assembly in June 2019 providing improved use rights to local 
communities, the Forestry Strategy 2035 (final draft May 2021), as well as in Lao PDR’s intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC, 2015) and updated NDC (2021)100.  
35. The (draft) Climate Change Strategy (2021) provides a comprehensive strategy for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation in Lao PDR, and strongly highlights the role of nature-based solutions. For instance, it highlights the need 
to “enhance deployment of ecosystem-based adaptation such as crop cover, wetland protection, forest and landscape 
for flood water storage, retention and regulation” to strengthen the resilience against an increasing risk of droughts 
and floods. 101  More integrated and well-planned interventions are needed that consider the intersection of 
deforestation and forest degradation, and climate change adaptation. The country has a National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (2009),102 and is in the process of developing a National Adaptation Plan (planned completion 
in 2021/22), as well as sectoral strategies and action plans. 
36. Lao PDRs’ updated NDC (2021) puts significant weight on the forestry sector, for both mitigation and adaptation. It 
states that nature-based solutions shall be prioritized to counter climate-induced disasters such as floods, landslides 
and droughts. It further highlights that “mitigation co-benefits will be strongly considered in sectoral adaptation 
strategies and adaptation plans”, showing the potential to strengthen the promotion of cross-cutting measures. The 
updated NDC differentiates between an unconditional and a conditional mitigation target by 2030 and the conditional 
target also aims at climate neutrality by 2050.  In terms of Land Use Change and Forestry the conditional target 
includes to increase forest cover to 70% through reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, foster 
conservation, sustainable management of forests, buffer zones of national parks and other preserves, and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks. The 70% forest cover target is associated with average annual emission 
reduction/carbon removals of 45 million tCO2eq/year. The unconditional target did not mention the 70% forest cover, 
although it is mentioned in a number of other plans and strategies including the updated Forestry Strategy 205. The 
financing needs for the conditional mitigation target 2030 is calculated at USD 4.76 billion of which the increase in 
forest cover alone is estimated at USD 1.7 billion. The unconditional emission reduction target is set at 1.1 million 
tCO2eq/year. 
37. In terms of adaptation, forest, agriculture and water resources are listed as priority sectors for climate change 
adaptation, where there are both mitigation and adaptation benefits of implementing many of the prioritized 
measures:103 
• 
Forestry: i) Promoting climate resilience in forestry production and forest ecosystems, including in buffer zones 
of protected areas and other forested areas, ii) promoting technical capacity in the forestry sector for managing 
forest for climate change adaptation, and iii) promoting integrated land use planning, natural resources and 
environment management. 
• 
Agriculture: i) Promoting climate resilience in farming systems and agriculture infrastructure, and ii) promoting 
appropriate technologies for climate change adaptation, including nature-based and circular economy solutions. 
• 
Water resources: i) Strengthening water resource information systems for climate change adaptation, ii) 
managing surface water, groundwater and wetlands for climate change resilience, iii) increasing water resource 
infrastructure resilience to climate change, including through nature-based solutions, iv) strengthening early 
warning systems in a timely manner.104 
38. However, the updated NDC (2021) highlights the following barriers and challenges for building climate resilience: 
weak institutional capacities, absence of sectoral strategies, action plans and indicators in most key sectors, weak

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
105 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/carbon-fund-eighteenth-cf18-june-20-22-2018-paris. 
106 The PRAPs were provided as Annex 22i-22n of the FP 117. 
107 Carbon Fund of the Forest Carbon Fund Partnership Facility – Emission Reductions Payment Agreement – Promoting REDD+ through 
Governance, Forest Landscapes and Livelihoods in Northern Lao PDR Programme. 
108 Government of Lao PDR, Ministry of Planning and Investment, Notification 1263, Suspension of Concession Consideration on Mining 
Related Businesses, and Forestry of Eucalyptus and Rubber Trees in the Lao PDR, dated 15 May 2012 
109 Government of Lao PDR. Prime Minister’s Order No. 31/PM dated 5 November 2013 on the Temporary Suspension of Logging in 
Production Forest. 
110 Government of Lao PDR. Prime Minister’s Order No. 15, May 2016, on Strengthening Strictness of Timber Harvest 
Management and Inspection, Timber Transport and Business. 
111 To, P. X., Treanor, N.B., Canby, K., 2017. Impacts of the Laos logs and sawn wood export bans: significant reductions in exports to major 
markets of Vietnam and China in 2016. Forest Trends Report Series: Forest Policy, Trade and Finance. Forest Trends, April 2017. 
112 It is foreseen that FLEGT will continue, although the FLEGT regulation may need to be amended. FLEGT licensing shall prove the legality 
of timber and the planned forest partnerships (e.g. EU-Laos) shall be the implementation strategy to enable deforestation and forest 
degradation free supply chains in the EU context 
cross-sectoral coordination, limited information and knowledge on climate change impacts, lack of access to 
appropriate technologies, and insufficient finance, among others.   
39. The National REDD+ Strategy to 2025 and Vision to 2030 guides REDD+ implementation in Lao PDR, and together 
they aim to improve the quality and extent of forests nationwide to provide economic, social and environmental 
benefits. This is further aligned with the country’s Forestry Strategy 2035, which includes three core elements: i) 
ensuring the sustainable management and use of forest resources ii) conserving forest resources in order to protect 
forests, forestland, flora and fauna, aquatic animals and wildlife, including through preventing and combatting 
wildfires, supporting forest restoration, and reducing deforestation and forest degradation, among others, and iii) 
developing the forestry and timber industry in a sustainable manner. Together these strategies require all 
stakeholders, including households, communities, and the private sector, to actively participate in the reduction of 
deforestation and degradation, and the promotion of forest restoration and reforestation.   
40. Laos has been a partner country in the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) since 2008. Its Readiness 
Preparation Proposal (R-PP) was accepted in late 2010, its Emission Reductions Programme Idea Note (ER-PIN) 
was approved in March 2016 and its Emission Reductions Programme Document (ER-PD) was accepted into the 
FCPF Carbon Fund without conditions at the 18th Carbon Fund Participants Meeting in June 2018. 105  A key 
component of the ER-PD is the articulation of the government’s comprehensive strategy to reduce GHG emissions 
and increase removals from the forest sector in the six target provinces – Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, 
Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay – that comprise the Laos ER-Programme area. The GCF project (FP 117) 
and the proposed GCF Project 2 form the cornerstone of the ER-P implementation. The GCF project area is identical 
with the ER-Programme area and uses the same GHG-accounting system. This six-province strategy of the ER-P is 
an aggregation and synthesis of Provincial REDD+ Action Plans (PRAPs) developed for each target province in the 
period 2016-2018.106 On December 30th the Government of Lao PDR (GoL) and the FCFP signed the ERPA for over 
8.4 million ERs.107   
41. In parallel, GoL has, in recent years, embarked on a number of reforms that provided a platform for launching GCF 
project interventions. In In recognition of emerging conflicting land disputes as well as environmental concerns the 
Government of Lao issued a suspension on granting new concessions for mining and rubber investments in 2012 
which is still in place until today.108 In addition, besides the temporary ban on logging in National Production Forests 
(GoL 2013)109 in order to protect natural forests from unsustainable exploitation, the Government of Lao PDR issued 
the Prime Minister’s Order No. 15110 (PMO 15) in May 2016 to strengthen enforcement of restrictions to halt illegal 
logging and illegal timber exports due to large amount of missing state revenues, amongst others. The PMO 15 is 
already demonstrating significant impact with Lao exports of logs and sawn wood to its main traders of Vietnam and 
China had decreased by 74% by the end of 2016.111  In addition, the European Commission is currently developing 
a new regulation on which means products (palm oil, soy, beef & leather, cacao, coffee, and timber) placed on, 
produced in, or exported from the EU market need to be deforestation and forest degradation free. Consequently, 
there will be additional requirements to ensure sustainable sourcing such as but not limited to: development of 
integrated land use planning processes, improvement of relevant legislation as well as fiscal incentives, sustainable 
forest management and restoration of forest, transparency in supply chains and access to information, strengthening 
the rights of forest dependent communities, among others.112  
  
B.1.6 Related ongoing and forthcoming projects with synergies 
42. A number of related projects with clear synergies to project 1 and 2 have been and continue to be implemented in 
the project area. An overview of the main project with synergies is provided in the following Table, and a more 
comprehensive summary is provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Many of these donors and implementing 
entities have been consulted during the project development process, where opportunities for continued cooperation 
have been identified, and lessons learned have been shared and, where suitable, reflected in the project design.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
113 Project 2 will provide additional financing after the KfW project ends to revise, implement and scale up village forest conservation 
agreements.  
Table 2: Overview of related projects and their potential synergies with project 2* 
Project, implementation period, 
donors 
Budget  
Description and synergies 
Sustainable Rural Infrastructure & 
Watershed Management Sector project 
(2020-2027) ADB, EU, IFAD, GIZ  
USD 
95 
million 
▪ 
Aims to address issues of productive rural infrastructure (PRI) and 
watershed management.   
▪ 
Provides co-finance for Activity 2.1.3. 
Partnerships 
for 
Irrigation 
& 
Commercialization 
of 
Smallholder 
Agriculture (PICSA) (2019-2025) IFAD  
USD 
85 
million 
▪ 
Aims to enhance livelihood resilience and sustainability towards 
inclusive local economic development 
▪ 
Provides co-finance for Activity 2.1.3. 
ProFEB Protecting forest ecosystems 
& biodiversity (2021-2024), 
BMZ  implemented by GIZ 
EUR 
8 
million  
▪ 
Aims to implement a multi-stakeholder approach which improves the 
regulatory and institutional framework to conserve forests and 
biodiversity.   
Village Forestry Management Project 
(2018-2025), BMZ implemented by 
KfW  
USD 
8 
million 
▪ 
Aims to improve forest ecosystems and the livelihood of the 
population in the project areas by the sustainable management of 
village forests. 
▪ 
Provides co-finance for Component 3 implementation 
Integrated conservation of biodiversity 
and forests (ICBF) (2015-2022) BMZ 
implemented by KfW  
  
EUR 
18 
million 
▪ 
Aims for the effective management of selected target landscapes 
(comprising national protected areas and corridors) sustaining 
biodiversity in forest ecosystems, while supporting livelihoods of 
forest-depending villages.   
▪ 
Activity 3.2.1 is modelled off the ICBF approach, and KfW provides 
co-finance for Project implementation.113  
FCPF Carbon Fund: Lao PDR Northern 
Laos Emission Reductions Payments 
Project (2021-2025) WB  
USD 
42 
million  
▪ 
Projects 1 and 2 have been designed to support the implementation 
of the overarching FCPF Carbon Fund ER-P.  
▪ 
Results-based payments achieved under the ER-Programme will be 
reinvested through Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2 under Project 2. 
F-REDD+ 2 (2022-2027), JICA 
N/A 
• 
F-REDD 2 Project will support the GoL to promote the 
implementation of FS 2035 and national REDD+ strategy, national 
forest monitoring system, and REDD+ capacity building in 
Savannakhet Province.  
• 
JICA support for national level forest monitoring, and capacity 
building will support the sustainability of Project 2. 
Land Management & Decentralized 
Planning (LMDP) (2015-2023) BMZ  
EUR 
7 
million 
▪ 
Aims to improve land management and support decentralized land 
use planning 
▪ 
Geographical overlap in 3 provinces. Villages with land use plans 
supported by the LMPD project will be targeted by the GCF project. 
LMPD project does not support the implementation of the village 
management plans, the GCF project will fill this gap. 
Scaling-Up Participatory Sustainable 
Forest Management Project 
(SUPSFM) (2013-2022)  
WB/IDA   
USD 
39 
million 
▪ 
Aims to reduce carbon emissions through participatory sustainable 
forest management in priority areas and to pilot forest landscape 
management.  
▪ 
SUPSFM has had a strong focus on activities within production 
forests, which has informed the design of Projects 1 and 2. 
Lao Agriculture 
Competitiveness 
project (LACP) 2018-2024 WB  
USD 
29 
million 
▪ 
Aims to increase the competitiveness and sustainability of selected 
agricultural value chains. Geographical overlap is only in Sayabouri.   
▪ 
Strongly linked to Outputs 2.1 and 2.3, 2.2. World Bank will oversee 
the implementation of Activity 2.1.4, and regular communication will 
be ensured (including on lessons learned and best practices) 
Second Lao Environment & Social 
Project LENS II (2014-2022) WB/IDA, 
GEF, GoL  
USD 
42 
million 
▪ 
Aims to strengthen selected environmental protection management 
systems, such as protected areas conservation. Finance has been 
channelled through EPF. 
▪ 
LENSII contributes to capacity building of EFP - who will serve as 
an EE under GCF Project 2. As WB will oversee the implementation 
of Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2, regular communication will be 
facilitated. 
Climate Friendly Agricultural Value 
Chain Project (CFAVCP) (2018-2025) 
ADB  
USD 
41 
million 
▪ 
Aims to improve climate resilience of agricultural infrastructure, and 
improve crop productivity, diversification, and commercialization.   
▪ 
Projects are complementary, while the ADB project focuses on 
infrastructure 
and 
capacity 
development 
for 
farmers 
and 
agribusiness, the GCF project in Component 2 will focus on private 
sector involvement and incentives for investments in deforestation

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
free and climate resilient value chains. Coordination with ADB is 
secured through ADB’s role in implementing Activity 2.1.3. 
Strengthening Lao PDR's institutional 
capacity to comply with the Enhanced 
Transparency Framework under the 
Paris 
Agreement 
(2018-2024) 
Financed by GEF, with UNEP as the 
implementing agency 
USD 
1.39 
million 
▪ 
Aims to strengthen the national capacity to track progress against 
actions identified in its NDC for domestic and international reporting 
requirements under the Enhanced Transparency Framework of the 
Paris Agreement 
▪ 
Project has been consulted with to ensure there is no duplication 
between projects. Coordination on lessons learned from project 
implementation, and best practices for compliance with the ETS will 
be ensured. 
Strengthening the natural capacity of 
ecosystems to regulate water flows & 
limiting 
the 
exposure 
of 
local 
populations in vulnerable areas to 
climate 
effects 
(2019-2025) 
GCF 
project with UNDP (AE) 
USD 
12 
million 
▪ 
Aims to test an alternative approach to flood control in urban Lao 
PDR, moving away from a traditional focus on grey infrastructure and 
implementing EbA in urban areas.  
▪ 
Both projects will strengthen the adaptive capacities of the 
population, although one focuses on urban and the other rural 
populations  
Building the Capacity of the Lao PDR 
Government to Advance the National 
Adaptation Planning Process (2020-
2024) Financed by GEF, with UNEP as 
the implementing agency  
USD 
26 
million 
▪ 
To strengthen the institutional and technical capacity of stakeholders 
and the government in Lao PDR to advance the NAP process.  
▪ 
Outreach will be sought with UNDP and through the NDC to ensure 
lessons learned from the project can inform NAP development, and 
vice versa. 
Lao PDR Southeast Asia Disaster Risk 
Management Project (2017-2024) WB  
USD 
31 
million 
▪ 
To reduce the impacts of flooding in target areas and enhance the 
Government’s capacity to provide hydro-meteorological services and 
disaster response.  
▪ 
Will improve climate-information in country, especially related to the 
provision of hydro-meteorological services and disaster response. 
Cooperation will be sought to share relevant climate-related 
information to inform Activity 1.2.2 and Components 2 and 3.  
Business Assistance Facility II (BAF 
II), one of four components of the Lao 
PDR Competitiveness & Trade Project 
(2019-2024), Australian Aid, Irish Aid, 
USAID & the WB  
AUD 
6M; 
USD 
13 
million, EUR 
360,000  
▪ 
Aims to support eligible Lao companies to increase their competitive 
advantage, and thereby grow into more sustainable businesses.  
▪ 
BAFII aims to improve the business sector of the whole.  Component 
2 focuses on investments in low-emission and climate resilient value 
chains for agri-MSMEs.   
Strengthening Agro-climatic Monitoring 
& Information System (SAMIS) (2016-
2020) Financed by GEF, with FAO as 
the lead implementing agency   
USD 
22 
million 
▪ 
Aims to enhance monitoring, analysis, communication and use of 
agrometeorological data and information for decision making in 
relation to agriculture and food security at national and provincial 
levels. 
▪ 
SAMIS developed key tools that are referenced within Activity 
1.2.2.   
 
*Detailed summaries are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a) 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
B.2.1 Need for Project 2 
43. The ambitious objective of the overarching programme is to support the Government and people of Lao PDR in 
further changing the present-day use of forests and landscapes and to ensure a transition to sustainable and climate 
resilient management at scale. This will reduce approx.11.7 million tCO2eq over the duration of 7 years of Project 1 
and 2 and directly increase the resilience of more than 273.000 villagers.  
44. Project 1 developed a foundation for the transformational change in the project area (as described in B.1.1). 
However, to fully reach the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate resilient forest and land use practices, 
additional support is needed – as outlined in the programmatic approach within FP117 (see the scenario without 
Project 2 presented in  
45.  
46. Figure 9 below).  
47. Project 2 is complementary and additional to Project 1. Together both projects will facilitate a paradigm shift in the 
forestry and land use sector in Lao PDR that will be sustained by unlocking additional sources of results-based 
payments, as well as public and private finance managed through national funds and institutions with strengthened 
capacities for mobilizing and channelling climate finance (see D.2 for more detailed information). It has been designed 
to address the barriers described below in Chapter B.2.2 and builds on the progress and best practices from Project 
1.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
114 Annex 2c includes a summary table comparing Project 1 and 2. It highlights progress made with the implementation of Project 1, lessons 
learned and recommendations for project 2, and provides insight on the main adjustments/ changes under Project 2.  
115 Lao PDR 2021. The focus in the updated NDC is on conditional mitigation targets, however it notes that more detailed assessment of 
adaptation financing needs will be included within the sectoral adaptation strategies.  
116 Lao PDR 2021. Updated NDC. 
 
 
Figure 9: Scenario without Project 2 
 
B.2.2 Barriers for REDD+ and strengthening the resilience of ecosystems and local livelihoods114  
48. While the GoL is fully committed to implementing the policies and strategies mentioned under Chapter B.1 (and 
further elaborated in Chapter D.5), and moving towards low-emission and climate resilient development pathways, 
the following barriers need to be addressed with GCF support to ensure the success of the already initiated 
transformational change of the forestry and land use sector in the Lao PDR. 
▪ 
Barrier 1. Insufficient government resources and support for climate change adaptation and mitigation: 
The NDC (2021) continues to highlight the need for external support to enable the country to meet its conditional 
climate change targets.115 It specifically mentions the need to design “innovative financial mechanisms that can 
blend public and private capital as a means of mitigating risks and unlocking private sector investment in climate 
projects”.  There is a need to develop targeted incentives to mobilize private sector funding and enable them to 
invest in low-emission and climate resilient land management practices. Project 2, thus, needs to continue scale 
up efforts to mobilize and channel climate public and private climate finance.  
▪ 
Barrier 2. Synergies between REDD+, adaptation and local land use planning not realized due to limited 
capacities and weak coordination: REDD+ in Lao PDR has predominantly focused on mitigation, although 
there is substantial potential to improve adaptation outcomes and strengthen cross-cutting efforts for adaptation 
and mitigation within the context of REDD+. The updated NDC (2021) highlights the need to strengthen the 
linkages between climate change mitigation and adaptation in forest ecosystems, including improving the 
integration of adaptation considerations in forest planning and management. It further highlights the need for 
improved integrated land use planning, to ensure the dynamics between land management, climate change 
mitigation and climate resilience are considered. Such challenges in the public sector are accelerated due to 
weak cross-sectoral and vertical coordination among sectors and government levels and limited human 
resources to coherently implement and enforce regulations and programs.116 Project 1 was a mitigation only 
project, and thus Project 2 needs to strengthen cross-cutting synergies within project design related to measures 
in the agriculture and forestry sectors, and ensure adaptation is mainstreamed across outputs and activities.   
▪ 
Barrier 3. Structural deficiencies in law enforcement: There continues to bey weak policy coherence and 
cross-sectoral coordination: policies continue to place emphasis on land use activities that support economic 
growth (e.g. cash crop cultivation, energy, etc.), while policies to safeguard forests and strengthen resilience to 
climate change are not given the same prominence and are not widely enforced. Law enforcement agencies such

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
117 The approach was validated by GIZ and stakeholders from Project 1. For more information refer to the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a), and 
the stakeholder engagement plan (Annex 7).  
as the forest inspectorate are under-staffed and under-equipped, lacking up-to-date maps and GPS equipment, 
for example, and even lacking vehicles and budgets to travel to the field. Project 1 developed standard operational 
procedures and established Provincial Deforestation Monitoring Systems (PDMS) in 3 out of 6 provinces. 
Nonetheless, there is a need for continued support with capacity building for the operationalization of these 
systems, harmonizing local approaches for law enforcement, and scaling up PDMS and capacity building efforts 
to the additional 3 provinces covered under Project 2.  
▪ 
Barrier 4. Missing consideration of integrated planning within landscapes, which can increase climate 
change risk and vulnerability by not addressing linkages between land use in upstream and downstream 
areas: The absence of a clear classification and zoning of land uses and consequently a lack of tenure security 
in many villages is a major underlying cause for deforestation from shifting cultivation and expansion of 
unsustainable land use activities (e.g. expansion of annual monocropping activities). Uncertainty regarding land 
uses and border demarcation often leads to unclear rules and gradual encroachment into forests. Village-level 
participatory land-use plans need to be climate-informed, harmonized into larger scale village cluster (kumban) 
plans, considering watershed protection and biological corridors, and integrated into spatial planning exercises 
at district level in order to equilibrate upstream and downstream impacts, dynamics and interactions. This is 
particularly important for building resilience to climate change. Project 1 developed a comprehensive Participatory 
Land Use Planning process (PLUP 2.0), based on lessons learned from other land use planning processes piloted 
in Lao PDR, and is implementing this approach in 240 villages in 3 provinces. Additional support is needed to 
continue to replicate and scale this effective approach throughout the project area (all six provinces).117 
▪ 
Barrier 5. Insufficient practical experience and skills for implementing sustainable, deforestation free and 
climate resilient agricultural practices and technologies: Land use practices commonly applied in the project 
area are characterised by low productivity and cannot typically be considered ‘good agricultural practices’. 
Increased competition for commercial agricultural lands is shifting subsistence agriculture (upland rice etc.) and 
certain cash crops (e.g. maize, Job’s tears and cassava) to less suitable forested upland areas. Crop rotations 
and fallow periods for soil regeneration are reduced leading to loss of soil fertility and weed infestation. 
Consequently, producers seeking out more productive land turn to forest areas for the expansion of agricultural 
production, which is leading to further deforestation and forest degradation. Poor access to irrigation exacerbates 
the low productivity of agricultural production, as does the limited availability of government agricultural extension 
services. In addition, a reliance on few cash crops also increases farmers’ vulnerability to climate change (i.e. 
higher dependency on few crops, where their livelihoods can be greatly impacted by changes in climatic 
conditions and climate-related natural hazards). Rural farmers further lack access to agricultural extension 
services, and knowledge on climate change, sustainable practices, production alternatives as well as access to 
formal financial services to invest and improve land use. Consequently, poverty levels are high, and adaptive 
capacities are low (see also Chapter D.4). Project 1 developed an approach to facilitate the Promotion of 
Sustainable Agricultural Production (PSAP), which is being implemented in 240 villages in 3 provinces. Further 
support is needed to strengthen agricultural extension and capacities on climate change (related risks) and best 
practices for deforestation free and climate resilient agricultural practices, and ultimately scale up the PSAP 
approach throughout the entire project area.  
▪ 
Barrier 6. Limited incentives for local villagers and agri-Micro, Small and Medium enterprises (MSMEs) 
to adopt and invest in more sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free practices and support 
value chain development: Poverty and lack of alternative livelihood opportunities (e.g. off-farm employment) 
have resulted in a high dependence on land and forests for household income in the project area. Most of the 
rural population practice a mix of subsistence agriculture with marketing of selected cash crops to local traders 
and agri-MSMEs. These small private sector companies either market unprocessed commodities (e.g. maize, 
cassava, rubber, cardamom) to markets in China, Vietnam and Thailand depending on demand, or are involved 
in some kind of value addition. The current focus on low value raw products and the promotion of monocropping 
systems without sufficient quality management over the final products is indirectly fostering the expansion of 
unsustainable agricultural activities into forest zones. It further makes farmers particularly vulnerable to climate 
shocks, as they are dependent on non-diversified value chains with limited practices to strengthen their resilience 
against climate change. Value adding in terms of sorting, processing, packaging and general quality improvement 
by the local agri-MSMEs remains an exception. 
There is a notable absence of incentives (including financing opportunities) for villagers and for micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises to invest in sustainable forestry, agro-forestry, and climate resilient agriculture 
activities, due to the various factors, including (among others):  
o 
Many financial institutions in Lao PDR have limited penetration in rural areas, making it physically difficult 
for remotely located individuals and businesses to reach bank branches,  
o 
Some banks are highly reluctant to lend to MSMEs in general

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
118 For more detailed information on projects mitigation and adaptation benefits, refer to Chapters D.1 and E. 
119 Detailed project activities associated with each of the project outputs are presented in the Theory of Change in Chapter B.2, and are 
described in detail within Chapter B.3. Activities build on best practices in Lao PDR and Southeast Asia, and further reflect lessons learned 
from Project 1 and other related projects/ initiatives (as further described in the Feasibility Study Chapter 6.6 in Annex 2a).  
o 
Agri-MSMEs often do not even have bank accounts and many do not maintain reliable financial statements, 
which makes it very difficult for banks to understand the firm’s profitability, cash flows, and ability to meet 
loan repayments 
o 
Agri-MSMEs lack proper business and financial planning.  
o 
Micro enterprises tend to lack the financial literacy required to understand the types of lending products that 
are available, how to develop a business plan, and how to go through the process of applying for a loan.  
o 
Agri-MSMEs are also discouraged from applying for a bank loan if they are uncertain about their future 
revenue stream, or if they perceive that financial institutions do not cater to their type of business, or are 
unable or unwilling to comply with the Lao PDR’s high collateral requirements (typically land and buildings).   
Project 1 did not include a targeted activity to support agri-MSMEs on agricultural land, but instead focused on 
village-based agroforestry activities in production forest areas. Under Project 2 targeted support for engaging 
agri-MSMEs within broader agricultural value chains is needed to incentivize the adoption of more sustainable 
practices that enable this critical actor to support the development of climate resilient and deforestation free value 
chains.  
▪ 
Barrier 7. Insufficient practical experience and skills for implementing sustainable forest landscape 
management: Weak policy coherence and limited coordination between competing policy priorities is a key 
barrier to the sustainable management of Lao PDR’s forest resources, as is the illegal clearing and degradation 
of forested lands driven by inappropriate agricultural practices, insufficient land use planning and weak law 
enforcement (see above barriers). The new forest law includes provisions for villagers to economically benefit 
from the sustainable management of their forests, including through the sale of sustainably harvested forest 
products. While seen as a major advancement for local villagers and as an additional incentive for the sustainable 
management of village forests, there are often low timber stocks and limited experiences in supporting VFM 
groups with this commercial element (e.g. including mainstreaming this into VFM plans and ensuring adequate 
implementation and monitoring).  Project 1 mainstreamed FLR into VFM guidelines, and supported the 
implementation of sustainable village forest management in village forests and within national protected areas in 
3 provinces. Continued support is required under Project 2 to scale up the development and implementation of 
robust VFM plans and village forest conservation agreements, resulting in SFM and FLR, in all six provinces.  
B.2.3 Project 2 goal statement, outcomes, outputs and co-benefits 
49. Project 2 goal statement: If the capacities of government institutions and respective staff are strengthened to train, 
steer and effectively monitor forest and agricultural land management, village communities are capacitated and 
incentivized to implement (village) forest management plans and villagers and agri-MSMEs are trained in sustainable, 
climate informed and deforestation free agricultural value chains, then the resilience to climate change of forest and 
agroecosystems and the vulnerable village communities who depend on them will be increased because local 
communities will manage forests and agricultural land sustainably and benefit from improved, climate resilient 
agricultural production and sustainable forest management.   
50. Specifically, Project 2 is anticipated to result in emission reductions of approximately 4.6 million tCO2eq over its 
duration of 4 years, and strengthen the resilience of 273,700 direct beneficiaries and 2,100,000 ha of ecosystems.118  
 
51. Outcomes and outputs: The project builds on Project 1 and has been designed to address the aforementioned 
barriers to achieve its goal as well as the overarching programme objective. Project 2 is comprised of the following 
three outcomes and associated outputs and activities:119 
 
Table 3: Overview of Project 2’s outcomes, outputs and activities and their link to barriers addressed 
Outcome/ Output 
Activities 
Barriers 
addressed 
Outcome 1:  Governance and the implementation of low-emission and climate informed planning is strengthened, and 
sustainable financing sources are accessed 
Output 1.1 Organizational structure and capacities of domestic 
(financial) institutions are strengthened to access, mobilize, manage, 
and monitor the use of climate finance from diverse public and private 
sources 
Activity 1.1.1 Climate change funding 
window and sustainable finance 
1, 2 
Output 1.2 Participatory Village Land Use Plans are developed and are 
climate informed and integrate measures to strengthen climate 
resilience 
 
Activity 1.2.1 Law enforcement and 
monitoring  
1, 2, 3 
Activity 1.2.2 Land-use planning and 
improved tenure security 
1, 2, 4

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
120 Due to these adjustments, Project 2’s implementation process at village level has been slightly adjusted in terms of terminology and the 
additional role of EPF in channelling matching grants to agri-MSMEs. Chapters B.3 and B.4 provide more detailed information.  
121 Progress with the implementation of Project 1 and adjustments to the design of Project 2 are presented in tables throughout Section B.3 
under each activity, and an overview of the main changes can be found under Annex 2c. The project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
provides further information on how stakeholder feedback has been integrated into the project (Annex 7). 
Activity 1.2.3 Knowledge management, 
FPIC, safeguards and gender 
All  
Outcome 2: Vulnerabilities of villagers are reduced and their livelihoods are improved by being able to engage in climate 
resilient, deforestation free value chains and access to markets 
Output 2.1 Villagers are trained by capacitated government staff and 
enabled to produce sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation 
free agricultural and agroforestry products, strengthening their access 
to sustainability-oriented markets 
Activity 2.1.1 Promotion of sustainable, 
climate informed and deforestation 
free agricultural practices and 
technologies 
1, 2, 5, 6 
Activity 2.1.2 Investments in 
sustainable climate informed and 
deforestation free agricultural practices 
and agroforestry 
1, 2, 5, 6 
Activity 2.1.3 Sustainable rural 
infrastructure watershed management 
1, 2, 4, 5, 6 
Activity 2.1.4 Implementation of benefit 
sharing plan for sustainable, climate-
informed and deforestation free 
agriculture 
1, 2, 5, 6 
Output 2.2 Agri-micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) are 
capacitated, and have improved incentives and access to finance to 
invest in marketing and processing for locally sourced deforestation 
free and climate resilient agricultural products 
Activity 2.2.1 Catalysing private sector 
investments in sustainable climate-
informed and deforestation free value 
chains 
1, 2, 5, 6 
Outcome 3: Sustainable management, protection and rehabilitation of forest ecosystems is improved 
Output 3.1 Village Communities are trained by capacitated 
government staff and have the financial resources to implement 
sustainable (village) forest management plans that contribute to 
REDD+ and strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems and the 
livelihoods that depend on them 
Activity 3.1.1 Village forest 
management 
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 
7 
Activity 3.1.2 Implementation of benefit 
sharing plan for sustainable forest 
management (SFM) and forest 
landscape restoration (FLR) 
1-7 
Output 3.2 National Protected Area (NPA) management plans are 
revised and communities are enabled and actively engaged in 
implementing village forest conservation agreements in NPAs that 
enable sustainable forest management and forest conservation 
Activity 3.2.1 National protected area 
(NPA) management 
1-7 
 
52. In comparison, to Project 1 there have been some adjustments in the project design, including reflecting: 
▪ 
Progress made under Project 1, where some activities were successfully completed, including policy 
mainstreaming and improvements to the regulatory framework. These achievements will also lead to efficiency 
gains in the context of Project 2, where targeted efforts have strengthened capacities and the overall enabling 
environment (e.g. updated guidelines, built capacities, training modules, etc.). 
▪ 
The Government of Lao PDR’s updated NDC (2021), which highlights the need to create and strengthen clear 
links between adaptation co-benefits and climate change mitigation in the agriculture and forestry sectors.120 As 
such, the project has been re-positioned as a cross-cutting project, and the design adjusted to ensure adaptation 
is cross-cutting throughout the project’s activities. Attention is paid to strengthening the adaptive capacities of 
villagers through ensuring climate-informed land use planning and investing in climate-resilient and deforestation-
free agriculture and sustainable forest management. Adaptation and considerations for resilience building have 
been mainstreamed across all activities, and additional support provided to update guidance and build capacities 
on understanding and factoring in climate risk and building the resilience of ecosystems and the local livelihoods 
who depend on them.  
▪ 
EPF’s nomination by the NDC in Lao PDR to start the GCF accreditation process, where Project 2 will provide 
support as they undergo the accreditation process. 
▪ 
Lessons learned from Project 1 and other ongoing projects and initiatives, as well as stakeholder feedback. One 
example is the increased focus on agri-MSMEs and private sector, which was developed based on extensive 
consultations with private sector actors and other stakeholders.121

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
 
122 Additional SDG benefits associated with the project are described in Chapter D.3. 
53. Project 2 co-benefits: Project 2 aims to generate two main co-benefits, namely: 1) improved food security, and 2) 
enhanced conservation of biodiversity.122 Food security will be improved through improved participatory land use 
planning, and targeted support under Component 2 to promote climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural 
practices, while consciously strengthening farmers’ adaptive capacities and enhancing co-benefits related to food 
security and nutrition. Biodiversity will be strengthened through the project again through integrated PLUP, and 
through interventions in Component 2 and Component 3 that reduce deforestation and forest degradation and 
implement FLR in biodiversity hotpots, including National Protected Areas (NPAs) and national parks that provide 
important habitats for diverse species including the black gibbon, among others. Investments in NPs and NPAs will 
also strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems to better withstand climate-related hazards and changing climatic 
conditions, and enhance the protective function of these ecosystems. It will further strengthen the resilience of forest 
dependent communities, who will benefit from the enhanced provision of vital forest ecosystem services.    
54. Gender equality and social inclusion are also at the core of the project’s approach, and have been mainstreamed 
throughout all project activities, which are described in detail within Chapter B.3, D.3, G.1 and G.2. 
 
B.2.4 Assumptions and risks: 
55. The project design is based on the following assumptions: 
▪ 
National and sub-national government officers are committed to improve planning processes in a participatory 
manner with local communities, guide the implementation of forest management plans, support villagers in 
engaging in improved agricultural production, and enforce rules and regulations. 
▪ 
Agri- MSMEs are willing to develop sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural value chains, 
and collaborate with villagers in a fair and equal manner. 
▪ 
Vulnerable local communities are willing to implement jointly developed (village) forest management plans and 
engage with agri-MSMEs to shift current land and forest management practices. 
56. These assumptions are considered to be well founded, as they have been informed through detailed feasibility and 
market assessments (Annex 2a+j), a cooperative project development process together with the Government of Lao 
PDR and other project partners, as well as extensive stakeholder consultations conducted for the ER-Programme 
development, the development of the overarching programmatic approach under Project 1, and more recently during 
the Project 2 development process (see the Stakeholder Engagement Plan in Annex 7). 
57. Project risks related to technical and operational, credit, governance and legal risks, among others, are described in 
detail in Chapter F, and environmental and social risks are described within Chapter G.1. 
 
B.2.5 Theory of change diagram 
58. The following Figure depicts the project’s theory of change, integrating the elements from Chapters B.2.2-B.2.4 
above. Project activities are described in detail within Chapter B.3.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Project 2 theory of change

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
123 Note: The GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF) was developed after Project 1 was developed, and thus for Project 
2 there have been adjustments in the theory of change, logframe, numbering of activities, and some of the terminology (e.g. actions à sub-
activities). Hence, project 1 Output equals Component under project 2.   
124 Chapter 6.6 of the Feasibility Study (FP Annex 2a) includes detailed Activity Sheets, with detailed information for each activity.   
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 3 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
 
Project 2 consists of three components,123 as depicted in the following Figure 11.124  
Figure 11. Overall Project Overview 
 
 
59. In comparison to Project 1 there have been some changes in the project design, due to various reasons. 
Some activities were completed under Project 1, including policy mainstreaming, and improvements to the 
regulatory framework. These achievements will also lead to efficiency gains in the context of Project 2, 
where targeted efforts have strengthened capacities and the overall enabling environment (e.g. updated

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
125 Detailed FPIC procedure is provided in Annex 6d within the Ethnic Group Development Plan.  
126 Notable changes from FP117 include the removal of activities on mainstreaming REDD+ into the NDC and socio-economic development 
plans, and strengthening the regulatory framework – as both of these activities were completed under FP 117. Activity 1.6 under FP 117 
(implementation of MRV system) is still supported by JICA, however outside of Project 2. 
127 Outputs under GCF’s IRMF are “Changes delivered as a result of project/programme activities that contribute to the achievement of 
outcomes.” – GCF. 2022. Guidance Note to support the completion of the IRMF elements of the revised funding proposal template for PAP 
and SAP, p. ii. 
guidelines, built capacities, training modules, etc.). Other adjustments have been made to the project 
design to strengthen the role of private sector actors, and reflect lessons learned from project 
implementation. Progress with the implementation of Project 1 and adjustments to the design of Project 2 
are reflected throughout Section B.2 under each activity, while an overview of the progress under Project 
1, lessons learned and main adjustments made to project design under Project 2 can be found under 
Annex 2c. In addition, adjustments have been made to reflect the Government of Lao PDR’s updated NDC, 
which highlights the need to create and strengthen clear links between adaptation co-benefits and climate 
change mitigation in the agriculture and forestry sectors.  
60. Due to these reasons, Project 2’s implementation process at village level has been slightly adjusted in 
terms of terminology and the role of EPF who will channel matching grants to agri-MSMEs, as shown in 
the following Figure 12. It should be further noted that Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is at the 
core of the project’s approach, and is fully integrated into the project design within all three Components.125 
 
Figure 12: Project implementation process at village level 
 
B.1. Component 1: Creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation126 
61. Component 1 addresses barriers at the national and sub-national levels, including measures that aim to 
scale-up and ensure access to sustainable financing for the forest and land use sector (Activity 1.1.1), 
improve forest law enforcement and monitoring (Activity 1.2.1), scale-up climate-informed participatory 
land use planning and strengthen land tenure security (Activity 1.2.2). It further facilitates the 
implementation of cross-cutting measures related to knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and 
gender throughout the entire project.  
62. Policy mainstreaming support, and support for revising the regulatory framework have been completed 
under Project 1 and are not continued under Project 2. These achievements under Project 1 nonetheless 
help to create efficiency gains and facilitate replication and upscaling under Project 2.  
 
Output 1.1 127  Organisational structure and capacities of domestic (financial) institutions are 
strengthened to access, mobilize, manage, and monitor the use of climate finance from diverse public 
and private sources

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
128 Renamed from Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund  
 
Activity 1.1.1 - Climate Change Funding Window and sustainable finance: 
63. As described under Project 1, Lao PDR’s potential to raise substantial, long-term climate finance remains 
partly still untapped. While both, Project 1 and Project 2 are designed to support Lao PDR to unlock REDD+ 
results-based payments from the FCPF, Project 1 already established the Climate Change Funding 
Window hosted by the Environment Protection Fund (EPF).  
64. This activity under Project 2 will focus on continuing to support the strengthening of the enabling 
environment to facilitate the shift from business as usual agricultural and forest land management towards 
low-emission, deforestation free and climate resilient practices. It will support the GoL to further explore 
additional sources of public and private finance for both climate change adaptation and mitigation 
investments, in line with the country’s NDC (2021). Additional sources of finance may include (among 
others): alternative REDD+ results-based payments (e.g. under the UNFCCC) and markets, including the 
participation in voluntary market mechanisms or market mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris 
Agreement, domestic government revenues (fees, royalties, fines and taxes) and international impact 
investment attracted by the combination of climate and social benefits that the Lao forestry and agriculture 
sectors offer.  
65. Under this activity the capacities of the two existing Lao funds - the Forest Protection Fund128 and the EPF 
– to mobilize, channel and monitor sustainable climate finance will be further strengthened. This will 
contribute to ensuring the sustainable management and disbursement of existing climate finance sources 
as well as of potentially new ones (e.g. Climate Change Funding Window, REDD+ results-based payments 
under the FCFP, GCF, Adaptation Fund and other sources). For EPF, specific capacity development will 
also focus on the matching grant allocation and monitoring as well as in overall support for its accreditation 
process to the GCF.  
66. Together these activities will address the barriers related to insufficient government resources and support 
for climate change adaptation and mitigation. It will do so by developing the capacities of the two national 
funds to be able mobilize and manage climate finance for adaptation and mitigation and by supporting the 
NDA to identify suitable sources of long-term climate finance to meet the conditional targets of the country’s 
NDC.   
 
67. Sub-activity 1.1.1.1: Enhancing the capacities of EPF & FPF to manage and monitor climate finance, 
including results-based payments (EE: GIZ and GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance): Under this sub-
activity the capacities of the two existing Lao funds - FPF and the EPF, to mobilize, channel and monitor 
sustainable climate finance will be further strengthened. Specifically: 
a. FPF – Hosted under the Ministry of Agricultural and Forestry (MAF). The Decree on the Forest 
and Forest Resource Development Fund (No. 38/PM, 2005)112 “determines principles, 
regulations on the establishment, management and monitoring of the Forest  and Forest 
Resource Development Fund [since renamed FPF], aiming at raising funds  from people 
engaged in forestry operations so that funds can be used for management, protection and 
development of the forest resources and contributed to the national economic and social 
development”. The FPF, renamed from Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund 
(FFRDF), has a legal mandate to collect and disburse forest sector financing to the district and 
village levels. It funds forestry activities, including conservation and protection of watersheds 
and protected areas, tree planting, wildlife conservation and training. The FPF was originally 
(2019) the proposed Benefit Sharing Mechanism in the World Bank Project (FCPF Readiness 
Grant), however, the Government of Lao decided to disburse money through an alternative 
mechanism (National treasury) pending a due diligence assessment (see section F). During 
Project 1 development it was also explored channelling finance through the FPF, however it 
was determined FPF had insufficient capacities and systems in place to meet international 
fiduciary standards. As such, funds were channelled through EPF under Project 1. To be able 
to manage international climate finance, FPF requires significant support to strengthen 
fiduciary and managerial standards. The following activities can be conducted to strengthen 
the overall capacity with a view to strengthen the fund to be able to access and manage climate 
finance: 
68. Strengthen the operating model of the fund through leadership training for the FPF board (vision, mission, 
and operating model) 
69. Review of existing procedures to obtain fund staff and discussing with the Ministry how knowledgeable and 
competent staff can be hired directly in order to secure international funds from donors

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
70. A multi-year vision document including budgeting, size of funds and budget tracking tools must be created 
and implemented 
71. FPF had no proper IT system implemented as of 12/2021. Current operations are using Excel. There is a 
strong need to support the fund so that it can track expenses, disbursements, financial flows, and develop 
reports.  
a. EPF – Established in 2005, the EPF serves as a financially autonomous organization to 
strengthen environmental protection, sustainable natural resource management, biodiversity 
conservation and community development in Lao PDR. The resources of the EPF shall only 
be used to finance regular and recurrent expenses of ministries, departments, agencies and 
any other public or private organizations and entities receiving financial support from the EPF, 
where these expenses relate directly to the implementation of Eligible Activities.  Project 1 has 
supported the EPF in establishing the Climate Change Funding Window to channel funds from 
GCF and other climate finance. In addition, Project 1 is operating via the EPF, where EPF is 
responsible for the financial management and disbursement of grants to other beneficiaries 
under the Government of Laos (represented by MAF and MoNRE). EPF is undergoing the 
GCF accreditation process, and aims to become a Direct Access Entity (DAE). Thus, the 
project will also provide EPF with valuable experiences to strengthen their capacities and 
prepare them to develop, implement and monitor their own GCF projects in the future. EPF 
will also be exposed to an additional matching grant mechanism under Project 2, and this 
Activity will support them to build their capacities and facilitate them to operate and monitor a 
matching grant mechanism working with a larger number of private sector actors and focused 
on sustainable value chain development. Technical support for EPF will focus on: 
• 
Management and monitoring of matching grants (linked with Activity 2.2.1) in particular: 
the overall process flow for contracting, overall procurement, and financial process and 
monitoring of matching grant use.  
• 
Climate change adaptation – including the development of a climate policy, tools for 
climate risk screening, categorization, identification good operational practices for 
managing climate risks, and monitoring of adaptation impacts. 
• 
Overall support to better adhere to GCF fiduciary standards during the implementation of 
Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAG) and matching grants in preparation for its 
accreditation as a direct access entity  
72. A combination of GCF grants, and co-finance from BMZ and GoL will finance this sub-activity. GCF grants 
will help finance trainings for FPF on the aforementioned topics, and will further cover IT equipment for 
FPF and EPF (including computers, monitors and office supplies), staff costs for on-the-job training, local 
consultants to support with trainings, and related travel costs for advisors.  
 
73. Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Options assessment and action plan for securing long-term financing for NDC 
implementation in the AFOLU sector (EE: GIZ / GoL co-finance): This sub-activity will support the Lao 
PDR government to identify suitable new long-term climate finance from multiple sources. It will also 
support the government to assess the readiness actions necessary to be able to gain access to market-
based approaches that emerge in the context of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement – including support on 
decisions related to the eligibility of programs, projects, and units under the country’s NDC; adherence to 
relevant integrity principles; capacities to meet potential requirements related to an enhanced transparency 
framework and addressing issues related to corresponding adjustments.  Additionally, under this sub-
activity, the gaps and pathway to conformance with the requirements of the standards required by REDD+ 
voluntary initiatives will be assessed alongside options to allow Lao PDR to access results-based finance 
for ERs generated in excess of the FCPF Carbon Fund contract volume. This will include emerging market 
and non-market-based approaches (such as the Lowering Emissions by Accelerating Forest Finance 
Coalition or broader voluntary carbon markets). Finally, support will be provided to Lao PDR in exploring, 
identifying, and fundraising from funding sources (e.g. Adaptation Fund) that support the Lao PDR 
government with financial backing for meeting the conditional NDC implementation targets and adaptation 
investment needs. The NDA and DCC (Department of Climate Change) will be supported to mobilize and 
channel climate finance to enable the Lao PDR to fulfil its ambitious NDC. 
74. GCF grants and GoL co-finance will cover this sub-activity. GCF grants will be utilized to hire national and 
international experts to conduct the options assessment and develop the action plan, in addition to covering 
travel costs for experts.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
129 All knowledge (revisions to roles, clarified reporting chains) will be clearly documented and disseminated using diverse communication 
approaches (written, oral presentations, posters, and radio programs) to reach a diverse audience. Where appropriate, materials will be 
translated into local languages. This will ensure that the knowledge and procedures remain within organizations even if staff change.  
130 PDMS have been set up in Project 1 in Houaphan, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri. They have not yet been set up in Bokeo, Luang Namtha 
and Oudomxay. Capacities in Lao PDR remain low, and additional support is necessary to support Government staff working on law 
enforcement and forest monitoring to operationalize PDMS. 
131 The PDMS approach was developed by JICA under their F-REDD programme. Project 1 found the approach to be suitable.  
132 Necessary Equipment requirements are 1 laptop PC with internet environment for Province and a tablet for field investigation per District. 
Need Basic computer and mobile device skill (it does not require technical knowledge and skills on GIS and satellite image analysis). 
Output 1.2 Participatory Village Land Use Plans are developed and are climate informed and integrate 
measures to strengthen climate resilience 
 
Activity 1.2.1 – Law enforcement and monitoring:  
75. Strengthened law enforcement is a key measure needed to support Lao PDR’s commitment to REDD+, as 
well as other high-level initiatives including PMO 15 and the FLEGT-VPA. As mentioned in B.2, illegal 
logging and unauthorized clearing of forest land still exist and are a challenge for provincial and district 
authorities to address due to limited budgets and technical capacities as well as understaffing.  
76. Project 1 supported the revision of standard operating procedures, the strengthening of systems, and 
provided trainings on Provincial Deforestation Monitoring Systems (PDMS), while supporting the 
implementation of PDMS in 3 provinces (Houaphan, Sayabouri, Luang Prabang). It further strengthened 
the regulatory framework, supporting revisions in the Decree on Protected Areas (ongoing), Forestry 
Strategy 2021-2035 the National REDD+ Strategy (April 2021), technical guidelines for village forest 
management planning (June 2021), among others, which have created a stronger basis for reducing 
deforestation and forest degradation – including forest law enforcement and monitoring. Project 1 
implementation has shown the current approach to strengthen law enforcement and monitoring is effective 
and well-tailored to the local context. However, despite the advancements under Project 1, continued 
support is needed to address outstanding barriers related to forest law enforcement and monitoring. 
77. Project 2 will build on the aforementioned achievements under Project 1, and will continue to train relevant 
monitoring and law enforcement staff, especially the Department of Forest Inspection and its sub-national 
line agencies, in all six provinces (Sub-Activity 1.2.1) , scale PDMS to the three other provinces within the 
ER-Programme area (Sub-Activity 1.2.2), and support the harmonization of local approaches and improve 
knowledge management for strengthened law enforcement (Sub-Activity 1.2.1.3).  
 
78. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1: Training to facilitate implementation of enhanced law enforcement (EE: GIZ 
and GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance): Relevant government staff, including Department of Forest 
Inspection staff and their respective sub-national line agencies among others will be trained using detailed 
and consistent information on PDMS and best practices for forest monitoring and law enforcement. 
Trainings will focus on members of rapid response teams, including staff within DAFO, PAFO, PONRE, 
DONRE, DOFI staff and their respective sub-national line agencies in all six provinces trained on SOPs, 
PDMS and best practices for forest monitoring and law enforcement. Training modules and information will 
be developed by the project and used for training and knowledge exchange, including educating new staff. 
It will train staff on standard operating procedures and best practices, building on current advancements 
under Project 1, ensuring a consistent standard for law enforcement is applied across the ER-Programme 
area.129 
79. Both GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ and GoL will finance this sub-activity. GCF grants will be used 
to finance equipment for ICT and monitoring technology for each province’s PDMS (GPS, communication 
devices, computers for remote sensing), and will cover costs for workshops and meetings between 
government agencies at the provincial and district level on enhanced law enforcement, PDMS and SOPs, 
as well as awareness raising campaigns on updated forestry laws and regulations.  
 
80. Sub-activity 1.2.1.2: Operationalization of provincial deforestation monitoring system (PDMS) (EE: 
GIZ and GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance)): This sub-activity will support the development and 
operationalization of the PDMS in the 3 additional provinces covered under Project 2 (Bokeo, Luang 
Namtha and Oudomxay), and the continued operationalization of PDMS’s in Project 1 provinces as it 
expands to cover additional villages (Sub-Activity 1.2.1). 130 This will involve on-the-job training and 
technical support for Provincial Deforestation Monitoring Teams, who will be set up in each Province.    
81. PDMS involves near real-time deforestation monitoring.131 It is a remote-sensing based tool combined with 
field verification to monitor land use and forest change within village forest boundaries using Sentinel 2 
Satellite imagery. It has been designed considering the local context, and involves a user friendly approach 
with minimal equipment.132 It involves the following main steps:

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
133 E.g. Standard operating procedures (SOPs), improved investigative procedures, whistle-blower systems and improved anti-corruption 
safeguards established under Project 1. 
134 Feedback from Project 1 highlighted there was a need for improved harmonization of approaches and sharing of best practices, lessons 
learned and experiences from across the six provinces. 
82. Extraction and display of deforestation areas: Provides a weekly deforestation monitoring using Google 
Earth Engine (GEE) Script in Web Application online within PDMS (take 1 – 2 Days). The result are 
REFERENCE (before) and TARGET (after) satellite images, where the Forest Loss Area can be semi-
automatically displayed on Web-application running on a computer. Based on this information, POFI/PAFO 
staff select the site for field investigation based on the Forest Loss Area from GEE and register the site 
polygons and send it to the tablet for the onsite verification. 
83. On-site verification/ administrative guidance: Based on the deforestation area displayed on the tablet, 
DFIU/DAFO staff investigate the area where deforestation occurred in the field together with villagers. They 
will record the information on deforestation area in the tablet. Following send the information from ODK to 
Sever in the Forest Inventory and Planning Division (FIPD). 
84. Reporting and information management: The input data on the tablet is semi-automatically transferred 
to the National Forest Monitoring Systems (NFMS) server, which then creates the reporting and statistical 
information for each level. 
85. Procedures, tools and best practices for the PDMS and forest law enforcement will be applied based on 
advancements of Project 1,133 ensuring operational PDMS follow a clear standard for monitoring and law 
enforcement.  
 
Figure 13: Overview of Provincial Deforestation Monitoring Systems 
 
 
86. A combination of GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ and GoL will finance this sub-activity. GCF grants 
will cover on-the-job training (subsidiary agreement for training POFI and DFIU on GIS/ mapping and the 
operationalization of PDMS.), the development and dissemination of materials (e.g. regulations, guidelines 
for DOFI, POFI and DFIU), meeting/ training costs and related travel costs for POFI, DOFI and law 
enforcement teams to execute monitoring of forest law enforcement in the target provinces.    
 
87. Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Harmonization of approaches and improvement of knowledge management for 
strengthened law enforcement (EE: GIZ and GoL / BMZ co-finance): This sub-activity facilitates the 
harmonization of approaches for local law enforcement across the project area. 134 Specifically, it will 
support knowledge exchange workshops and finance ongoing knowledge management measures to 
ensure approaches are harmonized and lessons learned are fed back into training, guidance materials and 
PDMS design and management.  
88. GCF grant finance and co-finance from BMZ will be utilized to implement this sub-activity. GCF grants will 
cover annual national and provincial workshops for harmonization of approaches and knowledge sharing. 
  
Activity 1.2.2: Land use planning and improved tenure security:

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
135 Land use planning in Lao PDR builds on over 20 years of experience in donor-funded projects (e.g. KfW, GIZ, German AgroAction and 
SIDA, Tabi, AgriSud, among others) and national initiatives to conduct land use planning. The detailed PLUP guideline, developed under 
Project 1 (included as FP Annex 2h, p. 4), provides an overview of how lessons learned from other land use planning processes has been 
integrated into the current guideline. In addition, the guideline incorporates the “Common Principles as a Guiding Framework for Land Use 
Planning at Village Level” that were published by the Lao National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute (NAFRI) in June 2017. More 
detailed information on the PLUP process is included in Chapter 6.6 of the Feasibility Study.  
89. Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) is an essential prerequisite and forms the base for Village Forest 
Management Plans (VFMPs), FLR, watershed protection activities (with a focus on EbA) and the Promotion 
of climate resilient, sustainable and deforestation free agricultural practices (PSAP). The leading agencies 
for the land use planning activities at national level are the Department of Forestry (DoF), the Department 
of Agricultural Land Management (DALaM), both under Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the 
Department of Land (DoL) under Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE). At provincial 
and district level, the supervision, coordination and implementation of land use planning is shared between 
PAFO and PoNRE or DAFO and DoNRE respectively.  
90. Project 1 supported the development of an improved PLUP process (i.e. PLUP 2.0), which clarifies village 
boundaries, categorizes and separates agricultural land use from forest zones, defines future land use 
changes taking into consideration traditional knowledge, strengthens village forest and land management 
and leads to clearly defined village land use regulations.135 All PLUP 2.0 documents need approval by the 
majority of villagers and are officially approved by the District Governor. This activity under Project 2 will 
support the development of a “climate change adaptation supplement” to the PLUP 2.0 guideline and 
related capacity building efforts, building on the updated guidance developed under Project 1 while 
strengthening the use of climate information and climate change adaptation measures within PLUPs. It will 
further ensure the scaling up of this strengthened PLUP 2.0 process in all six provinces (240 villages in 
Bokeo, Oudomxay and Luang Namtha, and 50 villages in Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang). In 
addition, PLUP 2.0 will also lead to broader discussions within adjacent villages and village clusters, 
focusing on land use compatibility (including upstream and downstream dynamics), ecosystem-based 
adaptation to strengthen resilience to flooding (e.g.  riverbank stabilization, riparian buffer zone restoration), 
forest and landscape restoration, and the design and designation of eco-corridors.  
 
91. Sub-Activity 1.2.2.1: Mainstreaming climate change adaptation into land use planning manuals and 
guidelines, and training provincial core PLUP trainers on climate risk and vulnerability and suitable 
interventions to strengthen climate resilience (EE: GIZ and GoL – KfW co-finance (implemented by 
GoL) GoL and BMZ co-finance): This sub-activity will focus on mainstreaming climate change adaptation 
within the PLUP 2.0 process, through the development of an “adaptation supplement”, which can be 
integrated within the PLUP 2.0 process and guideline  building on the critical advancements made under 
Project 1, including capacity building efforts of provincial and district PLUP teams. Adaptation 
considerations, including from the results of the project’s climate risk and vulnerability assessment (see 
Feasibility Study for summary of results) will be mainstreamed into both the training materials, informative 
materials for villagers, as well as in monitoring processes.  
92. This sub-activity will be covered by GCF grants and co-finance from GoL and KfW. GCF funds will cover 
planning and coordination workshops for PPMUs and DPMUs to implement the activity, ICT equipment to 
support PLUP implementation and knowledge management (laptop, monitor, office supplies), the 
development and dissemination of informational and training materials, and training costs for PLUP teams. 
 
93. Sub-Activity 1.2.2.2: PLUP in target project districts (linked with Activity 1.2.1 and Components 2 
and 3) in hotspot areas (EE: GIZ and GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance): Under this sub-activity PLUP 
will be implemented in 290 villages to improve planning to increase the efficiency, resilience and 
productivity of land use, while also promoting the sustainable management of forest areas. The PLUP 
approach will follow the PLUP 2.0 guideline (initially developed under Project 1), and adaptation 
supplement (developed under Sub-Activity 1.2.2.1). This sub-activity will focus on the implementation of 
PLUP in target districts, while sub-activity 1.2.2.3 will focus on the monitoring and enforcement of these 
plans (a summary of the PLUP process can be accessed in the activity sheet in the Feasibility Study).  
94. PLUP is comprised of the following steps (described in detail in FS Chapter 6.6): i) preparation ii) village 
orientation meetings, iii) socio-economic, land and forest data collection, iv) current land use and forest 
cover mapping, v) future land use management zones, vi) village regulations, vii) final meetings, 
documentation, approval and data storage, viii) link to subsequent activities (PSAP and VFM), ix) 
monitoring and evaluation (covered under Sub-Activity 1.2.2.3 below).   
95. Dedicated and fixed PLUP Teams will be set up in every target district, composed of trained DAFO and 
DoNRE technicians. District PLUP Teams will be trained by provincial level core trainers and GIZ experts 
in all six provinces on the PLUP 2.0 process and climate change adaptation supplement.  The team of

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
136 e.g. Bokeo, Luang Namtha, and Oudomxay 
provincial supervisors will report directly on PLUP activity progress to the PPMU and NPMU, will be directly 
responsible for an initial quality control of PLUP reports and will coordinate all monitoring activities. 
Additional quality control will be conducted by GIZ experts. 
96. This sub-activity will be implemented using GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ and GoL. GCF grants 
will finance a service provider to conduct PLUP implementation and train village land use and forest 
management committees, travel costs for DAFO and DONRE to conduct PLUP, equipment for conducting 
PLUP (materials for boundary demarcation – sign boards, metal signs, ropes, GPS, soil testing kits - for 
12 districts), and equipment maintenance and fuel costs.  
 
97. Sub-Activity 1.2.2.3: Monitoring and enforcement of land use plans (EE: GIZ and GoL / GoL and 
BMZ co-finance): Once land use plans are established (under Sub-Activity 1.2.2.2) and under 
implementation, they need to be monitored and enforced to ensure compliance with planned land use. 
However, in practice the lack of capacities, equipment and budget often limit monitoring and enforcement, 
which can then lead to unplanned / unapproved clearing of forested areas. This sub-activity will support 
ongoing monitoring (forest-related enforcement linked with Activity 1.2.1), supported by technical 
assistance, capacity building and equipment procurement, closely aligned with the implementation of 
activities under Components 2 and 3.  
98. GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ and GoL will be used for the implementation of this sub-activity. GCF 
grants will cover travel costs for the execution of monitoring and evaluation in the target villages and 29 
districts. 
 
Activity 1.2.3: Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender: 
99. This activity will facilitate comprehensive communication and exchange of information about topics of 
relevance for land users, policymakers and the broader public to understand the purpose and benefits of 
REDD+, climate risks and best practices for climate risk reduction in the agriculture and forestry sectors, 
and the need for behavioural change of business-as-usual land use. This activity will further ensure 
compliance with FPIC and safeguards through supporting the implementation of the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP, Annex 6b) and Gender Action Plan (GAP, Annex 8a). Implementation 
shows the current approach under Project 1 effective and well-tailored to the local context in the project 
area. As such, Project 2 will follow the same approach as project 1, and no substantial changes are 
envisaged.  
 
100. Sub-Activity 1.2.3.1: Knowledge management and communication (EE: GoL): Under this sub-activity 
lessons learned will be captured and information sharing will be conducted at the political level to inform 
national stakeholders and policymakers on Project 2 progress and to share key lessons that can support 
the effective implementation of REDD+ at the national level. Relevant education materials will also be 
produced for a wide array of stakeholders on REDD+, climate resilient agriculture, and sustainable land 
management. In addition, 3 campaigns on awareness-raising of laws and the regulatory framework 
pertaining to the forestry and agricultural sectors (closely linked to the strengthened regulatory framework 
supported under project 1), on REDD+ awareness will be carried out targeting local media (local 
newspapers in all target districts in the 3 additional provinces included under Project 2).136  
101. This sub-activity will be financed through GCF grants, and will cover service providers for information 
dissemination and IT services (e.g. website services), awareness raising campaigns on climate change 
risk and adaptation and mitigation, REDD+, revisions to the regulatory framework, and gender equality and 
social inclusion (GESI), among other topics. Subsidiary agreements will also be established to support 
monitoring of field activities in close cooperation with NPMU and PPMU. 
 
 
102. Sub-activity 1.2.3.2: Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender Action Plan (GAP), and ensuring compliance with FPIC and safeguards (EE: GIZ and GoL / 
GoL co-finance): The ESMP is provided in Annex 6b; the Gender Assessment is provided in Annex 8a; 
the GAP is provided in Annex 8b. 
103. This sub-activity will be financed through GCF grants and GoL co-finance. GCF grants will cover subsidiary 
agreements to implement the ESMP and GAP, support FPIC, continued stakeholder consultations and 
awareness raising events, as well as staff costs.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
137 This was calculated considering the following assumptions: the average landholding of upland dependent families is of 1.2 hectares. The 
project will be able to support PSAP implementation on an average of 50 upland dependent families per village in 290 villages through the 
VFAG initial payment and the bonus payment (this would come to a total of 14,500 families with approximately 17,400 hectares in total). 
The VFAG initial payment will be on average of EUR 10,800 and can reach at least 27 families with EUR 400 for PSAP implementation 
(under project 1 there have been 29-30 families accessing PSAP funding under VFAGs).It is assumed that villages will receive a bonus 
performance-based payment averaging EUR 10,000 and that 65% of that bonus payment will be channeled to PSAP activities and support 
an additional 20 upland dependent families.  
138 In the original design of Project 1, Output 2 focused on the promotion of Good Agricultural Practices according to FAO’s approach. Intensive 
training of farmers on the Good Agricultural Practices methodologies was to be undertaken with funding for the promotion of Good Agricultural 
Practices activities to be provided under the existing Village Development Fund (VDF) System. However, early assessments and reviews of 
in-country experiences showed that this originally intended approach was no longer feasible and required further adaptation to achieve the 
project’s objectives. The initial envisaged approach focusing on good agricultural practices, while still relevant for many crops cultivated in 
Lao PDR, needed to be complemented by a specific definition of deforestation free agricultural practices which the project would directly 
support. Furthermore, the real target groups for Output 2 needed to be better defined (upland farmers, mostly practicing rotational shifting 
cultivation). Consequently, a more specific approach to promote sustainable agricultural practices (PSAP), and a White List defining all 
technical deforestation free models to be promoted by the project were developed under Project 1. The PSAP Guidelines were drafted with 
all 6 target provinces in mind, and the White List combines deforestation free agricultural models applicable throughout Northern Lao PDR 
(thus applicable for both projects 1 and 2). 
139 PSAP activities will be planned and budgeted in one plan/whole project and approved by the district governor. PSAP activities may be 
implemented in a certain period only, in which the registered households need the grant during the same period.  
B.3.2. Component 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation: Implementation of 
sustainable and deforestation free agricultural practices (on 17,400 ha)137  
104. Component 2 addresses key drivers of deforestation and forest degradation and contributes to delivering 
emission reductions through reducing the expansion of agricultural activities into forested landscapes. It 
addresses deforestation and forest degradation through the Promotion of Sustainable Agricultural 
Practices (PSAP) and the definition of 31 sustainable farming models in a “White List”. These farming 
models also include aspects of adaptation to climate change through selection of robust crop varieties, the 
promotion of intercropping, mixed cropping and agroforestry systems, and the adoption of low-emission 
processing methods applied by farmers. By promoting various farming models, the project also aims to 
support agricultural diversification, which will build the resilience of smallholder farmers – who are often 
dependent on one or two climate-sensitive crops (e.g., upland maize). Project 2 will see a continuation of 
the implementation of the PSAP approach and the associated “White List”, with funding from the VFAGs 
developed under Project 1. PSAP activities will simply be scaled up to an additional 290 villages (240 in 
Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay and 50 additional villages in Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang 
Prabang).  
105. In contrast to the initial conceptualization under Project 1138, Component 2 now includes a stronger focus 
on agricultural value chains, private sector actors, and market-solutions for agricultural drivers of 
deforestation. it builds on recent in-country experiences and studies that note the relevance of engaging 
with and strengthening the capacities of agri-MSMEs to invest in the development of climate resilient, 
deforestation- free and low-emission agricultural value chains.  Only if the private sector further develops 
its potentials in processing and marketing of relevant and sustainably produced commodities, can access 
available sources of finance, and enters into long-term marketing relationships with the local producers, 
will the sustainability of these investments be achieved. To foster private sector involvement, a select 
number of companies will be accompanied in terms of business management and planning, access to 
finance for investments in processing, packaging, and marketing capacities. Matching grants by Project 2 
channelled through EPF will aim facilitate access to finance for agri-MSMEs and increase overall 
investments in the development of sustainable deforestation free, low-emission and climate resilient value 
chains.  
 
Output 2.1 Villagers are trained by capacitated government staff and enabled to produce sustainable, 
climate resilient and deforestation-free agricultural and agroforestry products, strengthening their 
access to sustainability-oriented markets 
 
Activity 2.1.1:  Promotion of sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices 
and technologies: 
106. This activity will scale up the Promotion of Sustainable and deforestation free agricultural Practices and 
Value Chains (PSAP) approach to 12 districts in Bokeo, Luang Namtha, and Oudomxay with a total of 240 
selected target villages and expanding the programme reach to 50 additional villages in Houaphan, 
Sayabouri and Luang Prabang. It will do so by developing capacities of DAFO and PAFO on sustainable, 
climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices and technologies (Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1), 
replicating the PSAP planning approach in 290 villages (sub-activity 2.1.1.2), and supporting the 
implementation of the PSAP agricultural activity and investment plan (Sub-Activity 2.1.1.3). 
107. The technical approach for this Activity, focused on PSAP approach,139 has been tested and refined in

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
140 More detailed information on the specific capacity building needs and measures is available in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a).  
141 Following the project’s FPIC approach, outlined in greater detail in ESMP Annex 6b.  
142 The terms shifting cultivation, swidden, and rotational agriculture are all used to refer to a farming system in which relatively short periods 
of cultivation are followed by relatively long periods of fallow. Where population density and agricultural/economic activity has not changed, 
such systems have often been stable for centuries. When changes occur, however, expansion into thitherto uncultivated natural areas takes 
place (pioneering shifting cultivation), often in conjunction with shortened rotational cycles. In consequence, not only does this lead to 
increased deforestation, but the fertility of existing plots also diminishes over time, requiring further opening-up of new agricultural areas. 
This can lead to a destructive spiral of large-scale deforestation. From: Carl Folke, Johan Colding, (2001). Traditional Conservation 
Practices. (ed. Simon Asher Levin). Encyclopaedia of Biodiversity, Elsevier, Pages 681-694, 
143 Funds to procure whitelist products (materials and seeds) will be coordinated with PSAP and VFAG district teams (staff) to ensure that all 
products are procured and report correctly to EPF. This will be closely monitored by project staff and EPF. 
Project 1. Sustainable, climate resilient, and deforestation free practices are promoted among target 
beneficiaries (mostly swidden upland farmers) through the use of a “White List”, which defines suitable 
deforestation free farming models. Some adjustments have been made based on the lessons learned from 
Project 1 specifically focused on strengthening climate change adaptation within the approach (building on 
improved climate-informed planning under Activity 1.2.2). It is also closely linked to activity 2.1.2. The 
funding for the implementation of the PSAP investment plans developed and implemented under this 
activity will be channelled through the VFAGs established under activity 2.1.2.  
 
108. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1 Capacity building and knowledge management for sustainable, climate 
resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices and technologies (EE: GIZ, GoL – IFAD co-
finance (implemented by GoL) / GoL and BMZ co-finance): This sub-activity will mainstream adaptation 
considerations into PSAP training materials through the development of an adaptation supplement.  It will 
also provide training to PSAP teams (comprised of PAFO and DAFO staff) in the 12 new districts of the 3 
Project 2 provinces (Bokeo, Luang Namtha, and Oudomxay) focused on sustainable, climate resilient and 
deforestation free agriculture to facilitate the implementation of the PSAP planning (Activity 2.1.1.2) and 
implementation (2.1.1.3) processes while ensuring implemented practices are among the most suitable for 
the given climatic and environmental conditions, and household priorities (building the resilience of local 
livelihoods and agro-ecosystems).140  
109. GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ, IFAD and GoL will be used for the implementation of this sub-
activity. GCF grants will cover the development of information materials for training trainers, travel costs 
for training trainers within the project provinces and districts on climate-resilient and deforestation-free 
agriculture. 
 
110. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2 Scaling of PSAP planning approach to 290 villages (EE: GIZ and GoL / BMZ co-
finance): After villages have been identified and have undertaken the PLUP 2.0 process (Activity 1.2.2),141 
trained PSAP teams (Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1) will start the PSAP planning process village by village. Under 
Project 2, this process will be conducted in 290 target villages. As in Project 1, the approach aims 
specifically at replacing deforestation-prone practices, such as pioneering and rotational shifting 
cultivation142, with more diversified and climate resilient agricultural production on selected plots where 
customary land use rights are established. The primary impact pathway is to break the cycle of shortening 
regenerative fallows and resulting soil fertility degradation, leading to lower yields and ultimately the need 
to compensate for these by opening up new cultivation areas. Based on the PSAP Guidelines developed 
under Project 1, farmers, prioritizing women-led and young families, will be offered suitable choices from 
the “White List”) and will be supported in finding the option that best fits their circumstances (for a detailed 
description of the step-by-step PSAP planning process see the activity sheet in the Feasibility Study). 
111. This sub-activity will be covered by GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ. GCF funds will support 
preparation, printing and dissemination of training and informational materials for farmers, and will fund 
PSAP planning at the village level (including travel costs for DAFO staff members to visit the villages with 
5-6 days per village).  
 
112. Sub-Activity 2.1.1.3 Implementation of PSAP Agricultural Activity and Investment Plan (EE: GIZ and 
GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance): The implementation of the PSAP plans will ultimately depend on the 
farmers who have registered with the PSAP team. PSAP teams will provide support to farmers, mainly 
consisting in the provision of information (see Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2) and ongoing extension and technical 
support during the implementation of the agricultural activity and investment plan (see Table 4 for a subset 
of and “White List” farming models and their adaptation and mitigation benefits; the full list of models is 
included in the Feasibility Study). Farmer commitment during implementation (see Activity 2.1.2) will 
incentivized through performance-based bonus payments (hereby referred to as bonus payments) and a 
second funding cycle and facilitated via extension support. This will consist in regular follow-up visits to 
support villagers with potential difficulties in the implementation of White Listed farming models.143

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
144 Detailed information interventions can be found in the Technical Extension Sheet for each PSAP Practice. Overall, the integration of climate 
information in the land use planning process and within PSAP investment plans will further enable improved agricultural land use planning 
that ensures selected production systems are suitable for the local climate and context. In addition, implementation of PSAP practices will 
benefit from landscape level planning and interventions under Component 3 that facilitate the restoration and sustainable management of 
forest lands, enabling the implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation practices that strengthen the overall resilience of forest 
ecosystems (providing key protective functions that also help safeguard agricultural lands, and reduce impacts such as flooding or 
sedimentation risks).  
145 Johnston, R. (2010). Rethinking agriculture in the Greater Mekong Subregion: how to sustainably meet food needs, enhance ecosystem 
services and cope with climate change. IWMI. 
146 Maniphousay, V. (2022). Climate Change Adaptation in Lao PDR. In Climate Change Adaptation in Southeast Asia (pp. 77-102). Springer, 
Singapore. 
147 IPCC, 2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land 
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-
Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, 
J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press. 
148 Trisurat, Y., Aekakkararungroj, A., Ma, H. O., & Johnston, J. M. (2018). Basin-wide impacts of climate change on ecosystem services in 
the Lower Mekong Basin. Ecological research, 33(1), 73-86. 
149 EcoLao (2012). Scoping Assessment of Climate Change Adaptation Priorities in the Lao PDR. Regional Climate Change Adaptation 
Knowledge Platform for Asia, Partner Report Series No. 6. Stockholm Environment Institute, Bangkok. Available online at 
www.asiapacificadapt.net or www.weADAPT.org. 
150 Lefroy, R., Collet, L., & Grovermann, C. (2010). Study on potential impacts of climate change on land use in the Lao PDR. 
151 IPCC, 2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land 
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-
Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, 
J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press. 
152 Johnston, R. (2010). Rethinking agriculture in the Greater Mekong Subregion: how to sustainably meet food needs, enhance ecosystem 
services and cope with climate change. IWMI. 
 
Table 4: Selection of “White List” farming models and their adaptation and mitigation benefits  
 
Threat / Climate 
Risk 
Climate Change (CC) impacts and 
proposed interventions 
Adaptation benefits144 
Mitigation benefits 
Coffee 
Intensification 
and 
increase of extreme 
events 
(floods, 
droughts, storm) 
 
Increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
(especially in the dry 
season) 
 
Changing 
production 
zones 
due to increasing 
temperatures 
(vertical 
shifts 
in 
ecosystems)145 
 
CC Impacts: Arabica coffee needs to 
be planted above 800-900 m.a.s.l. In 
Northern Lao PDR some plantations 
can be found as low as 600, m.a.s.l. 
With increases in 
annual 
mean 
temperature 146 the climatic suitability 
decreases gradually. There is high 
confidence about intensification of 
heatwaves 
in 
frequency 
and 
duration147 leading to decreased yield 
and increasing the potential for pest 
infestation.2The 
alternation 
of 
precipitation patterns due to changing 
climatic conditions, leads to water 
yield deficiency.148   
 
Interventions: 
Coffee plantation under shade trees 
as a multi-storey agroforestry system, 
diversification 
resulting 
in 
lower 
fertilizer input 
Improved planning and watershed 
management at a landscape or basin 
level 
and 
increasing 
irrigation 
efficiency, increased soil fertility due to 
diversification of crops. 
Benefits: 
▪ 
Soil 
protection, 
stabilization 
and 
erosion 
control 
(reducing 
sedimentation, 
losses of water, soil 
material, 
organic 
matter 
and 
nutrients)  
▪ 
Arabica 
coffee 
variety 
planted 
>800m is adapted to 
increasing 
rainfall 
and temperatures.,   
▪ 
Increased efficiency 
of innovation149  
▪ 
Micro-climate 
buffering  
▪ 
Income 
diversification, 
reduces risk of total 
crop failure 
Benefits:  
▪ 
Higher 
GHG 
sequestration.  
▪ 
Increases in soil 
organic carbon 
 
▪ 
Mitigation 
of 
GHG emissions 
from 
lower 
quantities 
of 
fertilizer use. 
Rubber 
Intensification 
and 
increase of extreme 
events 
(droughts, 
storm) 
Intensification 
of 
pest infestation  
 
CC Impacts: Studies suggest that the 
changing bioclimatic suitability for 
Rubber until 2050 is positive, resulting 
in 
a 
wider 
range 
for 
rubber 
plantations150. Nevertheless, it is worth 
noting, 
that 
with 
increasing 
temperatures and intensification of 
droughts 151  the vulnerability to pest 
infestation is likely to increase 152 , 
Benefits: 
▪ 
Soil 
protection, 
stabilization 
and 
erosion 
control 
(reducing 
sedimentation, 
losses of water, soil 
material, 
organic 
Benefits: 
▪ 
Multi-storey 
cover with higher 
GHG 
sequestration 
▪ 
Increases 
soil 
organic carbon

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
153 Trisurat, Y., Aekakkararungroj, A., Ma, H. O., & Johnston, J. M. (2018). Basin-wide impacts of climate change on ecosystem services in 
the Lower Mekong Basin. Ecological research, 33(1), 73-86. 
154 Aubertin, C. (2004). Cardamom (Amomum spp.) in Lao PDR: the hazardous future of an agroforest system product. Forest products, 
livelihoods and conservation. Case studies of non-timber forest product systems, 1, 43-60. 
155 Castella, J. C., Lestrelin, G., Hett, C., Bourgoin, J., Fitriana, Y. R., Heinimann, A., & Pfund, J. L. (2013). Effects of landscape segregation 
on livelihood vulnerability: Moving from extensive shifting cultivation to rotational agriculture and natural forests in northern Laos. Human 
Ecology, 41(1), 63-76. 
156 Lefroy, R., Collet, L., & Grovermann, C. (2010). Study on potential impacts of climate change on land use in the Lao PDR. 
Increase 
and 
intensification 
of 
wildfires 
 
Increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
(especially in the dry 
season) 
having impacts on the productivity of 
rubber plantations.  
 
Interventions: 
Agroforestry system of intercropping 
annual and perennial plants between 
rows of rubber trees 
 
matter 
and 
nutrients)  
▪ 
Micro-climate 
buffering  
▪ 
Income 
diversification 
Fruit trees 
Increase 
and 
intensification 
of 
extreme 
events 
(floods, 
droughts, 
storm)/low 
yields 
and irrigation supply 
problems 
 
Decreased 
vegetation 
photosynthetic 
activity 
(i.e., 
browning) 
Intensification 
of 
wildfires 
CC Impact: With the intensification of 
extreme weather events17, such as 
storms, droughts and floods the 
establishment of fruit tree plantations 
will be challenged. The increasing 
temperatures and consequently the 
increasing 
evapotranspiration 
will 
likely lead to water deficiency.153 With 
increased flood intensity soil erosion 
will also become more prominent.18 
 
Interventions: 
Horticulture, 
including 
fruit 
tree 
plantations mixed with vegetables.  
Benefits: 
▪ 
Soil 
protection, 
stabilization 
and 
erosion 
control 
(reducing 
sedimentation, 
losses of water, soil 
material, 
organic 
matter 
and 
nutrients)  
▪ 
Micro-climate 
buffering  
▪ 
Income 
diversification 
▪ 
Selection of suitable 
climate resilient fruit 
tree species based 
on 
site-species 
matching 
Benefits: 
▪ 
Carbon 
sequestration 
through planting 
trees and through 
increases in soil 
carbon. 
 
Cardamom 
Intensification 
of 
extreme 
events 
(floods, 
droughts, 
storm)/low 
yields 
and irrigation supply 
problems 
 
Decreased 
vegetation 
photosynthetic 
activity 
(i.e., 
browning) 
 
Intensification 
of 
wildfires 
due 
to 
increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
(especially in the dry 
season). 
CC Impact: Amomum sp. is a forest 
plant and requires shade and constant 
moisture levels 154 . With increasing 
temperature and the intensification of 
evapotranspiration24 
the 
water 
availability 
is 
likely 
to 
decrease 
affecting 
the 
productivity 
of 
Cardamom.23 With the increased 
frequency of extreme weather events, 
especially in the wet season, soil 
erosion is increasing and therefore 
decreasing the availability of soil 
organic matter 23. Furthermore, the 
reduction of fallow length is leading to 
a gradual change from suitable areas 
for Cardamom to suitable areas for 
Broom Grass and/or peuak meuak.155 
 
Intervention: Native cardamom plants 
under forest cover (maintaining multi-
story cover) 
Benefits:  
▪ 
Soil 
protection, 
stabilization 
and 
erosion 
control 
(reducing 
sedimentation, 
losses of water, soil 
material, 
organic 
matter 
and 
nutrients)  
▪ 
Micro-climate 
buffering  
▪ 
Income 
diversification 
▪ 
Selection of suitable 
climate resilient fruit 
tree species based 
on 
site-species 
matching 
▪ 
Biodiversity 
and 
habitat conservation 
Benefits: 
▪ 
Higher 
GHG 
sequestration 
Maize 
Intensification 
and 
increase 
in 
of 
extreme 
events 
(floods, 
droughts, 
storm) 
 
CC Impact: The bioclimatic suitability 
in future climate scenario up to 2050 is 
likely to decrease for Maize especially 
in the north of Lao PDR156. This is the 
result 
of 
changing 
climatic 
Benefits:  
▪ 
Income 
diversification 
▪ 
Improved soil cover 
and 
climate 
resilience compared 
to 
current 
Benefits: 
Improve soil-nitrogen 
fixation

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
157 IPCC, 2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land 
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-
Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, 
J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press. 
158 IPCC, 2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land 
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-
Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, 
J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press. 
Increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
(especially in the dry 
season) 
conditions
157
 intensifying 
the 
ineligibility of Maize in the future.  
 
Interventions: Mixed cropping of 
maize and various beans/ legumes.20 
monocropping 
of 
maize  
Paddy Rice 
Intensification 
and 
increase 
in 
of 
extreme 
events 
(floods, 
droughts, 
storm) 
 
Increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
(especially in the dry 
season) 
 
CC Impacts: The increasing mean 
annual 
temperatures 
lead 
to 
prolonged drought periods happening 
more frequently. Furthermore, with the 
intensification of precipitation patterns 
in the wet season158 the vulnerability 
to floods is likely to increase having a 
direct impact on paddy fields.  
 
Interventions: Creation of new paddy 
fields (irrigated or rainfed) on suitable, 
flat 
land 
or 
rehabilitation 
and 
enlargement of existing paddy field, 
flood/drought resistant rice seeds 
Benefits:  
▪ 
Improves access to 
water 
throughout 
the dry season 
▪ 
Enhanced incomes 
and food security in 
the dry season 
 
 
 
113. GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ and GoL will finance this sub-activity. GCF grants will be used for 
enabling monitoring by PSAP teams (training and travel costs), developing climate-informed training 
modules and training trainers, providing gender-responsive extension support at the village level (including 
travel and training costs for extensions services), and conducting knowledge exchange meetings and 
workshops at the village cluster and district level.  
 
Activity 2.1.2: Investments in sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices 
and agroforestry: 
114. To support shifting cultivation and upland farmers in their transformation of land use towards sustainable 
and resilient agricultural practices appropriate funding mechanisms have to be applied. The project’s 
investments in innovative, sustainable, and deforestation free production systems require grant support to 
absorb investment risks and low return rates, both characteristics to be expected in the project context. To 
fund selected activities from the “White List” and annual village forest management activities, a Village 
Forest and Agricultural Grant (VFAG) fund will be established in each of the 290 target villages.  
115. VFAGs are managed by a committee of 3 selected village representatives who get endorsed by the district 
governor – at least one member of the village committee must be female. A bank account is opened for 
each VFAG at the nearest commercial hub, following the VFAG Guidelines (see activity sheet in the 
Feasibility Study for a detailed description of the VFAG guidelines). The initial contribution of 10,800 EUR 
will be transferred through the Climate Change Funding Window to the account. Transferred funds will be 
used among other things to provide grants of up to 400 EUR to PSAP registered families who have passed 
the eligibility criteria (e.g. dependency on shifting cultivation or upland monocropping, women-headed 
families, poor, young, etc., as specified in the PSAP Guidelines). The grants will not be handed to receivers 
directly but will be used to pay for approved items needed to establish and implement the chosen activity 
from the “White List” and technical extension sheets (Sub-activity 2.1.1.2). The established VFAG system 
will be also used for channelling bonus payments of up to 10.000 EUR (the amount depends on the size 
of the village forest area and the performance) to the target villages for successful forest protection after a 
monitoring period of 2 years. Funds from the bonus payments will be used in the same way for further 
expansion of “White List” activities and village forest management activities. 
 
116. Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Scaling up the VFAG approach to 290 villages (EE: GIZ, GoL - IFAD co-finance 
(implemented by GoL)): Through this sub-activity the project will establish operational VFAG funds in the 
290 target villages of the project.  
117. GCF grants and co-finance from IFAD will cover this sub-activity. GCF grant finance will be used to train

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
the VFAG team in DAFO on best practices for VFAG establishment and management (including best 
practices for gender equality and social inclusion - GESI), facilitate the formation and training of VFAG 
committees, including providing trainings on financial management and GESI, and provide upfront 
payments to VFAGs to finance the PSAP investment plans as well as bonus payments to VFAGs after 2 
years of successful implementation.  
 
118. Sub-activity 2.1.2.2 Capacity building of new VFAG committees (EE: GIZ): This sub-activity will 
support capacity development of VFAG committees to be able to effectively manage the VFAG fund. The 
committee has the overall task of organizing VFAG related activities and administrating VFAG funds.  
VFAGs are managed by a committee of 3 elected village representatives who get endorsed by the district 
governor – at least one member of the village committee must be female:  
• 
The VFAG President assumes the leadership of the Committee and the VFAG. They are chairing 
VFAG assembly meetings and is also representing the VFAG externally. 
• 
The VFAG Cashier is in charge with effectuating and recording all money transactions within the VFAG. 
He/she is also responsible for safekeeping VFAG cash stocks. 
• 
The VFAG Accountant has the task to record and document all income and expenditures within the 
VFAG in a timely, complete, and correct manner. They keep a cash book, collect bank statements and 
ensure that all expenditures are documented by invoices according to project accounting standards. 
They prepare quarterly reports, which are submitted from the VFAG committee to EPF, as stipulated 
in the VFAG bylaw.  
119. For the newly elected committee to perform these tasks appropriately, each member must be familiarized 
with the rules and standards that have been defined in the VFAG Guidelines and govern the entire process. 
Committee members will receive training both the specific processes relevant to their role, as well as more 
general capacity building on financial management. 
120. GCF grants will cover trainers, equipment, and office supply to ensure VFAG committees are able to 
manage the VFAG funds. 
 
121. Sub-activity 2.1.2.3 Monitoring of VFAGs (EE: GIZ and GoL): Under this sub-activity the necessary 
actions to ensure that VFAG Committees adhere to VFAG rules will be carried out and that corrective 
actions are taken by the project in case of non-compliance with the VFAG guidelines (actions are described 
in detail in the activity sheet in the Feasibility Study).  
122. This sub activity will be entirely financed by GCF, and will cover equipment to support VFAG monitoring 
(computers) and other monitoring costs (e.g. travel costs to visit villages).  
 
Activity 2.1.3: Watershed forest management to support small-scale irrigation investments (EE: GoL, 
ABD and IFAD co-finance (implemented by GoL)): 
123. Activity 2.1.3 builds on the ongoing ADB initiative, “Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed 
Management Sector (SRIWSM)” project and the “Partnerships for Irrigation and Commercialization of 
Smallholder Agriculture” (PICSA) funded by IFAD. The ADB project in combination with the IFAD project 
seek to address sustainable rural economic growth and watershed management in the provinces of Luang 
Prabang, Xiengkhouang, Sayabouri and Houaphan. However, it should be noted that co-financing for the 
GCF programme only focuses on actions implemented in Luang Prabang, Sayabouri and Houaphan in a 
total of 58 target villages across 8 districts. 
124. The Activity aims to support sustainable market-oriented agriculture production and sustainable natural 
resources management in selected watersheds. Specifically, the activity is ensuring that the forested 
landscapes in the catchment areas remain intact through improved land management (including good 
agricultural practices), and reduced pressure from drivers of deforestation and degradation by addressing 
key underlying causes (e.g., lack of alternative livelihood opportunities, poverty, low agricultural 
productivity, lack of value adding activities, weak negotiation/marketing skills). The SRIWSM and PICSA 
projects support market-oriented agricultural product value chain development specifically for high value 
crops grown on irrigated land plots in 11 schemes which will be rehabilitated and modernized by SRIWSM. 
PICSA will focus on the provision of improved extension systems for the development of intensified 
agriculture, capacity building for Water User Groups (WUGs) and provision of farmer group investment 
facilities. Value chains of high value crops that the SRIWSM/PICSA projects have identified and assessed 
will be promoted and first market assessments have been conducted (Sub-Activity 2.1.3.1). A total of 11 
irrigation schemes in Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang will be rehabilitated or newly constructed 
(Sub-Activity 2.3.2). Finally, nutrition-sensitive agriculture is implemented in all target villages of 
SRIWSM/PICSA (sub-activity 2.1.3.3).

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
159 Note: In the overarching ADB project, this Action is entitled “Output 1 Irrigated and upland farmers with increased income from high-value 
crops and livestock”. 
160 Within the overarching ADB project, this Action is entitled “Output 4: Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture in the targeted PRI communities”; EU 
and IFAD co-finance will also support the implementation of this Action. 
161
 The 
Principles 
for 
Responsible 
Agricultural 
Investment 
can 
be 
accessed 
here: 
https://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/cfs/Docs1314/rai/CFS_Principles_Oct_2014_EN.pdf  
125. This activity is financed exclusively by ADB, IFAD, and the Government of Lao PDR (i.e., without requiring 
GCF financial support). 
 
126. Sub-Activity 2.1.3.1 Market oriented production159: The sub-activity is applying a value chain / market 
linkage strategy to reduce the market and business risk faced by dry-season irrigators. Farmers located 
and operating on the 13 subprojects (11 irrigation schemes) have been consulted while making market 
assessments of the various representative subprojects (RSPs). With the assistance and information of the 
producers and other actors of the high value crop (HVC) value chains, the prices, and margins at the 
various levels of the value chains of HVCs have been identified and analysed for highest returns and 
market access. These completed assessments are currently being reviewed. Based on these 
assessments, SRIWSM will then develop agribusiness and marketing strategies, including HVC cropping 
plans for the dry season following the completion of the RSPs, identifying the targeted markets (wholesale, 
retail, or export) for the high value crops, and bringing together the key market actors in the HVCs’ value 
chains to discuss investment needs from the SRIWSM/PICSA grant programme.  
 
127. Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 Watershed ecological services protected: The SRIWSM Project will contract 
private contracting firms to carry out the construction or rehabilitation of all 13 representative subprojects. 
The construction is slated to begin in May 2022. The SRIWSM Project has carried out the engineering 
design and the requisite surveys of the Subprojects in Houaphan, Sayabouri, and Luang Prabang 
provinces (see detailed description in the corresponding activity sheet in the Feasibility Study).  
 
128. Sub-activity 2.1.3.3 Improved nutritional status160: PICSA and SRIWSM were designed as nutrition 
sensitive projects. The AIF grant (ADB-administered EU grant) is being used exclusively to support 
improvement of nutrition awareness and Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture (NSA) (activities of the SRIWMSP 
Project). The nutrition interventions include increased dietary intake and improved quality of diet for 
nutritionally vulnerable groups and school-based nutrition activities in all target provinces. District Nutrition 
Committees have been established in selected districts, received technical training, and have developed 
nutrition intervention packages. Future priorities will be on strengthening the coordinating function between 
district line agencies by the District Nutrition Committees, provision of technical trainings and strategic 
guidance on nutrition sensitive interventions.  
129. The NSA is being strengthened within the framework of the existing multi-sectoral nutrition coordination 
mechanism in Lao PDR by promoting behaviour change in sanitation, women’s workloads, and dietary 
habits in prioritized villages in project districts. The improved nutritional status is complementing all other 
outputs of the SRIWMSP Project by providing increased local availability and markets for diverse and 
nutritious foods products originating both from the irrigation schemes and from improved use of the 
catchment areas. 
 
Activity 2.1.4 Implementation of benefit sharing plan for climate-smart agriculture and sustainable 
livelihoods for forest dependent communities (EE: GoL, World Bank co-finance (implemented by GoL)): 
130. GCF Projects 1 and 2 are the main investment projects contributing to the Lao PDR GFLL programme, 
which further provides the framework for the implementation of the Lao Emission Reduction Programme. 
As such, the GCF-financed Project 1 and Project 2 and the implementation of the Benefit Sharing Plan 
(BSP) in the context of the FCPF- Emission Reduction Payment Agreement (ERPA) and are closely 
aligned. Through World Bank co-financing, this activity will sustain the implementation and results of 
activities under Component 2 promoting sustainable, deforestation free, and climate resilient agriculture 
beyond the lifespan of GCF Project 2, with specific linkages to activities, 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. The activity will 
be implemented at the provincial, district, and village level. It will address the negative impacts of 
unsustainable agricultural practices and support farmers transition to CSA practices and technologies with 
higher levels of productivity. During implementation, the principles of CSA and those of Responsible 
Agricultural Investment 161  will be followed to ensure that, in addition to climate-related criteria, 
considerations related to social, environmental, gender, and economic safeguards are also effectively 
integrated.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
162 The ER Programme will not disburse any cash payments to communities. It will establish institutional mechanisms and workplans to deliver 
benefits to communities. 
163 This categorization is based on the project view and does not represent the official categorization of Lao MSMEs according to the Lao 
National Chamber of Commerce.   
131. This activity is exclusively financed using World Bank co-finance. No GCF funds are required for the 
implementation of this activity.  
 
132. Sub-activity 2.1.4.1 Operationalization of benefit sharing plan for climate-smart agriculture and 
sustainable livelihoods for forest dependent communities: This sub-activity will support the 
establishment of an enabling environment to promote sustainable and deforestation free CSA approaches. 
It will also sustain the implementation of these models while helping to address issues related to market 
demand, low productivity, limited availability of productive alternatives for farmers, and land and soil 
degradation.  As part of the operationalization of the BSP direct investments will be undertaken in support 
of scalable models implemented with local communities and ethnic groups in a sustainable manner.162 
Investments will also support alternative livelihood options. These models include crop diversification, 
agroforestry techniques such as terracing, and intercropping and are all aligned to CSA principles and will 
bring direct benefits in terms of soil conservation.  
 
Output 2.2 Agri-MSMEs are capacitated, and have improved incentives and access to finance to 
invest in marketing and processing for locally sourced deforestation free and climate resilient 
agricultural products   
 
Activity 2.2.1:  Catalyzing private sector investments in sustainable, climate resilient, and deforestation 
free value chains: 
133. In Project 1 it became clear that the cooperation with local agribusinesses needed to be further defined 
and that a more comprehensive approach was needed towards establishing sustainable deforestation free, 
low-emission and climate resilient value chains for the main commodities under the “White List”. This 
activity now includes the provision of clearly defined incentives, matching-grants, for agribusiness to 
support the project activities.  
134. This activity will support the development of sustainable, climate resilient, and deforestation free value 
chains in support of the models and investments based on the “White List” that will be implemented by 
upland farmers in target villages (Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2). The focus of the activity is on value chain 
development and marketing through private sector enterprises and specifically agricultural Micro, Small 
and Medium-Enterprises (agri-MSMEs). This engagement with agri-MSMEs aims to support ensuring that 
there is predictable and increasing demand for the commodities produced under activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 
in the target villages. A categorization of the most relevant agri-MSMEs for contributing to the results of 
the project was developed as part of the private sector assessments carried out under Project 1. This 
categorization will be followed during Project 2. 
 
Table 5: Agri-MSME description and categorization by turnover163  
Category 
Description 
Category A 
Companies involved in the entire supply chain, from production to trading and processing, either 
specialized on a single commodity (e.g., rubber or coffee) or 2-3 commodities. Staff numbers are 
generally above 15 people, and they have an annual turnover higher than LAK 10,000,000,000 
(USD 1,100,000). It is estimated that approximately 30% of the agri-MSMEs belong to this 
category. They can be considered as medium-sized companies and could play an important role 
as a catalyst for good practices along the supply chain by making investments in deforestation free, 
low-emission and climate resilient processing, serving higher value markets. 
Category B 
Companies involved in at least 2 areas along the supply chain. Staff numbers are from 5 to 10 
people, and they have an annual turnover in the range of LAK 2,000,000,000 to LAK 
10,000,000,000 (USD 220,000 to USD 1,100,000). It is estimated that 50% of the companies would 
be classified as Category B. Most of them are family businesses. These can be considered as 
small companies and could receive targeted support in terms of securing sustainable production 
levels through direct cooperation with farmers on a larger geographic scale, widening the scope of 
products and value adding activities. These companies would certainly represent the core of the 
target companies for project collaboration and would provide good impact opportunities. 
Category C 
Companies involved in only one area of the supply chain and currently focusing on trading of raw 
products. With an average of 1 to 5 staff, they have an annual turnover in the range of LAK 
80,000,000 to LAK 2,000,000,000 LAK (USD 9,000 to USD 220,000). Approximately 20% of agri-
MSMEs will fall into this category. All of them are family businesses. Category C companies would 
be considered as micro companies. Their strength is their direct connection and working

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
164 The project operations manual (Annex 21) includes more detailed information on the indicative screening criteria, eligibility criteria and 
operational procedures.  
experience with farmers. Many of them are interested in widening their business model by 
strengthening value addition and improving market access. 
 
135. Local agri-MSMEs in Lao PDR face a number of challenges in their business operations that include: 
unreliable and strongly fluctuating supply chains in terms of quality, quantity; processing techniques are 
obsolete and environmentally unsustainable; and access to finance is limited. To address these barriers 
and support a transition towards more sustainable business models that can contribute to the development 
of climate resilient and deforestation free value chains, this activity aims to establish strong and reliable 
connections between the cooperating agri-MSMEs and target farmers; through joint value chain and 
business model assessments (Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1) and the provision of matching grants to screened and 
selected agri-MSMEs for processing and marketing sustainable products (Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1).   
 
136. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1: Climate resilient and deforestation free value chain development (EE: GIZ): 
This sub-activity will directly assist a selected number of agri-MSMEs through value chain and business 
model assessments, with the aim of contributing to the adoption of low-emission and climate resilient 
processing methods, coordinated transportation and marketing of sustainably produced finished products. 
The Lao National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (LNCCI) has been identified as a key potential 
partner for supporting the work under this sub-activity aimed at strengthening the operations of agri-
MSMEs. In the context of the project, LNCCI will assist the project in the process of identifying suitable 
agri-MSMEs for close cooperation with the project. Indicative criteria to identify relevant agri-MSMEs 
include:164  
• 
Company must be active in the marketing of at least one or preferably several commodities comprised 
in the “White List”, 
• 
Company should be active in more than one district or show a strong interest to expand their 
geographic coverage, 
• 
Company should practice at least some kind of value adding and processing or/and have an interest 
or plans to invest in sustainable processing techniques, 
• 
Company must have an understanding and keen interest in sustainable production methods, 
deforestation free agriculture, and environmental aspects as well as social responsibility, 
• 
Company should have potentials for future business development in terms of staff, assets, marketing 
capacities, and access to finance, 
• 
Company should have expressed a key interest to closely cooperate with the GCF projects, 
• 
Companies should be selected to represent diverse value chains with no more than 2-3 companies 
involved in the same products.  
• 
Agri-MSME should be able to provide 50% co-finance contribution, either in-kind or in-cash depending 
on investment plan. 
• 
Female-led and ethnic minority-led agri-MSMEs will be specifically targeted. 
 
137. All selected companies will receive technical support in the areas of business management including 
financial management, technical innovations towards low emission value chains, simple market analyses 
and planning (Further description of technical assistance support to be provided is included in the 
corresponding activity sheet of in the Feasibility Study).  
138. GCF grants will cover the implementation of this sub-activity. It will cover a technical assistance service 
provision contract, where TA will be provided to screen companies, and provide targeted technical 
assistance related to business development and ensuring business plans adequately reflect climate-
resilient and low-emission practices, aligned with the White List.  
 
139. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2: Matching grants to support agri-MSMEs develop climate resilient and 
deforestation free value chains (EE:GIZ and GoL): To promote deforestation free and climate-informed 
value chains and the marketing of sustainably produced commodities in accordance with the “White List”, 
the project will provide matching grant funds on investments by a sub-set of the agri-MSMEs identified

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
165 The screening process will look at various technical, financial, and institutional factors, as well as environmental and social safeguards 
and gender.  
166 Climate-sensitive processing investments will include solar energy supply and solar dryers, water-saving technologies, environmentally 
friendly packaging, transport management and higher values end products for alternative markets. 
167  The way in which the selection process will be conducted i.e. call for proposal vs. direct award etc., will still be clarified.  
168 A company that has no active participation to the agribusiness value chain (e.g., pure logistic company) would not be eligible. 
169 Plans to expand operations into the Project villages will be considered as an integral part of the selection process to enter into agreements 
with agri-MSMES and thus already considered as part of the eligibility criteria.  
170 The contribution from the agri-MSME will be verified by the EE  
under 2.2.1.2 that will be further screened165 and selected to improve their processing166 and marketing 
capacities (a step by step description of the matching grant allocation process is included in the activity 
sheet in the Feasibility Study) .  
140. Matching grants are defined as partial contribution for investments to support sustainable value chain 
development for White Listed activities, where: 
• 
50% of the total investment amount comes as a grant channelled through EPF, and  
• 
50% of the total amount comes from an equity contribution of the agri-MSME or as a loan from a local 
financial institution in Lao PDR. 
141. After a selection process of suitable companies167 and the necessary contractual agreements, the project 
would provide a 50% matching grant (up to EUR 50,000) for company investments in climate change 
adaptation and GHG-saving technologies based on a new business plan supported by the project under 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. The following Table 6 outlines the maximum matching grant amount according to the 
agri-MSMEs category: 
 
Table 6: Maximum matching grant amount according to agri-MSME categorization 
Category 
Maximum amount 
Indicative number of grants 
Category A 
EUR 50,000 
20 
Category B 
EUR 25,000 
24 
Category C 
EUR 10,000 
20 
142. The funds for the financial contributions to the investments by the selected agri-MSMEs will be channelled 
through the EPF. Disbursements of any grant contributions will be based on approved investment plans 
(according to predefined eligibility criteria and positive list for investments in low-emission and climate 
resilient value chains). A set of indicative eligibility criteria is included in the Table 7 below. 
 
Table 7: Eligibility criteria for consideration of the matching grant mechanism 
Eligibility Criteria 
Specification 
Sector / Value Chain 
Agri-MSME  
Focus on processing or marketing at least 1 commodity within the subset of the 
“White List”).168   
Company types/ ownerships 
Sole ownership, partnerships, and joint ventures. 
Business purpose of the 
applicant’s company / eligible 
investment areas 
• 
Machinery 
• 
Auxiliary infrastructure investment (e.g. storage facility etc.) (max 50% of 
grant)  
• 
Renewable energy 
• 
Certifications 
• 
Merchandising 
Company Age 
Company must be in operations for at least 2 years. 
Company Size 
Category A, B, and C – agri-MSMEs   
Company registration                     Must be officially registered with DoIC in Lao PDR. 
Company operations/ location 
Must have operations in one of the 6 target provinces (at the province, district, or 
village level).169   
Financial mgmt. & accounting 
requirements 
Must have a bank account at the point of matching grant application; must show 
financial statements for at least one year.  
Matching contribution 
The agri-MSME must match the 50% matching grant with a contribution of its 
own170

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
171 GIZ “ESG toolkit”: https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/ESG toolkit.xlsx 
143. The matching grant mechanism will target a sub-set of the commodities in the “White List”. These have 
been prioritized based on their market and value-added potential.  
 
Table 8: Commodities and value adding steps linked to the White List 
Commodity 
Steps of Value Adding 
Possible End 
Products 
Coffee 
Drying, fermenting, grinding, roasting, packaging 
Green beans 
Roasted coffee 
Tea 
Drying, fermenting, cutting, packaging 
Green or black tea 
varieties 
Bong Bark 
Drying, cutting, milling, paste making, packaging 
Incense sticks 
Tung Oil  
Drying, extracting oil, bottling 
Oil for paints 
Benzoin 
Drying, cleaning, grading, packaging 
Fragrance powder 
Rubber 
Cleaning, compressing, heating, grading 
Sheet rubber, timber 
Paper Mulberry 
Drying, cutting, grinding, grading, pulp making, packaging 
Mulberry paper 
Bamboo 
Drying shoots and canes, fermenting shoots, conserving shoots, 
cutting canes, milling for pulp, grading, manufacturing of handicraft 
items, packaging 
Canes, shoots, 
handicraft, pulp 
Cardamom 
Drying, grinding, grading, packaging 
Seeds, Cardamom 
powder 
Rattan 
Drying, cleaning, heating, grading, Manufacturing of handicraft 
items 
Handicraft, furniture, 
conserved shoots 
Sichuan Pepper 
Drying, cleaning, grinding, grading, packaging 
Sichuan pepper husks 
Broom Grass 
Drying, cleaning, grading, broom manufacturing 
Brooms 
Sascha Inchi 
Drying, conserving, roasting, extracting, grading, packaging 
Nuts, oil, creams, 
cosmetics 
Cotton 
Cleaning, grading, spinning 
Handicrafts, clothes 
Beans 
Drying, hulling, cleaning, grading, oil extraction, tofu processing, 
packaging 
Beans, tofu, sprouts, oil 
Peanuts 
Drying, hulling, cleaning, roasting, milling, oil extraction, packaging 
Peanuts, butter, oil 
Job`s Tears 
Drying, hulling, cleaning, roasting, milling, oil extraction, grading, 
packaging 
Berries, flour, seed oil 
Sesame 
Drying, cleaning, roasting, milling, oil extraction, grading, packaging 
Seeds, oil, paste 
(Tahini) 
 
144. The use of funding from matching grants will be constrained first by an exclusion list171 (that follows the 
IFC Performance Standards) and second by a positive list of categories and uses. An indicative positive 
list is shown below. It will be validated with the technical assistance provider at the beginning of the project.  
 
Table 9: Indicative positive list of investment categories  
Category 
Potential uses – a link to sustainability will have to be clearly demonstrated in the 
business and investment plan that will be submitted for consideration for accessing a 
matching grant 
Machinery 
Processing equipment such as: 
• 
driers, ovens 
• 
choppers, mills, cutters, threshers, shredders, crushers, presses 
• 
washers, cleaners 
• 
sorters, separators, centrifuges etc. 
• 
mixers 
• 
pelleting machines 
• 
roasters, cookers, smokers

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
172 Notable changes from FP117 include the mainstreaming of adaptation throughout each activity, including strengthening the consideration 
of climate information and integration of climate change adaptation measures within the VFM and NPA management plans, and facilitating 
the implementation of cross-cutting mitigation and adaptation measures through the implementation of these plans. An additional activity 
has been included to facilitate the re-investment of results-based payments into the project area through the implementation of the approved 
ER-Programme’s Benefit Sharing Plan (Activity 3.1.2).  
173 Specifically, Activities under Component 3 that are subject to Component 1 deliverables are: 
For Activity 3.1.1: VFAGs have to be in place after Village Forest Management Planning is concluded, to provide funds for the implementation 
of annual plans; Land use planning and improved tenure security – Land Use Plans have to be in place as a precondition for VFM; Knowledge 
management, FPIC, safeguards and gender – FPIC has to be completed as a precondition. 
For Activity 3.2.1: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new VFAGs to channel climate finance to target villages – VFAGs have to 
be in place after National Protected Area (NPA) management planning is concluded, to provide funds for the implementation of annual 
plans; Knowledge management, FPIC, safeguards and gender – FPIC has to be completed as a precondition. 
174 Village use forests are forests located within a village area, which the government has allocated to the village to manage, preserve use in 
a sustainable manner in accordance with the legal and regulatory framework. Village forests may be characterised as production, protection 
and conservation forest (see below).  
175 Smith, H. and Alounsayath, O. (2015), Forest Legality Compendium, Department of Forestry Inspection and Department of Forestry, Lao 
PDR, p.242. 
• 
bottling and canning machines 
• 
pasteurizers 
• 
cold-chain equipment (e.g., fridges, freezers etc.) 
• 
fermentation vats 
• 
packing machines, balers, wrappers etc. 
Structures as support for a 
proposed investment (max 
50% of grant) 
 
• 
Warehouses, storage facilities 
• 
Covered/uncovered drying yards 
• 
Extension of processing space (excluding the purchase of land) 
Energy 
 
• 
Solar cells, wind turbine, water turbine,  
• 
Batteries and other items required for the functioning of such systems 
Certification 
 
• 
Acquisition of sustainability and climate compatibility certifications 
• 
Getting GMP or HACCP certification 
• 
Getting quality or food safety certification 
Merchandising 
• 
Investment in branding, technology, for marketing and commercialization of 
climate-friendly products  
• 
Integration into existing online market platforms for sustainably produced 
products 
 
145. Finally, monitoring of the use of funds and implementation of the agreed and financed investment plans 
will be ensured through the ongoing support and coaching by the technical assistance provider.  
146. GCF grants will be used for the matching grants, where screened and approved agri-MSMEs will provide 
a 50% share of the funds.     
 
B.3.3. Component 3. Climate change mitigation and adaptation through forestry172 
147. Component 3 will build upon Component 1 (enabling environment) and Component 2 (VFAG establishment 
and operationalization),173 and aims to strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems and the livelihoods 
of forest-dependent villages, while reducing emissions through sustainable forest landscape management 
and the promotion of FLR. The Component supports measure throughout the following forest categories 
in Lao PDR:174 
• 
Production forests are natural and planted forests classified for the purpose of timber and NTFP 
production that are managed by the State in accordance with the Forestry Law (although PMO 31 has 
imposed a ban on such harvesting since 2013).  
• 
Protection forests are forests classified for the function of protecting water resources, riverbanks, 
roadsides, preventing soil erosion, protecting soil quality, strategic areas for national defence, 
protection from natural disasters and environmental protection. In protection forests, individuals and 
villages have certain rights with respect to the harvesting of timber and forest products for their own 
consumption. They are managed by the Department of Forestry.175 
• 
Conservation forests (also referred to as National Protected Areas, NPAs) are forests classified for the 
purposes of conserving nature, preserving plant and animal species, forest ecosystems and other sites 
of natural, historical, cultural, tourism, environmental, educational and scientific value. Within 
conservation forest, individuals and villages have certain rights with respect to the harvesting of timber 
and forest products for their own consumption. They are managed by the Department of Forestry.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
176 Bonus payments are ex post payments issued by the Climate Change Funding Window to support defined activities that have been 
achieved according to a pre-defined performance metric (i.e. based on results). Investment payments are ex ante payments issued to VFAG 
committees to support activities listed in a White-List. For more information refer to Activity 2.1.2 in Chapter B.3, Chapter B.4.3, and the 
Project Operations Manual (Annex 21).   
177 Each VFMP establishes the geographical demarcation of village forestry, the allowable cut, where villagers can harvest, allowable practices 
and prohibited practices. The baseline in each case varies from village to village. 
178 For more information on currently permitted activities, refer to the VFMP Guidelines: https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/Village-Forest-
Management-Planning-Guideline.pdf. It should be noted that Activity 1.3 aims to revise these guidelines, and include commercial harvesting 
based on sustainable management plans and sustainable forest management principles to strengthen additional income streams for 
villagers and provide incentives for the sustainable management of forest resources. 
148. Project 1’s phased and gradual approach to scaling up local forest management (such as village forest 
management, sustainable forest management activities within NPAs), was found to be suitable and 
necessary to gradually build up the capacities of government staff, and local forest-dependent men and 
women, addressing key barriers identified in B.2. As such, guidelines developed under Project 1 will be 
used to replicate and scale up village forest management (Activity 3.1.1), NPA management and Village 
Forest Conservation Agreements (VilFoCA) in all six provinces (Activity 3.2.1). Activities under Component 
3 build on past experiences in Lao PDR, and not only supports the development of climate-informed and 
sustainable management plans (based on thorough participatory land use planning), but also provides 
hands-on capacity building and finance to implement the annual operational plans. The anticipated bonus 
payments (i.e. performance-based payments)176 will bridge the phase until forests can be commercially 
used as outlined under article 120 of the revised forest law. In addition, with the approved Benefit Sharing 
Plan under the ER-Programme sub-national agencies will receive finance to provide their services and 
village communities will receive finance to further implement their management plans (Activity 3.1.2).  
 
Output 3.1 Village Communities are trained by capacitated government staff and have the financial 
resources to implement sustainable (village) forest management plans that contribute to REDD+ and 
strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems and the livelihoods that depend on them 
 
Activity 3.1.1: Village Forest Management (VFM): 
149. Activity 3.1.1 will support the development, implementation and monitoring of climate-informed village 
forest management plans (VFMPs). Each VFMP establishes the geographical demarcation of village 
forestry, the allowable cut, where villagers can harvest, allowable practices and prohibited practices. The 
baseline in each case varies from village to village. Based on the climate-informed land use plans 
developed under activity 1.2.2, VFMPs will be designed using a combination of spatial planning and 
participatory land use planning with villagers as a precondition to support the sustainable management of 
village forests. The VFMP guidelines already under implementation in Project 1 (CliPAD/GIZ 2016) provide 
the following examples of permitted activities177: Forest patrolling for protection against encroachment; fire 
prevention (e.g. digging fire breaks, ploughing firebreaks, controlled burning of fire breaks, etc.); building 
check dams or small water reservoirs to provide water for firefighting and water for watering planted tree 
seedlings; reforestation to promote river bank stabilization and ecosystem-based adaptation; identification 
and marking of trees to be left as mother trees for seed production; selective cutting (in small quantities in 
different diameter classes in accordance with the sustainable forest model to improve forest structure and 
provide timber and fuelwood for villages); close parts of forest temporarily and protect young regeneration 
trees, fencing off of some parts to encourage regeneration; conduct weeding around valuable tree 
seedlings; marking of trees to be cut every year; enrichment planting; promotion of natural regeneration 
(e.g. in case of fire damage, shifting cultivation, excessive degradation/tree cutting); direct seeding in 
barren, highly degraded areas; and NTFP management and development.178 
150. As with the development of the VFMPs, the implementation of the VFMPs will follow the best practices 
outlined in the VFM Guidelines. Financial resources will be transferred to VFAGs using mechanisms 
established under GCF Project 1. On average each village community will receive EUR 1,500 per year (at 
least twice during the project implementation period) to incentivize the implementation of the VFMP. In 
summary, the EPF will receive budget requests (annual work plans) from village communities and will 
check them against set criteria. More details on transfer modalities are available in the Climate Change 
Window Operations Manual (OM) (Annex 21). 
 
 
151. Sub-activity 3.1.1.1: Mainstreaming of climate change adaptation in VFMPs and training DAFO and 
PAFO on climate change adaptation within village forestry (EE: GIZ and GoL / BMZ co-finance): 
This sub-activity will strengthen climate change adaptation within VFM planning, implementation and 
monitoring. The VFMP process will be developed considering the climate-informed LUPs developed under

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
179 International and national consultants will be hired to support adaptation mainstreaming, the revision of the VFM guideline, and related 
supporting materials and trainings. Budget will also be provided to print informative materials to support the VFM process (for district VFM 
teams and villagers), and for training provincial core VFM trainers from PAFO on climate change adaptation, including the revised guideline 
and best practices to support VFM planning, implementation and monitoring.   
180 Since substantial capacities have been built on the VFMP guideline and considering the project will be implemented in a period of 3.5 
years, it is recommended to mainstream climate change adaptation into the guideline, while keeping the overall approach/ stages, which 
are anyways aligned with a systematic forest planning approach.  
181 GIZ. 2015 Village Forest Management Planning Guideline 
182 For more detailed information on the various stages, refer to the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). 
183 Supported activities currently include forest protection and regeneration activities. This includes (CliPAD/ GIZ 2016, p. 16): “fire prevention 
activities, patrolling, promotion of natural regeneration, enrichment plantings, direct seeding, identification and marking of trees to be 
protected as mother trees for seed production, partial or temporary protection of selected parts of the village use forest, selective cutting, 
marking of trees to be cut per year, NTFP management and development activities, building of small dams and water reservoirs, planting 
on national tree planting day and replacement of demarcation pegs along the forest boundaries after 2-3 years.” For more information on 
currently permitted activities, refer to the above-mentioned VFMP guidelines from 2016. It should be further noted that Activity 1.2 aims to 
revise these guidelines and include commercial harvesting based on sustainable management plans and sustainable forest management 
principles to strengthen additional income streams for villagers and provide incentives for the sustainable management of forest resources.  
activity 1.2.2, however further guidance is needed within the context of VFM to strengthen the resilience of 
forest ecosystems and local livelihoods. This sub-activity will provide the following support:179 
• 
Revision of the VFM planning guideline180 to ensure climate change adaptation is intentionally and 
systematically considered throughout the process (from planning to implementation and monitoring). 
This will ensure VFMPs developed, implemented and monitored by the project are climate-informed, 
and identify suitable measures to strengthen the adoption of ecosystem-based adaptation measures 
within VFM. Some measures are already often included within VFMPs, e.g. restoration and 
revegetation of degraded riparian areas, however support from Project 2 will ensure climate change 
adaptation is intentional and mainstreamed in a systematic manner. It will raise further awareness of 
PAFO and DAFO officers and villagers on climate change, risks and suitable risk reduction 
measures.  
• 
Development of training materials for training provincial VFM trainers and training materials for 
district VFM teams on the revised guideline, and climate change adaptation within VFM. 
• 
Trainings for provincial VFM trainers and district VFM teams on the VFM process and revised 
guidelines, and best practices for climate resilient and sustainable village forest management.  
• 
Elaboration of informative materials, including materials on climate change (including climate-related 
risks and risk-reduction practices via VFM and sustainable land management) to support VFMP 
development processes, and eventually implementation. 
152. GCF grants and BMZ co-finance will be used for the implementation of this sub-activity. GCF finance will 
cover international and national experts to revise the VFM planning guideline, develop training materials 
and conduct trainings, as well as training costs, and costs for developing, printing and disseminating related 
materials for capacity building and awareness raising.  
 
153. Sub-activity 3.1.1.2: Development of VFMPs (EE: GIZ and GoL / GoL and BMZ co-finance): Based 
on the climate-informed PLUPs developed under activity 1.2.2, VFMPs are designed using a combination 
of spatial planning and participatory land use planning with villagers as a precondition to enable the 
sustainable management of village forests.  Among others, tools developed by FAO for planning Forest 
and Landscape Restoration (FLR) will be used in this respect.181 VFMP development will follow the 
following key stages as per the aforementioned guideline:182   
• 
Stage 1: Demarcation of forest areas and preparation of detailed village forest map 
• 
Stage 2: Participatory Forest Resources Assessment (PFRA) and basic forest inventory 
• 
Stage 3: Preparation of five-year village forest management plan (VFMP) 183 
• 
Stage 4: Preparation of annual forestry operation plan 
• 
Stage 5: Village forest management agreement  
154. GCF grants in combination with co-finance from BMZ and GoL will be used for the implementation of this 
sub-activity. GCF grants will cover revision of training materials and modules (national and international 
experts), costs associated with printing and disseminating informational and training materials, conducting 
trainings on climate-informed village forest management planning for PAFO and DAFO, and  trainings for 
village forest and NTFP management division, PAFO and DAFO on best practices for VFM plan 
development, investments in equipment to facilitate VFM planning (GPS, camera, IT equipment,

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
184 The following monitoring and reporting processes will be guaranteed: i) Quarterly monitoring of progress made in implementation, 
distributing GCF grants (based on annually approved village forest plans) through the REDD+ Funding Window to VFAGs for the 
implementation of village forest management activities, reporting illegal activity and reporting conflicts; ii) Annual monitoring of the overall 
achievement in implementing the annual plan of operation, and preparation of new annual plan of operation; iii) Every 2 years, conduct 
monitoring of forest condition and forest cover by using PFRA techniques and transect walks; iv) After 5 years, conduct monitoring of the 
overall achievement of the VFMP, and prepare a new VFMP and new VFM agreement. For more detailed information refer to the Feasibility 
Study in Annex 2a.  
185 KfW 2017. 
relascopes, measuring tapes), and travel costs for government staff to visit villages and support them with 
the VFM planning process (incl. VFMP development and annual management plans). 
 
155. Sub-activity 3.1.1.3: Implementation and monitoring of VFMPs (EE: GIZ and GoL - KfW co-finance 
(implemented by GoL) / GoL and BMZ co-finance): As with the development of VFM plans and 
agreements, the implementation of the plans will follow the best-practice guidelines and procedures 
outlined in the Village Forest Management Guidelines, including the following stages: 
• 
Stage 6: Implementation of the village forest management activities by village groups that signed the 
village forest management agreement, following annual plan of operation and which will be financed 
by annually approved grants.  
• 
Stage 7: Monitoring and evaluation  
• 
Monitoring and evaluation will be linked with the PDMS established and operated under sub-activity 
1.2.1.184  
156. Resources will be transferred to VFAGs, following the same procedures and approach as Project 1. VFAGs 
will be established under activity 2.1.2, where their set up and operation follows the “Guidelines for the 
Setup and Operation of Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAGs) under the Implementation of the 
Governance Forest Landscape and Livelihood (I-GFLL) Programme”. The EPF will receive budget 
requests from VFAGs and check them against set criteria.185 More detail on transfer modalities is available 
in Chapter B.4 and the Climate Change Funding Window Operations Manual (Annex 21).  
157. This sub-activity will be financed using GCF grants and co-finance from BMZ (channelled through GIZ and 
KfW) GoL. GCF grants will cover trainings for PAFO and DAFO staff on best practices for village forest 
management to support VFMP implementation, travel costs for government staff and trainers to support 
on the ground trainings, training-related costs for VFM groups on best practices for SFM and support them 
to implement their VFMPs, and provincial exchange and knowledge dissemination events on best practices 
for VFM, 
158. GCF finance will also provide direct investments in village forests for the implementation of their VFMPs, 
and will further cover monitoring costs (travel costs for government staff to visit villages and facilitate on-
the-ground monitoring and site checks).  
 
 
Activity 3.1.2: Implementation of benefit sharing plan for Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) and 
Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR) (EE: GoL, World Bank co-finance (implemented by GoL): 
159. GCF Projects 1 and 2 are the main investment projects contributing to the GoL's GFLL programme, which 
further provides the framework for the implementation of the Lao Emission Reduction Programme. As such, 
the GCF-financed Project 1 and Project 2 and the implementation of the ERPA and benefit sharing plan 
are closely aligned (see institutions involved below).  
160. Activity 3.1.2 builds on the Lao ER-Programme (GFLL), and the FCPF-Emission Reduction Payment 
Agreement (ERPA), including the implementation of the associated approved benefit sharing plan (BSP). 
Specifically, through implementation at the sub-national level, and with the consideration of lessons learnt 
from other projects, including CliPAD and ICBF, this activity will seek to apply a landscape approach that 
will aim to maximize land use potential and ecosystem services.  
161. The Programme targets implementing and scaling up forest landscape restoration and management on at 
least 70,000 hectares, through assisted natural forest regeneration, plantation development and 
agroforestry systems to enhance forest carbon stocks. 
162. The beneficiaries under the benefit sharing plan (BSP) include:  
• 
Government agencies (at all levels). 
• 
Rural forest-dependent communities, hereinafter named as communities.  
• 
Actors in pilot initiatives, which will include the private sector, non-profit associations, and research 
and education institutions.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
186 This will be additional to the villages supported under Project 2 Activity 3.1.1. 
187
 Government 
of 
Lao 
PDR. 
2018. 
Emissions 
Reduction 
Programme 
Document 
(ER-PD). 
Available 
online: 
https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/system/files/documents/LaoPDR_ERPD_FinalDraftMay.2018-Clean.pdf; 
IUCN. 
2011. 
NBSAP 
Assessment: An assessment of Lao PDR´s National Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 and Action Plan to 2010. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 46pp. 
188 This project supports the “effective management of 2 target landscapes comprising NPAs and corridors contributing to sustaining 
biodiversity in forest ecosystems, while supporting livelihoods of forest-dependent communities”: Braeutigam, D. (2015), Integrated 
Conservation of Forests and Biodiversity ICBF – Introduction, KfW and MoNRE, Lao PDR. Prior to its implementation, extensive Pre-
Feasibility and Feasibility Studies were conducted (2012-2015, implementation until 2022), which informed the design of the overall GCF 
Programme as well as Project 2. The ICBF team has been consulted during the development of Project 1 and 2, and lessons learned have 
been reflected in the project design (for more information refer to Funding Proposal Chapter B.2 and the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a).  
189 The project further builds on initiatives related to NPA management in Houaphan province (e.g. Wildlife Conservation Society, World Bank 
supported measures in Nam et Phou Louey NPA, and USAID, SNV and WB supported work in Nam Xam NPA. 
163. Through World Bank co-financing, this activity will sustain the implementation and results of activities under 
component 3 of GCF Project 2, with specific linkages to activities 1.2.1 on land use planning and 3.1.1 on 
the development and implementation of Village Forest Management Plans. No GCF funds are required for 
the implementation of this activity.  
 
164. Sub-activity 3.1.2.1: Operationalization of benefit sharing plan for SFM and FLR: This sub-activity will 
focus on operationalizing the approved benefit sharing plan. Specifically, it will strengthen enabling 
environment for scaling the implementation of SFM and FLR; support the implementation of village forest 
management; and supporting forest landscape models and sustainable forest plantations. Special focus 
will be placed on FLR and SFM, including with the objective of restoring degraded forests. The sub-activity 
should leverage and sustain the village forest management planning process and seek to establish 
relationships with private sector actors including for the development of commercial forestry activities.  
165. The sub-activity will also focus on the development of capacities and training of government staff at sub-
national level and of communities. Emphasis and focus will be placed on the development of capacities of 
vulnerable groups. The sub-activity additionally seeks to strengthen tenure security of village land and 
forest resources, by supporting and scaling up VFM.186  
 
Output 3.2 NPA management plans are developed and communities are enabled and actively 
engaged in implementing conservation agreements in NPAs that enable sustainable forest 
management and forest conservation 
 
Activity 3.2.1: National Protected Area (NPA) management: 
166. Implementation and financing of NPA management plans within the NPAs will address the core barrier that 
there are insufficient resources (financial, technical and administrative) to support the effective 
implementation of management plans.187 This is particularly relevant since these forest areas contain the 
largest remaining high-carbon-stock forests, which are particularly at risk of deforestation and forest 
degradation 
167. Based on the successful approach from ICBF, 188  applied under GCF project 1, and the experiences and 
lessons learned from the World Bank LENS II project, among others, 189 activity 3.2.1 will continue to 
support NPAs and national parks (NPs) supported under Project 1, as well as three additional NPAs:  
168. Project 1, specifically, focused on supporting 2 NPAs and 1 National Park: Nam Sam NPA and Nam Et 
Phou Louey National Park in Houaphan province and Nam Pouy NPA in Sayabouri province. They span 
12 districts, all of which have been supported under project 1. These NPAs cover 672,200 ha, of which 
approximately 96% of this protected area is classified as forest. 
169. Project 2 area contains 3 National Protected Areas (NPAs) – Nam Ha in Luang Namtha, Nam Kan in Bokeo 
province and Phou Hi Phi in Oudomxay province. They span 12 districts, which have all deliberately been 
selected for GCF project implementation. In total, these 3 NPAs cover an area of 367,150 ha.  
 
170. In particular, activity 3.2.1  will support adaptation mainstreaming within NPA planning and management 
(Sub-Activity 3.2.1.1), the revision of management plans for NPAs, scaling up participatory and cooperative 
processes for law enforcement and governance of NPAs (including community-based enforcement and 
monitoring facilitate through law enforcement action plans, Sub-Activity 3.2.1.2), identification and mapping 
of villages within and adjacent to NPAs, and the participatory development and implementation of village 
forest conservation agreements (VilFoCA) in ‘guardian villages’ (Sub-activities 3.2.1.3 and 3.2.1.4). Such 
sub-activities and related processes will build on the harmonized implementation approaches developed 
under project 1, considering lessons learned and best practices from the aforementioned projects. 
Together, these efforts will reduce deforestation and forest degradation, strengthen the resilience of forest 
ecosystems against climate change, provide additional incentives for conservation, and strengthen local 
livelihoods of forest dependent men and women living in and adjacent to NPAs.

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
190 The revision of NPA management plans will consider, among others: i) assessment of climate risks and vulnerability for the NPA, and 
development of recommendations to strengthen the resilience of local ecosystems and forest-dependent communities within to climate 
change. Such assessments will take into consideration upstream and downstream land use dynamics, and potential nature-based solutions 
to strengthen ecosystem services such as riparian zone protection and stabilization (e.g. reforesting degraded riparian zones, gully control, 
riverbank stabilization, among others); Assessment of key forest areas and the quantification of current and potential threats as a key 
component to develop NPA management plans; Zonation: Identification of suitable land use categories and climate-informed PLUP; 
Assessment and identification of alternative deforestation free and climate resilient livelihood opportunities for which villages will be eligible 
to receive village-level livelihood grants through village conservation contracts (linking NPA management to the VilFoCA process). 
191 Nam et Phou Louey National Park (Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Xiengkhouang) already has a LEAP that is operational. Lessons learned 
and best practices from the development and implementation of this LEAP will be considered when developing the plans in the other 5 
NPAs in the project area.  
192 Under Project 1 it was noted that each NPA has their own approach, thus Project 2 will also focus efforts to reflect on lessons learned from 
each NPA, and develop a harmonized approach. 
171. Financing for this activity will be provided from the Climate Change Funding Window to government entities 
and to villages. Government entities will be supported by the Province, District and National Management 
Units (PPMUs, DPMUs and NPMUs) in their annual work planning and budgeting. Work plans and budgets 
will be submitted to the EPF, and approved funds will then be disbursed in accordance with the Climate 
Change Funding Window Operations Manual (OM). 
 
172. Sub-activity 3.2.1.1: Capacity building on climate change adaptation and NPA management (EE: 
GIZ and GoL): This sub-activity will support climate change adaptation mainstreaming within NPA 
management approaches in Lao PDR. It will include the development of supporting materials and revised 
guidelines to facilitate the integration of climate-information and best practices for strengthening the 
resilience of forest ecosystems into NPA management plans and VilFoCA (building on PLUP under Activity 
1.2.2), and training provincial and district staff on revised guidance, climate-informed NPA planning, and 
best practices for strengthening resilience through the implementation of SFM and FLR.  
173. GCF grant finance will cover the implementation of this sub-activity, and will finance training and capacity 
building for government staff, national and international experts to support adaptation mainstreaming, and 
community-focused information material on regulations, livelihood opportunities and training-related 
information.  
 
174. Sub-activity 3.2.1.2: Improvement of management and law enforcement in NPA conservation 
landscape (EE: GIZ and GoL / / GoL co-finance): The 6 NPAs in the project area have NPA Management 
Plans that are valid until 2025. The project will support the revision of these plans for the next 5-year 
planning period. The revision of these management plans will build on the climate-informed land use plans 
developed under Activity 1.2.2, and will ensure adaptation is mainstreamed throughout the plan (building 
on guidance and capacity building provided under Sub-Activity 3.2.1.1).190 
175. In addition, this sub-activity will strengthen law enforcement in NPAs and National Parks. Specifically, it 
will include:  
• 
Investments in law enforcement tools, including patrolling equipment, in line with the needs identified 
in the LEAPs. 
• 
Development and implementation of Law Enforcement Action Plans (LEAPs) for 5 NPAs, 191 
supporting regular monitoring and enforcement of management plans, where high-risk areas will be 
targeted by PAFO staff.192  
• 
Development and implementation of a biodiversity monitoring strategy aimed at evaluating the 
effectiveness of NPA management actions. 
• 
Implementation of SMART law enforcement data management system to standardize the monitoring 
of enforcement efforts, threats and results over all NPA’s.  
• 
Capacity development for NPA and DOFI staff, support for strengthening inter-agency cooperation, 
and provision of equipment to support improved monitoring and enforcement.  
• 
Village engagement by PPMUs and DAFO staff within guardian villages. 
176. GCF grants and GoL co-finance will be used for the implementation of this sub-activity. GCF finance will 
cover service provision contracts to revise NPA management plans, investments in equipment for NPA 
management (e.g. GPS, relascope, IT equipment, cameras, sign board and billboards for boundary 
demarcation), stakeholder consultation and information dissemination events (including travel costs for 
government staff to visit villages within and in areas adjacent to NPAs).

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
193 KfW (2017), Village Fund Disbursement and Management Guideline. 
194 One change is the addition of World Bank as co-financier, where GoL will lead the implementation of Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2 with FCPF 
up-front and results-based payment (mid-term), which are new in comparison to Project 1. JICA, who previously was a cooperation partner 
under Project 1, will not be formally involved as an implementation partner under Project 2.   
177. Sub-activity 3.2.1.3: Development of new and amendment of existing village forest conservation 
agreements (VilFoCA) (EE: GIZ and GoL): This sub-activity will support the development of new and 
amendment of existing VilFoCA for villages within or adjacent to NPAs. These agreements will enable 
villages to access village-based grants for a set of eligible agricultural and forestry activities that support 
villages’ livelihoods and forest protection. The VilFoCA development process will follow guidelines 
developed by the ICBF project, which are based on a participatory process applying FPIC, and will be 
coherent with approved NPA management plans. VilFoCA development will also involve awareness raising 
on climate change and related risks and considerations for resilience building, linked with best practices 
for reducing deforestation and promoting sustainable land management to strengthen resilience and 
enhance livelihoods.   
178. GCF funds will cover the implementation of this sub-activity, and will cover costs of DAFO and PAFO to 
update and/or the development of VilFoCA. 
 
179. Sub-activity 3.2.1.4: Implementation of VilFoCA (sustainable land use, forest conservation and 
management) (EE: GIZ and GoL/ GoL co-finance): This sub-activity will facilitate the implementation of 
VilFoCA developed under the previous sub-activity. Technical and financial support will be provided to 
implement sustainable land use activities that are aligned with the VilFoCA and NPA management plans. 
Guidelines developed by the ICBF project will be followed, which permit activities such as the following:193 
• 
Natural and enhanced forest restoration. 
• 
Improved forest use through bamboo management for income generation. 
• 
Agroforestry for food security and income generation. 
• 
Non-timber forest products for income generation. 
• 
Aquatic conservation zones for livelihood benefits. 
180. Grants used for the implementation of VilFoCA will reduce the pressure on deforestation and reliance of 
unsustainable forest use, and will improve household incomes. The application process is described in 
the Climate Change Funding Window Operations Manual (Annex 21). 
181. This sub-activity will be financed through GCF grants and co-finance from GoL. GCF finance will cover 
equipment operation and maintenance costs, travel costs for government staff to visit villages to support 
with SFM trainings and VilFoCA monitoring, and will provide village conservation grants for NPA adjacent 
communities with approved VilFoCA to support them to implement their agreements while strengthening 
their livelihoods.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
182. Since Project 2 will build upon Project 1 and expand the area being covered to the initial six provinces, the 
institutional arrangements already in place will only change slightly (see Figure 14 below).194 This is 
informed through the ongoing implementation of FP117, which validated the suitability of the implemented 
approach.  
 
B.4.1 Project steering structure 
183. The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) provides administrative oversight of the project, ensuring 
coordination across ministries – initially for Project 1 and upon approval also for Project 2. The NPSC 
provides strategic implementation guidance to the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and 
Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSCs, the Provincial REDD+ Task Forces), whilst ensuring 
compliance with the NDC, the National REDD+ Strategy and national socio-economic development 
objectives. The structure of the NPSC builds upon the existing institutional structure for REDD+ in Lao 
PDR. Thus, the REDD+ Task Force, as the responsible government entity for REDD+, serves as the 
NPSC.  GIZ, as the Accredited Entity (AE) and one of two Executing Entities (EEs), will maintain observer 
status on the NPSC in order to provide strategic guidance and ensure that GCF-related guidance and 
compliance is provided to the national actors. The National Project Steering Committee will meet twice per 
year throughout the project implementation period, as well as on an ad hoc basis as and when required.

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
184. At the provincial level, the Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSCs, one for each participating 
province) will be led by the provincial REDD+ Task Force in each province, which are already in place 
under the broader ER-Programme. At the provincial level, the PPSCs will meet 4 times per year and review 
project implementation progress and provide support to address potential bottlenecks related to 
implementation.  
 
B.4.2 Project management, implementation and execution structure 
 
185. For Project 2, GIZ with its head office in Germany will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE), as to Project 1. 
The GIZ project in Lao PDR will continue to fulfil the role of an Executing Entity (EE) for Project 2, together 
with the Government of Lao PDR (represented by MAF and MoNRE) where the EPF will be responsible 
for execution. The Climate Change Funding Window under the EPF, already established and 
operationalised under Project 1, will also be utilised as a financial delivery mechanism for Project 2. 
Detailed information is available in the Climate Change Funding Window Operations Manual (Annex 21). 
 
Figure 14: Cooperation and contractual arrangements 
 
Role of GIZ as AE  
186. As the AE, GIZ will assume oversight responsibility for Project 2, as defined in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement between GCF and GIZ (AE). As AE, GIZ will administer project funds on behalf of the GCF and 
will provide oversight guidance and quality assurance of the EPF as EE through its relevant head office 
units.  
 
187. In order to implement Project 2, GIZ will need to establish legal arrangements with a new partner (World 
Bank), and amend legal arrangements with the remaining partners of Project 1 (i.e. IFAD, ADB and KfW - 
see Figure 15 below): 
• 
The German Federal Ministry for Cooperation and Development (BMZ) will amend the commissioning 
to GIZ with the implementation of Project 2 (amended commissioning agreement). The GCF will 
transfer funds based on the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) to the Accredited Entity GIZ.  
• 
As a new FAA will be signed for Project 2, the Government of Lao PDR (represented by MAF and 
MoNRE), as the Executing Entity (EE) will sign a new grant agreement (i.e. subsidiary agreement) with

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
GIZ (AE) for Project 2, based on GIZ standard operating procedures for grant agreements. This 
subsidiary agreement establishes the legal basis on which GIZ makes the GCF Proceeds available to 
the Environmental Protection Fund (EPF), as under Project 1, to enable the EPF to continue managing 
and operating grants disbursement through the Climate Change Funding Window, in accordance with 
the AMA and FAA.  
• 
Finally, GIZ (AE) will amend the existing implementation agreement signed under Project 1 with the 
Government of Laos (related to the BMZ commission and signed between GIZ and MAF) to cover 
project 2. 
 
Government of Lao PDR   represented by MAF and MoNRE as the main political partners  
188. The Government of Lao PDR, represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE), will serve as the main political partners. The 
government’s role in this respect is driven by the following considerations: 
• 
The mandates and functions of the two ministries, notably their sectoral relevance and the fact that 
MoNRE is the GCF National Designated Authority (NDA) of Lao PDR and is responsible for the EPF; 
and that MAF serves as the Chair of the REDD+ Task Force and is (together with the Ministry of 
Finance) the contract signing party with the FCPF Carbon Fund to sell GHG emission reductions and 
receive results-based payments. MAF is further responsible for the FPF, which will have two roles as: 
a) a beneficiary receiving capacity building support; b) once its capacities are satisfactorily built to 
potentially channel funds to beneficiaries.  
 
 
Figure 15: Legal implementation and cooperation arrangements 
 
 
GIZ as Executing Entity (EE) 
189. GIZ has been operating in Lao PDR since 1993 and currently employs approximately 250 staff members, 
most of them Lao nationals. GIZ technical assistance in the Lao forestry sector amounts to Euro 21 million, 
with Lao PDR ranking among the top 15 recipient countries of forestry-related German development 
assistance worldwide. 
190. In its capacity as an EE, GIZ will lead, and provide overall management of, the Technical Assistance (TA) 
to Project 2 at national and sub-national levels. It will be responsible for: 
• 
Managing the project budget of GIZ (EE) 
• 
Liaising with the GIZ Regional Office based in Vietnam regarding budget and finances, monitoring and 
reporting, staff and appraiser contract

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
195 Referred to as project owners in the operations manual, referring to entities who directly receive funding from EPF to implement actions 
and receiving funds under the Quarterly Plans, i.e. national government entities (DOF, DOFI, DOL), provincial government entities (PAFOs), 
district government entities (DAFOs), VFAGs and CSOs. Each Project Owner has a bank account specific to I-GFLL implementation.  
196 Coordination between the EPF with GIZ (EE) and DOF – will be ensured through their participation during NPMU quarterly meetings 
Furthermore, GIZ as EE will steer capacity building measures for the EPF and will provide technical support to the EPF as described under 
Activity 1.1.1. 
197 In order to ensure capacities remain at DoF after project completion, capacities are being built to enable a transformational change and 
enable income generation from sustainable climate resilient and deforestation free agriculture and land use during the course of the project. 
See Chapter B.6 for more detailed information.  
• 
Reporting to the German Embassy and BMZ regarding their financial contributions to the project, as 
well as the overall progress of project implementation 
• 
Coordinating project implementation with the co-financing development partners and their projects and 
counterparts, as well as other donors and projects operating in the same technical and/or geographical 
area.  
• 
Liaising with, and reporting to, the NPSC and PPSCs 
• 
Coordinating with, and reporting to, line ministries involved in the project (MAF, MoNRE), as well as 
MPI and the GCF NDA in Lao PDR (Department of Planning and Finance within MoNRE) 
• 
Supporting establishment and management of the NPMU, as well as the management of Provincial 
Project Management Units (PPMUs) in each of the 6 project provinces and District Project 
Management Units (DPMUs) in each of the project’s target districts.  
191. GIZ as an EE will be responsible for a GCF budget for Project 2 of EUR 14.14 million. 
 
The Government of Lao PDR as an EE through the Environment Protection Fund  
192. The Government of Lao PDR (represented by the MAF and MoNRE) possesses the legal personality to 
sign a subsidiary agreement with GIZ (AE) regarding the role that the EPF will play in operating the Climate 
Change Funding Window (see below). While the legal agreement with GIZ (AE) will be signed with the 
Government, the GCF funding will flow from GIZ (AE) direct to the EPF, which will be responsible for (see 
Climate Change Funding Window Operations Manual and Grant Agreement for more detailed information): 
▪ 
Securing fiduciary standards regarding all financial management, approvals and disbursements 
▪ 
Disbursement of grants to ‘project owners’195  
▪ 
Responsible for financial management at the project level, following the respective financial guidelines 
in the Climate Change Funding Window Operations Manual 
▪ 
Annually submit project level reports to GIZ, as outlined in the Grant Agreement 
▪ 
Write final programme level report to GIZ 
▪ 
Submission of final financial statement to GIZ (AE)   
193. EPF is also undergoing the process to apply for GCF Accreditation, and this project will further support 
them to build their capacities (under Activity 1.1.1), and gain valuable experience in implementing a GCF 
project.  
 
NPMU, PPMUs and DPMUs 
194. Project management units will be established at the national, provincial and district level, following the 
structure applied under Project 1.  
195. The National Project Management Unit (NPMU), established within the Department of Forestry (DoF) of 
MAF under Project 1, will remain in place to manage Project 2. The NPMU’s physical location in DoF will 
continue to foster local ownership of the project, build institutional capacity and to ensure continuous 
linkage with Government policy-making and implementation of other initiatives.  
196. NPMU will continue to closely coordinate with the responsible government agencies on relevant activities 
and will provide technical and financial management support.  
197. In relation to the operationalisation of the Climate Change Funding Window the NPMU will have following 
responsibilities196: 
▪ 
Revision, consolidation and approval of the Annual Work Plan (AWP)   
▪ 
Supporting the preparation of quarterly plans at the national, provincial and district level  
▪ 
Provision of technical assistance to national government entities, PPMUs, DPMUs and civil society 
organizations (CSOs)197 
▪ 
Assigning a NPMU team to supervise the implementation of national government entity and CSO 
quarterly plans 
▪ 
Appraisal, approval and monitoring of all quarterly plans (following criteria outlined in the Operations 
Manual in Annex 21) 
▪ 
Final approval of “VFAG Fund Requests” from VFAG-Cs

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
198 See Figures 2 and 3, and Table 2 in Annex 21 for more detailed information.  
199 Currently the Operations Manual developed under Project 1 only cover four out of five payment types including operational funds, 
investment payments, upfront payments and bonus payments. Matching grants as the fifth type of payment will be included in an updated 
version of the Operations Manual. 
▪ 
Jointly review and approval of applications of Agri-MSEMs Matching Grants together with the EPF and 
GIZ during NPMU quarterly meetings 
▪ 
Monitoring of the Agri-MSEMs Matching Grants investments  
▪ 
Support the preparation and final approval of monthly implementation reports 
▪ 
Give recommendations to PPMU and DPMUs based on implementation monitoring 
▪ 
Supporting risk management processes as outlined in the Project Operations Manual  
▪ 
Oversee project implementation  
198. PPMUs and DPMUs, under the instruction of the NPMU, will assist the NPMU team in executing the above 
responsibilities. In addition to mirroring national-level responsibilities at the local level, PPMUs and DPMUs 
will have an additional responsibility at the provincial and district levels. In the event that project 
beneficiaries (e.g. VFAGs) are not able to independently prepare adequate annual operational plans and 
budgets, PPMUs and DPMUs will assist beneficiaries to complete appropriate plans. Detailed 
responsibilities and processes are described in the Climate Change Funding Window Operations 
Manual.198 
 
B.4.3 Flow of Funds  
199. The following Figure 16 depicts the overall flow of funds for Project 2. Funds from GCF will be transferred 
to GIZ as AE, who will then transfer funds through the EPF Climate Change Funding Window to the 
beneficiaries and directly to GIZ Lao PDR (in its role as EE). KfW, World Bank, ADB and IFAD provide co-
financing through the Government of Laos.  
Figure 16: Fund flow structure 
 
 
Climate change funding window project cycle and fund disbursement process 
200. As described above, GIZ will make GCF Proceeds available to the environment Protection Fund, who will 
then channel funds to beneficiaries through the Climate Change Funding Window, developed and utilized 
under Project 1. Detailed procedures are outlined in the Climate Change Funding Window Operations 
Manual (Annex 21).199  
201. The EPF, as described in the Operations Manual (Annex 21), is responsible for the administration and 
transfer of project funds to beneficiaries, including all related financial monitoring and auditing and ensuring 
         
      
                  
          
     
         
       
            
      
                 
   
   
        
   
              
             
   
         
    
             
                 
               
            
            
               
                
               
         
             
      
                 
   
      
        
   
      
           
              
   
            
          
             
   
      
             
               
                         
 low of  unds      rant

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
compliance with the GCF ESS and Gender requirements. Detailed responsibilities and the role of the 
NPMU and EPF are stated under chapter 1.4 Processes and Responsibilities in the Operations Manual. 
202. Grant payments channelled through the Climate Change Funding Window are of five types: operational 
funds, investment payments, upfront payments, bonus payments and matching grants. Operational 
payments ensure the implementation of planned activities (for instance, capacity development measures, 
equipment procurement, etc.). Upfront payments are ex ante payments issued to beneficiaries to support 
defined activities (outlined in a written budget request submitted by the beneficiary to the NPMU). Bonus 
payments are ex post payments issued by the Climate Change Funding Window to support defined 
activities that have been achieved according to a pre-defined performance metric. Investment payments 
are ex ante payments issued to VFAG-Cs to support activities listed in a white-list (for Good Agriculture 
Practices). Matching grants are payments issued in form of business contracts for agri-MSMEs to support 
(linked to Activity 2.2.1), and were redesigned under Project 2. 
203. The choice of payment modality for particular project elements has been made primarily on the basis of 
beneficiaries’ capabilities and incentives (i.e.  a realistic assessment of their ability to implement activities 
using pre-existing skills and financial resources). Note, however, that in some respects the distinction 
between upfront payments and performance-based payments is somewhat artificial. Upfront payments will 
be issued on an annual basis. This means that, if continued funding is required, the beneficiary will be 
required to submit a new funding request. This provides an opportunity for the NPMU technical team to 
assess beneficiary performance to date and, if needed, to stipulate corrective actions or to withhold 
subsequent payments. Thus, even for upfront payments there is a performance-based element. 
204. Grant payments to beneficiaries through the Climate Change Funding Window will range between 
approximately Euro 10,000 to Euro 50,000. The value of each grant payment will be determined by the 
amount requested by the beneficiary for specific activities (in the form of an ex ante written funding 
request), the amount subsequently agreed with the NPMU technical team and the beneficiary on the basis 
of the beneficiary’s initial request, and – if there is an ex-post performance element – on the verified 
performance of the implemented activities. The basis for all payments besides matching grants is detailed 
annual workplans for national, provincial and district (including village) levels. Workplans will be developed 
during joint planning meetings and through the participation/involvement of all concerned stakeholders 
(government, CSOs, private sector, etc.). Within those plans, the timelines, budgets, concerned 
organizations, implementing agencies, performance metrics (if relevant), etc. will be noted and agreed on. 
205. Through the Climate Change Funding Window, the EPF will channel Euro 19.39 million of the GCF grant 
to Project 2 beneficiaries (Table 10 below).  
 
Table 10: Beneficiary eligibility criteria for the Climate Change Funding Window 
Beneficiary 
Category 
Activities supported 
through the Climate 
Change Funding 
Window 
Eligibility Criteria to receive Funding through the Climate 
Change Funding Window 
Government 
agencies (at 
national, provincial 
and district levels) 
Law enforcement; land 
use planning; agriculture 
and forestry; MRV; 
safeguards 
implementation 
▪ 
Approval of budget requests submitted to the NPMU 
VFAG 
PSAP investment plans, 
VFAG-related 
management and 
monitoring 
▪ 
Eligible VFAGs must be in the target villages. VFAG guidelines 
outline various conditions and criteria that VFAGs must comply 
with. This includes (among others): Approval of budget requests 
submitted to the NPMU; establishment of a VFAG committee in 
beneficiary villages; activities seeking funding conform with a 
White List of eligible activities (PSAP).  
▪ 
For more information please refer to the VFAG guidelines 
(Annex 2f). 
Micro, Small and 
Medium agri-
Enterprises 
(MSMEs) 
Matching grants (up to 
50%) to support climate 
resilient and 
• 
Agri-MSME  
• 
Focus on processing or marketing at least 1 commodity within 
the subset of the “White List”  
• 
Eligible investment areas (see table Indicative positive list of 
investment categories)

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
200 The Government and CSOs sub-windows are presented in combined form here because they closely complement each other (as merged 
in the Operational Manual). 
deforestation free value 
chain development 
• 
Must be officially registered with DoIC in Lao PDR 
• 
Company must be in operations for at least 2 years. 
• 
Must have operations in one of the 6 target provinces (at the 
province, district, or village level) 
• 
Must have a bank account at the point of matching grant 
application; must show financial statements for at least one 
year. 
• 
Must be able to provide up to 50% of co-financing  
 
Table 11. Climate Change Funding Window Grant Allocations 
Climate Change 
Funding Window 
Sub-Window 
Total 
Operational 
Funds (Euro) 
Total Upfront 
Payments 
(Euro) 
Total 
VFMP/ViFoCA 
Implementation 
Total 
Performance-
based Payments 
(Euro) 
Total 
Payments 
(Euro) 
Government and 
CSOs200 
7.72 million 
 
 
 
7.72 million 
VFAGs 
 
3.84 million  
3.13 million 
2.9 million 
9.87 million 
Agri-MSMEs 
 
1.8 million 
 
 
1.8 million  
Total 
7.72 million 
5.64 million  
3.13 
2.9 million 
19.39 million 
 
B.4.4 Regulation, taxation and insurance 
Privileges, immunities and taxation 
206. The Federal Republic of Germany has concluded Framework Agreements on Technical Cooperation under 
international public law with the Government of Lao PDR, which provide for certain privileges and 
immunities to be applied in projects and programmes of technical cooperation, including exemptions for 
taxes, customs, duties and fees. GIZ will endeavour to reach arrangements to have these privileges and 
immunities also applied to Project 2, including GCF proceeds. However, formal agreements will only be 
entered into after the project has been approved. 
Approvals, permits, licenses and land 
207. At the time of submitting this Funding Proposal, GIZ is not aware of the project requiring specific approvals, 
permits, licences or land to allow for the implementation of planned activities. 
Currency 
208. The local currency in Laos is the Lao KIP (code: LAK). The project’s local transactions will use LAK. The 
AE will manage GCF proceeds in Euro. GIZ will apply its standard rates for the conversion of currency. 
Insurance 
209. GIZ, as the AE, will ensure that project activities are adequately insured as per GIZ standard operating 
procedures and common practices. GIZ standard operating procedures require contractors to ensure 
required insurance cover. GIZ policies provide insurance cover for GIZ staff. At the time of submitting the 
Funding Proposal, GIZ does not anticipate additional insurance to cover special risks in this project. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
210. After decades of losing tropical forest, Lao PDR is actively seeking to implement an ambitious REDD+ 
emission reductions programme. Laos has committed substantial domestic resources, and has worked 
closely with bilateral and multilateral donors, to reach its current level of REDD+ readiness and ability to

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
201 UNICEF Lao PDR. 2021. Impact of COVID-19 on Lao PDR. 
202 Moody´s Investors Service Inc. 2020. Rating Action: Moody´s downgrades Laos´s rating to Caa2, outlook changed to negative.  
transform its forest sector. But capacity and funding gaps remain. No developing country has ever 
managed to achieve sustainable management of its forests and landscapes alone anywhere in the world. 
The degree and complexity of the necessary change is high. The need for financial and technical 
assistance is high. The updated NDC (2020) explicitly highlights the need for external support in achieving 
the 70% forest cover and the conditional target for emission reductions.  
211. At the same time, Northern Lao PDR is among the most vulnerable regions in the country to climate 
change, which poses substantial risks to the local population who is highly dependent on the particularly 
exposed agricultural sector for their livelihoods and wellbeing. Climate change poses a risk to human 
wellbeing, food security, and ecosystem health. The updated NDC notes the forestry and agriculture sector 
are among prioritized sectors in terms of climate change adaptation, and specifically highlights the need to 
strengthen cross-cutting measures with clear climate change mitigation and adaptation benefits. The 
AFOLU sector has substantial potential to strengthen cross-cutting measures, and Project 2 has been 
designed to strengthen the role of adaptation through building capacities, strengthening the use of climate 
information in planning and decision making, mobilizing finance for both mitigation and adaptation in the 
AFOLU sector, and scaling up cross-cutting investments with clear adaptation and mitigation benefits. 
Building on, and coordinating with, complementary initiatives, Lao PDR will deploy GCF support to remove 
investment barriers to unlock future results-based payments, domestic taxes and fees, and to create a 
sustainable environment for scaling-up REDD+ and climate resilient land use activities (see also Sections 
B. 6 and D.2 below). The transformation envisioned by the programme requires the active participation of 
private sector actors in the forestry and agriculture sectors. However, sustainability focused markets are 
severely underdeveloped and those focused on deforestation free products are almost non-existent. The 
development of these markets necessitates that significant technical support and targeted financial support 
is also provided to the private sector.   
212. Lao PDR needs GCF support in the form of a patient long-term commitment, which goes beyond the 
potential of Laos’s existing development partners and other potential financing alternatives: 
• 
Alternative 1 – More public financing: The Government of Lao PDR is committed and contributes a 
substantial amount of co-finance (Euro 11.8 million) to Project 1 and anticipates a co-financing 
contribution of EUR 6.9 million to Project 2.  
• 
Alternative 2 – More grants from other development partners: All of Lao PDR’s main development 
partners in the forest sector already support the GCF project. Germany and Japan have both 
committed grant financing to Project 1, and ADB and IFAD have committed loan packages for the 
implementation of improved agricultural practices and to reduce the pressure on expansion into 
forested landscapes. The World Bank (FCPF Carbon Fund) is offering Lao PDR REDD+ results-based 
payments. Additionally, the FCPF has worked closely with GIZ and the government to support the 
development of the GCF Programme by scheduling the ESMF and gender work streams to match the 
project’s needs. The FCPF has also provided key data for the development of the project. With this 
support, there are still gaps to meet the country’s ambitious climate targets.  
• 
Alternative 3 – Additional loans for the Government of Lao PDR: According to the IMF’s Debt 
Sustainability Analysis, “Lao PDR’s risk of external debt distress remains high, suggesting the urgent 
need to tighten fiscal policy, strengthen public financial management, and develop a comprehensive 
medium-term debt management strategy.” Despite these constraints, the government borrowed Euro 
24.1 million from ADB and Euro 11.35 million from IFAD to complement both GCF projects. Since the 
development of Project 1, Lao PDR’s economy has been hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic. UNICEF 
released a series of reports in 2021 that note the country’s economy could contract by 1.8-3.3%, and 
there are substantial urgent investments needed to support the country´s pandemic response (e.g. 
health care, nutrition and food security, among others).201 In August 2020, Moody´s downgraded Lao 
PDRs issuer rating to Caa2 from B3 noting a negative outlook and highlighting that “Laos is facing 
severe liquidity stress, given sizeable debt servicing payments due this year and persisting until 2025, 
and constrained financing options. Heightened liquidity risk is exacerbated by weak external and fiscal 
buffers and poor governance, and points to a material probability of default in the near term.”202 Thus, 
there is limited ability for Lao PDR, a LLDC, to take on additional loans for climate change in this 
particularly challenging context, although support for a climate action and a green recovery to the 
COVID-19 pandemic is urgently needed.   
• 
Alternative 4 – Loans for households and agri-MSMEs: The beneficiary groups – village 
subsistence farmers – are among the poorest population groups in Lao PDR, with a high dependence

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
on natural resources and poor access to markets and financial services, and they have insufficient 
assets for the repayment of loans. Approximately 28% of inhabitants in the Project 1 area live below 
the poverty line, higher than the national average of 23%. The possibility of working with local financial 
institutions was scoped during the project formulation process. During the development of this FP, five 
local financial institutions were consulted to assess their potential support to the project and specifically 
for managing the matching grants for agri-MSMEs and developing tailored products. The consultations 
revealed that this would not be feasible amongst other reasons due to the inability of institutions 
consulted for managing international grant finance and their operational footprint in target areas (see 
Annex 2a for more details). Thus grant financing combined with technical assistance has been 
determined to be the most appropriate financing instrument for these beneficiary groups. The GCF’s 
added value will be to support the poorest population groups of the country in the transformation 
towards more sustainable land use practices. Support for agri-MSME’s will require matching grants, to 
ensure their ownership and commitment to the project, while the provision of business plan 
development and investment support will enable them to implement and scale up more sustainable 
investments in the future, after the GCF project provides initial support to get their investments in 
sustainable and deforestation free value chains off the ground.  
 
213. As such, in the absence of viable alternatives, the Government requests GCF grant financing, which will 
enable the project to: 
• 
Help overcome the government’s constraints to source public funding or assume additional debt to 
invest in measures needed to reduce deforestation and forest degradation and strengthen climate 
resilience.  
• 
Demonstrate and scale-up investments in deforestation free, and climate resilient agriculture, and 
forest landscape restoration and related value chains. 
• 
Strengthen the use of climate-data in land use planning, and ensure integrated planning at the 
watershed level (through scaling up the implementation of the revised PLUP 2.0 process, and related 
capacity development). 
• 
Build the capacities of forest-dependent persons to understand climate-risks, and suitable risk 
reduction practices in the AFOLU sector, while supporting the capacity development of institutional 
structures (VFAGs) that may facilitate access to additional funds for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in the future. 
• 
Build national capacities to mobilize, channel and monitor climate finance, from both domestic and 
international sources. 
• 
Strengthen an enabling environment for REDD+, climate resilient agriculture and ecosystem-based 
adaptation in Lao PDR, including strengthened law enforcement and monitoring, and climate-informed 
land use planning. 
• 
Strengthen the often-overlooked interlinkages between REDD+ and climate change adaptation, and 
support the mobilization of funds for cross-cutting measures in the agriculture and forestry sectors. 
• 
Implement Lao PDR’s updated NDC, including adaptation measures in the agriculture and forestry 
sector, and helping the country to meet conditional emission reduction targets. 
• 
Facilitate the engagement of the private sector, and specifically agri-MSMEs through the use of 
matching grants, in the development of sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free value 
chains that remain after project implementation. This would not happen in the absence of concessional 
finance due to the barriers faced by these actors to access finance in general and finance for 
sustainability-oriented investments in particular.  
 
214. To ensure efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability in the use of grants, the project applies the following 
principles:  
• 
The AE and EPF will disburse GCF grants in tranches, with the second and consecutive tranches 
conditional on financial accounting.  
• 
Grant finance channelled by EPF will benefit from efficiency gains from the processes developed, and 
experiences generated, under Project 1. It will also help the fund acquire capacities related to climate 
finance and prepare them to develop, implement, manage and monitor their own GCF or climate 
finance projects in the future 
• 
The GoL will make available unlocked financing (results-based payments, tax, fees) to finance 
sustainable deforestation free and climate resilient investments in AFOLU, replacing GCF grants and 
closing the funding gap to transform the forest sector. 
• 
Concessionally to the private sector will be minimal and processes will be in place to ensure that 
matching grants are specifically targeted at closing the viability gaps faced by agri-MSME for

=== PAGE 66 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
203 Double counting of emission reductions – understood to involve an emission reduction being counted more than once towards a mitigation 
pledge – will be avoided through the transparent reporting and accounting of emission reductions using UNFCCC (e.g. BUR technical 
annex), NDC and FCPF accounting protocols. Once the Government of Lao PDR receives FCPF payments for emission reductions, those 
emission reductions will be retired so that they cannot be ‘re-used’. 
investments that support the development of climate resilient and deforestation free value chains and 
the predictability of demand for sustainably produced agricultural products at village level.  
 
215. In addition, lessons learned from Project 1 have been reflected in the design of the Project 2, where 
activities have been adjusted to strengthen climate change adaptation and ensure the efficient and 
effective use of grant resources (highlighted in throughout Section B.3, and further discussed within Annex 
2c). A clear financial exit strategy has been developed, which shows how project activities will contribute 
to a sustained paradigm shift, and continue to mobilize additional public and private financial resources in 
the future that will enable continued scaling up of sustainable land use practices and investments (see 
Sections B.6 and D.2 below). 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
216. The entire project approach is designed around a distinct exit strategy: GCF grant financing will enable the 
GoL to: (i) initially and temporarily close the structural funding gap for transforming the forest sector through 
the provision of GCF grant finance, and (ii) permanently close the structural funding gap by unlocking and 
increasing additional financing streams for the sector. The key elements of the exit strategy are:  
• 
Enable access to REDD+ results-based payments to facilitate the upscaling of cross-cutting 
measures for sustainable land management: Project 2 will build on the advances from Project 1, 
and continue to scale up necessary activities that build up an enabling environment for REDD+ and 
sustainable land management (e.g. climate-informed, participatory and integrated land use planning, 
strengthened law enforcement and monitoring), while scaling investments in deforestation free and 
climate resilient agriculture practices, sustainable forest management and forest landscape 
restoration. These measures will continue to help deliver emission reductions that enable Lao PDR to 
access REDD+ RBP – initially, and most concretely, through the FCPF Carbon Fund and later through 
other potential (e.g. UNFCCC) channels.203 The project’s focus on strengthening adaptation will also 
help channel mobilized funds for REDD+ into activities and investments with clear adaptation benefits.  
• 
Attract increased private sector investment: The project is designed to facilitate greater (and more 
sustainability-oriented) private sector investment in the forestry and agriculture sectors. Project 2 
activities specifically devoted to private sector development (Component 2) will mobilise new and 
additional investment and provide targeted investment support for agri-MSMEs – an often overlooked 
actor with substantial potential to facilitate a transformational change in the target sectors. By 
developing and deploying tailored matching grants for agri-SMES, the project will mobilize at least 
EUR 1.8 million for supporting the development of climate resilient and deforestation free value chains 
increasing the predictability of demand for producers adopting PSAP promoted farming models. The 
enabling environment for facilitating additional private sector investment be further strengthened by 
improved capacities on sustainable forest and agricultural land management, as well as advancements 
in law enforcement and monitoring that will create an improved investment climate by strengthening 
the implementation of the revised regulatory framework (supported under Project 1) and ensuring 
transparency and accountability for sustainable land-based investments.  
• 
Mobilise national and international sustainable finance for sustainable and climate resilient 
land management and REDD+: With GCF support, the structural funding gap will be closed by 
unlocking and increasing additional national and international financing streams for the forest and 
agricultural sectors. Matching grants for agri-MSMEs will catalyse private sector investments in 
deforestation free and climate resilient agricultural value chains. The implementation of sustainably 
planned VFMPs will take into account new provisions under the forest law, enabling villagers to benefit 
from the commercial use and sale of timber and NTFPs from village forests, providing direct income 
to villagers, and providing revenue to the Forest Protection Fund through forest licensing fees, and 
taxes. The project will also help identify suitable new funding sources and actively facilitate that Laos 
gains access. Project 2 (specifically Activity 1.1.1) will further explore additional and suitable sources 
of long-term finance, including (among others): 
o 
Alternative REDD+ results-based payments for ERs generated in excess of the contract volume 
of the FCPF Carbon Fund. This will include potential market- and non-market voluntary initiatives 
such as the Lowering Emissions by Accelerating Forest Finance Coalition or participation in 
broader voluntary carbon markets demanding ERs from jurisdictional programs. The project will

=== PAGE 67 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
204 The close link to the ER Programme ensures that excess ER are compatible with emerging market-based approaches like the LEAF 
programme that was initiated by the Governments of Norway and UK to bring more private sector finance into REDD+ while maintaining 
high environmental integrity (https://leafcoalition.org/). The Methodological Framework of the Carbon Fund allows fungibility of ER with the 
ART/TREES (https://www.artredd.org/) with limited adaptation (5-year reference period for the FREL). ART/TREES is anticipated to be the 
main standard for high integrity market transactions for jurisdictional and national REDD+ programs and shall also inform the development 
of any mechanism under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Thus, continued performance in reducing emissions even after the expiry of the 
CF ERPA opens the opportunity to access to international financing sources for REDD+. 
205 The few impact investors active in the country are predominantly invested in renewable energy and the provision of financial services. 
Prasad, M., Bauer, S., Gokhale, A., Borthakur, S., & Reddy, H. (n.d.). THE LANDSCAPE FOR IMPACT INVESTING IN SOUTHEAST ASIA. 
40. 
206 For more information on the financing modalities, please refer to Chapter B.4. 
provide overall support for facilitating conformance with the methodological requirements 
(accounting and safeguards) of market-oriented carbon standards such as ART/TREES204 or 
others.    
o 
Market and cooperative approaches under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, where Lao PDR will 
be supported on developing its approach to define eligible land use programs, projects, and units 
within their NDC; adherence to integrity principles, and with capacities to meet the requirements 
of an enhanced transparency framework to address issues related to corresponding adjustments.  
o 
Overall support to the NDA to develop a financing strategy to identify and fundraise climate 
finance to meet conditional NDC targets and the climate change adaptation investment needs 
outlined in the NDC and that considers domestic government revenues as well potential strategies 
to work with private impact investors active in the region205.  
 
217. Figure 17 below provides an overview of the main financing mechanisms the project plans to utilize to 
achieve its impact, contribute to a paradigm shift, and ensure the overall long-term sustainability of the 
project. 
• 
Develop the capacities of EPF and FPF to mobilize and channel climate finance: The project will 
continue to strengthen the capacities of the EPF, which acts as an EE, to manage parts of grant 
financing for the project. The project will continue to channel GCF grant financing (in a staggered, 
performance-based manner) through the Climate Change Funding Window to participating villages 
and stakeholders for implementing SFM, FLR and deforestation free agriculture as well as matching 
grants to agri-MSMEs .206 Project 2 will further build the capacity of EPF as it undergoes its GCF 
accreditation process (aligned with their 2nd GCF Readiness Grant), eventually enabling EPF to 
develop and implement their own GCF projects. Project 2 will also continue to support capacity building 
of FPF, in close coordination with the World Bank, to help them to meet the necessary international 
standards required for them to take over fund management and disbursement (including REDD+ 
results-based payments), and realize their legal mandate to collect and disburse forest sector financing 
to the district and village levels.  
• 
Strengthen the provision of alternative livelihood opportunities that facilitate a transition 
towards low-emission, deforestation free and climate resilient livelihoods and land use:  
Additional income and livelihood opportunities, in conjunction with capacity building, extension support, 
participatory land use planning and reasonable law enforcement, will create a cascading effect and 
maintain the low-emission development trajectory triggered by the project. Project 2’s strengthening of 
adaptation measures, including integrating planning in a landscape approach and scaling up climate 
resilient investments (among others), will further facilitate strengthened resilience of local livelihoods 
and the ecosystems upon which they depend. The financial and economic analysis (Annex 3) 
demonstrates that the proposed interventions are viable in the long-run, with positive net present 
values as well as many other social, economic and environmental co-benefits.  
• 
Ensure alignment with national policies and development plans: The project is closely aligned 
with, and explicitly supportive of government policies and plans. By aligning the project with key 
national climate policies, priorities and commitments, the changes of continuity of impacts and activities 
after the GCF investment ends are very high. 
 
218. It will be the responsibility of the Government of Lao PDR, including the National REDD+ Task Force, 
MoNRE (including EPF) and MAF, to monitor and ensure that the structural funding gaps for low-emission, 
deforestation free and climate resilient land use will be closed. The National REDD+ Task Force, with its 
given mandate, will follow-up with and provide guidance to the Provincial REDD+ Task Force, chaired by 
the respective governors, to ensure the sustainability of the GCF financed paradigm shift pathway. In 
addition, strengthened capacities of EPF and FPF, as described above, will further facilitate improved 
monitoring, mobilization and channelling of public and private climate finance.

=== PAGE 68 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Overview of the complementary financing mechanisms utilized by the project to contribute 
to the project’s long-term sustainability

=== PAGE 69 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
32.82 
million euro (€)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Equity 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Guarantees 
 
 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
32.82  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
41.26 
million euro (€) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrumen
t 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Government of 
Lao PDR 
In kind 
 
6.91 
million euro 
(€)  
 
 
 
BMZ 
(implemented 
through GIZ) 
Grant 
 
0.86 
million euro 
(€)  
 
 
 
ADB 
Senior 
Loan 
and 
grant 
13.07 
million euro 
(€)  
 
 
 
IFAD  
Senior 
Loans 
2.53 
million euro 
(€)  
 
 
 
BMZ 
(implemented 
through KfW)  
Grant  
2.25 
million euro 
(€) 
 
 
 
World Bank 
(FCPF) 
FCPF 
Results-
based 
paymen
ts 
15.64 
million euro 
(€) 
 
 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
74.08 
million euro (€)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
Project 2 Co-finance: 
The following provides an overview of the co-financiers for Project 2:207 
The Government of Lao PDR will contribute co-finance of Euro 5.92 million towards the 
implementation of Project 2. Key government inputs will be staff time contributions by 
national-, provincial- and district-level staff. 
 
 
207 Co-financing commitment letters are provided in Annex 13.

=== PAGE 70 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
BMZ financing: The total BMZ financing for the project amounts to Euro 3.11 million of 
this, Euro 0.86 million will be implemented through GIZ as an Executing Entity in Lao 
PDR. GIZ (Executing Entity) will finance the implementation of Activities 1.1.1, activity 
1.2.1, 1.2.3, 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 3.2.1 as well as parts of activities  3.1.1. The remaining Euro 
2.25 million of BMZ financing will be implemented by KfW through its Village Forest 
Management Programme (VFMP).  
 
ADB will provide co-financing of Euro 13.07 million to implement Activity 2.1.3 (in 
conjunction with the Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector 
project, SRIWSM). 
  
The IFAD PICSA loan project with the Government of Lao PDR will co-finance Project 2 
with Euro 2.53 million to support the implementation of Activity 2.1.3. IFAD will provide 
loans direct to the Ministry of Agriculture. The IFAD loan is a stand-alone, sovereign loan 
to the Government, which will be supervised on technical and fiduciary aspects. IFAD will 
also supervise procurements. IFAD supervision will involve field missions to the project 
area to check compliance with procedures. 
 
The World Bank through the FCPF Carbon Fund will co-finance Project 2 with EUR 15.64 
million to support and sustain the implementation of activities under Components 2 and 
3. World Bank co-finance will implement Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2 through the 
operationalization of the Benefit Sharing Plan in the six target provinces. 
 
Co-Financing Flows 
IFAD, KfW and ADB sign loan contracts with the Lao Government (MoF/MAF) to channels 
funds to MAF and then onwards to the Departments in the Ministry and to sub-national 
agencies; BMZ channels funds to GIZ and GIZ then provides mainly technical assistance 
to local partners. See Chapter B.4 for more detailed information. 
 
Other financing (e.g., mobilized private finance) pr: 
The project will mobilize at least EUR 1.8 million from the private sector, and specifically 
agri-MSMES, for supporting the development of climate resilient and deforestation free 
value chains through the strategic use of matching grants (Activity 2.2.1). 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
The following Table provides an overview of project finance by component and co-financing partners. 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1: 
Creation of an 
enabling 
environment for 
REDD+ 
implementation 
Output 1.1: 
Organizational 
structure and 
capacities of 
domestic 
(financial) 
institutions are 
strengthened 
to access, 
mobilize, 
manage, and 
monitor the 
use of climate 
finance from 
diverse public 
and private 
sources 
1.70 
1.64 
Grants 
0.06 
In-kind 
Grants 
 
GoL 
BMZ

=== PAGE 71 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.2: 
Participatory 
Village Land 
Use Plans are 
developed and 
are climate 
informed and 
integrate 
measures to 
strengthen 
climate 
resilience 
6.64 
4.84 
Grants 
1.81 
in-kind 
Grants 
 
GoL 
BMZ 
KfW 
 
Component 2: 
Market 
solutions for 
agricultural 
drivers of 
deforestation 
Output 2.1: 
Villagers are 
trained by 
capacitated 
government 
staff and 
enabled to 
produce 
sustainable, 
climate 
resilient and 
deforestation-
free 
agricultural 
and 
agroforestry 
products, 
strengthening 
their access to 
sustainability-
oriented 
markets 
35.39 
11.89 
Grants 
23.50 
In-kind 
Grants 
Senior-
Loans 
RbP 
GoL 
BMZ 
ADB 
IFAD 
WB 
Output 2.2: 
Agri-MSMEs 
are 
capacitated 
and have 
improved 
incentives and 
access to 
finance to 
invest in 
marketing and 
processing for 
locally 
sourced 
deforestation-
free and 
climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
products 
3.08 
3.08 
Grants 
 
 
 
Component 3: 
Climate 
Change 
mitigation and 
Output 3.1: 
Village 
communities 
are trained by 
capacitated 
government 
14.87 
5.53 
Grants 
9.34 
In-kind 
Grants 
RbP 
GoL 
BMZ 
KfW 
WB

=== PAGE 72 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
adaptation 
through forestry 
staff and have 
the financial 
resources to 
implement 
sustainable 
(village) forest 
management 
plans that 
contribute to 
REDD+ and 
strengthen the 
resilience of 
forest 
ecosystems 
and their 
livelihoods 
that depend 
on them 
Output 3.2: 
NPA 
management 
plans are 
developed and 
communities 
are enabled 
and actively 
engaged in 
implementing 
conservation 
agreements in 
NPAs that 
enable 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
and forest 
conservation 
4.22  
2.25 
Grants 
1.97 
In-kind 
 
GoL 
PMC 
 
6.07 
1.49 
 
4.58 
 
GoL 
BMZ 
IFAD 
WB 
M&E 
 
1.60 
1.60 
 
 
 
 
Contingencies 
 
0.5 
0.5 
 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (EUR) 
74.08 
32.82 
41.26 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
 
219. The long-term sustainability of project interventions is enhanced by the project’s focus on individual and 
institutional capacity building, both of the project’s implementing entities and the key beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 73 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
Measures focused on institutional strengthening at the provincial, district and local levels form an essential 
element of the individual activities, given local capacities and the general low level of awareness of 
sustainable practices. Government entities and the rural population (agents of deforestation and forest 
degradation) will have improved skills and awareness of climate change, related risks and suitable best 
practices for climate-resilient and sustainable land use management. Through strengthened awareness 
and capacities, it is likely that they will continue to support such measures after project completion (see 
also Sections B.6 and D.2). Such interventions will further enhance the sense of ownership of provincial 
and district governments during the project lifetime, as well as the ongoing implementation of such activities 
after project closure.

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.1.1 Impact Potential - Mitigation 
220. The ER-P Reference Level (RL) accounting area covers precisely the same six provinces (Bokeo, Houaphan, 
Luang Namtha, Luang Prabang, Oudomxay and Sayabouri) as covered by this GCF project: therefore, the 
geographical footprints of the ER-P Reference Level and the GCF project are the same. 
221. The methodological approach is based on the methodology used for the preparation of the Reference Level (RL), 
which was submitted and approved (in June 2018) by the FCPF Carbon Fund and is compliant with the Carbon 
Fund Methodological Framework 208 . The approach equates to a highly detailed Tier 3 approach in IPCC 
terminology. For a detailed description of the Reference Level (RL) methodology, please refer to the ER-PD 
(Chapters 8 and 11) and respective Annexes (activity data, emission factors and forest degradation assessment). 
The same methodology will be replicated for the ex-post assessment of the achieved GHG emission reductions 
and removals within the GCF Programme. 
222. Project 2 (this project) mitigates 4.6 million tCO2eq during its 4-year implementation period, at a cost to the GCF of 
Euro 5.06/tCO2eq.209 The overarching GCF Programme (i.e. Projects 1 and 2) will mitigate 11.7 million tCO2eq 
during the programme implementation period of 7 years (2020-2026). 
223. The emission reduction potential is calculated similarly as for Project 1. It applies the FRL of the ER-Programme 
(including activity data and emission factors, forest cover change matrices for the years 2005 ,2010 and 2015) and 
considers the forest area (by land use) being targeted through the forestry related interventions under component 
3 (i.e. >260.000 ha). 
224. Details on the calculations of the baseline scenario and the projection of the GCF implementation are outlined in 
the GHG Methodology Note in Annex 22a. 
225. Large areas of the project area are covered by regenerating vegetation with the possibility to recover to mature 
forest under sustainable forest management (based on expert consultations). In 2050, when all designated forest 
areas are completely recovered and under sustainable management, the project area will be characterised as zero 
net emission forestry, contributing to Lao PDR´s target to reach carbon neutrality by 2050 (as mentioned within Lao 
PDR´s updated NDC).210 
 
D.1.2. Impact Potential - Adaptation  
226. Even though the project has its origins in mitigation, it does have adaptation merits, and Project 2 has been 
intentionally designed to mainstream adaptation throughout its activities. Lao PDR is a LDC with limited adaptive 
capacities, which is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. Indeed, forestry and agriculture are two of four 
key sectors highlighted by Lao PDR’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA),211 as well as two of five 
key sectors identified in the NDC as being highly vulnerable to climate change.212 The country is considered to 
have a high risk of river flooding, landslides, cyclones and wildfires, a medium risk for extreme heat;213 and there 
are specific climate change impacts identified for the regions to be targeted with this project (see also the CRVA in 
Annex 2d). 
227. Although this GCF proposal is a REDD+ initiative, it builds on the NDC that highlights the possibility to strengthen 
cross-cutting measures in the forestry and agricultural sectors. The proposal incorporates interventions that will 
promote climate change adaptation – notably enhanced land-use planning (including improved considerations to 
link local level planning to the watershed level), improvements to irrigation infrastructure, reforestation in catchment 
areas and low-emission and climate resilient agriculture, among others. It further supports private sector MSMEs 
to strengthen climate resilient and low-emission agricultural value chains, which will provide incentives that help 
mobilize additional finance for climate change mitigation and adaptation in the country. Beyond this, the project will 
support the mobilization and improved channelling of public and private funds for climate finance, including a 
strengthened emphasis on supporting investments that have cross-cutting climate change impacts (not only 
mitigation).  
 
Direct and Indirect Beneficiaries 
 
208
 FCPF 
(2016), 
available 
at: 
https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2016/July/FCPF%20Carbon%20Fund%20Methodological%20Framework%20revis
ed%202016.pdf. 
209 80% mitigation share being considered for the calculation; budget requested for component 1-3. 
210 Lao PDR 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution. 
211 Lao PDR. 2009. National Adaptation Programme of Action to Climate Change. 
212 Lao PDR 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution. 
213 GFDRR, Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction. No Date. Lao People's Democratic Republic.

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
228. As described in Chapters B.1 and D.4, the project will work in some of the most vulnerable areas of Lao PDR, 
focusing on a sub-set of the population who is particularly at risk – smallholder farmers in predominantly upland 
areas, of which nearly half belong to ethnic minority groups.  
229. Project 2 will directly support 153,700 persons (76,850 men and 76,850 women – equivalent to 2.15% of the 
national population) to implement climate resilient practices, including climate resilient and low-emission 
agriculture, as well as various measures for forest landscape restoration (implementing FLR in village forests and 
NPAs).214 It will also contribute to increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making, through 
improved participatory land use planning, considering the link between local land use planning and the landscape 
level. By supporting the implementation of FLR, Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA), SFM and low-emission and 
climate resilient agriculture, based on integrated planning processes, it will further strengthen awareness of climate 
threats and risk-reduction processes. At the Programme level (i.e. Projects 1 and 2), 273,700 persons will directly 
benefit from the Programme (136,8500 women and 136,850 men), equivalent to 3.8% of the national population). 
230. Indirectly, Project 2 is expected to benefit 332,991 persons (166,496 women and 166,496 men – equivalent to 4.6% 
of the national population) through investments in sustainable land practices that will maintain or improve the 
provision of vital ecosystem services, as well as through improved forest monitoring and strengthened government 
capacities on climate change mitigation and adaptation. 215 The overarching Programme will indirectly benefit 
723,382 persons (361,691 women and 361691 men), equivalent to 10% of the national population. 
Ecosystems brought under improved, deforestation-free and climate-resilient land management 
231. The overarching Programme will bring 2,112,000 ha of terrestrial ecosystems under improved sustainable and 
climate-resilient land management practices informed by PLUP, of which 1,422,000 are forest ecosystems,216 and 
700,000 ha area agro-ecosystems.217 This includes also sustainable land management in 5 NPAs and 1 National 
Park, where the project will facilitate the restoration of forested land and the vital ecosystem services it provides. 
Through updating NPA management plans, strengthening forest monitoring and law enforcement, and through 
working closely with local communities to implement village forest conservation agreements the project will support 
the restoration and/or adoption of improved practices in 1,039,350 ha of conservation forests (see Chapter 6.6 for 
more information on the practices implemented in NPAs).218 The total area of forests covered under village forest 
management plans is 382,650 ha .219 
232. Focusing on the area of land covered directly by measures financed from VFAGs (related to PSAP and VFM), 
forest landscape restoration and sustainable forest management practices, including EbA, will be implemented on 
 
214 Direct beneficiaries calculated based on the following assumptions: 
▪ 
530 villages will be supported in Project 2 (240 villages with continued support from project 1, and an additional 290 villages under 
Project 2). There are approximately 530 people per village.  
▪ 
It is assumed al villagers in the target villages are direct beneficiaries, as they will benefit from land use planning and other project-
supported interventions.  
▪ 
Population data is based on the average rural village size in the project area based on the Lao Population and Housing Census Data 
2015 (https://lao.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/PHC-ENG-FNAL-WEB_0.pdf).  
215 Indirect beneficiaries are considered the population in the 29 districts covered by the project (17 districts within Luang Prabang, Sayabouri 
and Houaphan, and an additional 12 districts from Bokeo, Oudomxay and Luang Namtha), minus the number of direct beneficiaries. The 
population in all 29 districts will benefit from strengthened legal and regulatory frameworks from Project 1 and continued awareness raising 
and capacity building under Project 2, improved forest monitoring through PDMS, and strengthened government capacities on climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. The 29 districts are listed in Chapter 6.7, and the district population data was collected from the Lao PDR Population 
and Housing Census (2015).   
216 The Area (ha) under sustainable forest practices across forest categories = area of village forest and NPAs supported by the project. 
Project 2 will continue supporting NPAs and Village Forests Areas that are supported under Project 1.  
Village forests supported: 
▪ 
180,000 ha of village forests from project 1 will continue to be supported by Project 2 
▪ 
Project 2 is expected to support 290 new villages with VFM.  The average area of village forests covered under project 1 was 700 ha. 
Therefore, it is estimated that new VF groups under Project 2 will cover 203,000 ha. 
217Calculated considering the average village under Project 1 had 1,320.75 ha of agricultural land. This was then multiplied by 530 villages.   
218 Project 2 will work in 5 NPAs and 1 NP. Areas of NPAs and NP are determined based on their latest management plans. Baseline figures 
cover the 2 NPAs and 1 National Park covered under Project 1 (total area circa 672,200 ha):70,000 ha Nam Sam NPA; 411,000ha Nam et 
Phou Louey NP ; and191,200 ha Nam Pouy NPA. The total Figure under project 2 includes the baseline figures plus 3 additional NPAs 
supported in Bokeo, Luang Namtha and Oudomxay (combined area of 367,150 ha in these 3 NPAs): 87,350 ha Phou Hi Phi NPA; 222,400 
ha Nam Ha NPA; 57,400 ha Nam Kan NPA 
219Village forests supported includes forests supported under Project 1 plus additional village forests established under Project 2. A total of 
179,650 ha of village forests from project 1 will continue to be supported by Project 2. Project 2 is expected to support 290 new villages with 
VFM.  The average area of village forests covered under project 1 was 700 ha. Therefore, it is estimated that new VF groups under Project 2 
will cover 203,000 ha.

=== PAGE 76 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
191,500 ha of forested land,220 and low-emission and climate resilient measures will be implemented on in an 
additional 17,400 ha for a total Programme coverage of 31,800 ha of agricultural land. 
233. Table 12 below provides more detailed information about how the project addresses the main climate-related 
hazards. In addition, Table in Section B.3 provides an overview of the adaptation and mitigation impacts of a subset 
of crops included within the White List. The development of tools and strengthening institutional capacities on 
climate change adaptation within the AFOLU sector, supported throughout all 3 components as a cross-cutting 
element, will further facilitate replication and upscaling (see also Chapters E.2 and E.4 below).  
 
Table 12: Overview of climate-related hazards and their impacts and how the project aims to address them 
Hazard 
Impact 
Project Interventions 
Project Impact 
Increased 
occurrence 
of 
extreme 
precipitation 
events 
and 
floods 
in 
the 
monsoon 
season 
Increased occurrence of seasonal flooding 
during the monsoon season may lead to 
damage and losses of crops and livestock, 
damage 
to 
rural 
and 
transportation 
infrastructure, as well as a change in 
environmental services due to adverse 
environmental impacts (e.g. soil erosion 
and sedimentation). As majority of the 
population 
in 
the 
project 
area 
are 
smallholder farmers, including a high 
proportion 
of 
farmers 
from 
ethnic 
minorities, their livelihoods and food 
security will be adversely impacted.  
Development and implementation 
of village forest management 
plans that consider climate risk 
and 
vulnerability 
within 
their 
planning 
and 
management 
practices 
(e.g. 
restoration 
of 
riparian 
buffer 
zones, 
implementing 
ecosystem-based 
approaches 
to 
strengthen 
resilience).  
Adoption 
of 
climate 
resilient 
agricultural practices, based on 
climate-informed PLUP, will also 
promote the selection of suitable 
practices with adaptation benefits 
(e.g. stabilization of soils and 
reducing sedimentation through 
agroforestry, planting bamboo in 
gully areas, etc.) 
• 
Increased resilience of 
local 
livelihoods, 
and 
forest 
and 
agro-
ecosystems 221 to floods 
through 
ecosystem-
based adaptation and 
the adoption of climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices. 
• 
Reduced risk of food 
insecurity due to EbA 
increasing the resilience 
against floods. 
Increased 
occurrence 
of 
extreme 
heat 
and droughts 
Rising 
temperatures 
and 
increased 
occurrence of droughts and extreme heat 
may lead adversely impact crops (e.g. 
maize) 
and 
livestock 
(e.g. 
loss 
of 
productivity, crop failure, need for more 
input, erosion and soil degradation, pests 
and disease, among others). As majority of 
the population in the project area are 
smallholder farmers, many of which belong 
to ethnic minority groups, their livelihoods 
and food security will be adversely 
impacted due to agricultural losses and 
damages. 
Promotion of climate resilient 
agricultural practices based on 
participatory land use planning 
processes, considering climate 
risk and resilience. 
Examples of practices promoted 
include: agroforestry (cardamom, 
coffee, fodder, fruit trees), 222 
intercropping, improved livestock 
grazing areas (including shade), 
beekeeping 
with 
native 
bee 
species, among others. 
ADB financed Activity223 applies a 
value chain and market linkage 
strategy to reduce the market and 
business 
risk 
for 
dry-season 
irrigators, 
including 
ensuring 
climate-informed planning and 
upgrading irrigation schemes, to 
• 
Increased resilience of 
local 
livelihoods 
and 
agro-ecosystems due to 
the adoption of more 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices, 
based 
on 
climate-informed 
land 
use plans.  
• 
Reduced risk of food 
insecurity due to the 
adoption 
of 
climate 
resilient agriculture and 
EbA 
increasing 
the 
resilience 
against 
droughts, and extreme 
heat 
(improving 
production, 
promoting 
diversification 
and 
reducing risk).  
 
220 E.g. Forest patrolling for protection against encroachment; fire prevention (e.g. digging fire breaks, ploughing firebreaks, controlled burning 
of fire breaks, etc.); building small water reservoirs to provide water for firefighting and water for watering planted tree seedlings; reforestation 
to promote river bank stabilization and ecosystem-based adaptation; identification and marking of trees to be left as mother trees for seed 
production; selective cutting (in small quantities in different diameter classes in accordance with the sustainable forest model to improve forest 
structure and provide timber and fuelwood for villages); close parts of forest temporarily and protect young regeneration trees, fencing off of 
some parts to encourage regeneration; conduct weeding around valuable tree seedlings; marking of trees to be cut every year; enrichment 
planting; promotion of natural regeneration (e.g. in case of fire damage, shifting cultivation, excessive degradation/tree cutting); direct seeding 
in barren, highly degraded areas; and NTFP management and development. See Chapter Error! Reference source not found. for more i
nformation on the activities implemented in VFMPs. 
221 Specific areas of forest and agro-ecosystems to be provided in the feasibility study and funding proposal based on further spatial analysis.  
222 Promotion of agroforestry (with site-species matching of appropriate species) through Component 2 “White List”, which can help stabilize 
soils and protect them against erosion (wind and rain), improve soil moisture, and create a micro-climate buffering effect, among other 
positive environmental impacts. 
223 The provincial teams in charge for the implementation of Project 1 are working closely together with the ADB and IFAD project in the three 
provinces. Cooperation modalities are in place, e.g. through PPMU (Provincial Project Management Unit), regular technical exchanges, 
often staff are based in the same office; exchange on and alignment of approaches and methodologies (e.g. ADB/IFAD applies the PLUP 
2.0 guidelines; at district level the same people are in charge to implement I-GFLL (GCF 1) and ADB/IFAD project.

=== PAGE 77 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
strengthen 
the 
resilience 
of 
production and related value 
chains against increasingly dry 
conditions 
and 
drought. 
In 
addition, IFAD and ADB will 
support efforts that link agriculture 
to nutrition and natural resources 
promoting 
climate 
resilient 
practices that help address food 
and nutrition security (e.g. village 
nutrition teams). 
• 
Value 
adding 
opportunities associated 
with climate resilient and 
deforestation free value 
chains are expected to 
further 
strengthen 
adaptive capacities of 
farmers. 
Increased 
occurrence 
of 
wildfires due to 
increasing 
temperatures 
and 
increasingly dry 
conditions.  
While it is not possible to separate wildfires 
from the anthropogenic triggers (e.g. the 
use of fire for clearing fallow land), there will 
be an increased risk that could increase 
both the frequency and severity of fires due 
to 
increasingly 
dry 
conditions 
and 
increasing temperatures. It may also be 
more difficult to put out forest fires in 
increasingly drier and warmer conditions. 
As an indirect impact of wildfires, there may 
also be a higher risk of erosion and 
sedimentation, that can in-turn increase 
flooding risks. 
Large scale forest fires can adversely 
impact forest function. In addition, fires can 
spread to adjacent villages, national parks 
(and ecotourism facilities), forest and 
agricultural plantations leading to losses 
and damages. They can lead to the loss of 
human life, and are attributed with diverse 
adverse 
health 
impacts 
including 
respiratory problems, and cardiovascular 
disease, among others. 
Development and implementation 
of village forest management 
plans that consider climate risk 
and 
vulnerability 
within 
their 
planning 
and 
management 
practices 
(including 
wildfire 
prevention and management). 
Capacity 
development 
on 
awareness and best practices will 
be supported for provincial and 
district governments on wildfire 
prevention and management, and 
village forestry groups will be 
trained on climate risks and best 
practices 
for 
prevention 
and 
resilience building. 
• 
Increased resilience of 
the livelihoods of forest-
dependent communities 
and forest ecosystems 
upon which they depend 
through the application of 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
practices 
that 
helps 
strengthen 
their 
resilience 
to 
wildfires (e.g. fire break-
lines, fire management, 
improved 
awareness 
and warnings). 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.2.1 Overall contribution to climate resilient, deforestation free and low-emission development pathways224 
234. To overcome path dependencies and support a paradigm shift, the project will continue the initiated changes in 
current land and forest management practices of Project 1, and expand the approaches (based on lessons learned 
from project 1) to 3 new provinces. Elements contributing to the overall paradigm shift in the project area, including 
the following (see also Figure 18 below): 
• 
Implement climate-informed participatory land use planning and measures to strengthen tenure 
security, improve land use planning, and implement these land use plans: Project 2 will continue to scale 
up the PLUP 2.0 approach, with a strengthened focus on climate change adaptation, 225 to 290 villages, 
including the integration of participatory land use plans into broader village cluster level plans, to facilitate 
holistic planning, promote watershed protection, and address upstream and downstream interlinkages between 
land use and land use change, and climate risks to stabilize the mountainous shifting cultivation landscapes of 
Northern Laos.  
• 
Scale up investments in sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices: The 
proposed GCF project specifically focuses on investments at village level in both agriculture and forestry. Based 
on the new forest law, villagers can use timber for commercial purposes, providing an additional incentive for 
the sustainable management of village forests. With investments through VFAG for the implementation of 
VFMPs, VilFoCA and PSAP (White List), options and incentives to change current business practices towards 
deforestation free, low emission and climate resilient practices are provided. This is further aided by 
strengthening linkages with private sector actors in support of the development of climate resilient and 
deforestation free agricultural value chains that that not only provide climate benefits, but also provide 
predictability of demand for sustainable agricultural production and reduce pressure on forests. This includes 
agri-SMEs and sustainability-oriented agroforestry companies, as well as actors in the Lao National Chamber 
 
224 For more information, refer to Chapter E.2. 
225 Climate change adaptation supplement to be developed to ensure adaptation is integrated within the PLUP 2.0 approach, with related 
capacity building on climate change, including risks and resilience building, to be conducted for government staff and local villagers. For 
more information refer to the detailed activity sheets in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a)

=== PAGE 78 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
of Commerce and Industry. Beyond this, Project 2 supports the implementation of the NDC to through nature-
based climate change solutions, while strengthening synergies between adaptation and mitigation in the 
forestry and agricultural sectors. Adaptation measures have been strengthened within Project 2, recognizing 
the interlinked dynamics between land use and land use change and climate risk/resilience, and the potential 
to strengthen cross-cutting measures with both adaptation and mitigation benefits for local forest-dependent 
communities and ecosystems.   
• 
Catalyse private sector investments in value chains with incentives to transition towards climate 
resilient, low-emission and deforestation free value chains in the AFOLU sector: The project’s 
jurisdictional approach bridging agriculture, forestry and financial sectors and business activities is critical to 
enable real land use changes and more sustainable forest and food systems.  The project is also supporting 
the development of sustainable value chains by linking agri-MSMEs to producers adopting deforestation-free 
agriculture with the aim of facilitating market access for sustainably produced products at village level. Agri-
MSMEs committed to the sustainable transformation and processing with offtake agreements from capacitated 
local producers are key to enable a paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate resilient land and forest 
management.    
• 
Scale-up investments in sustainable and climate resilient forest landscape management, and 
watershed protection: Project 2 will continue to work on watershed protection through activity 2.1.3 co-
financed by ADB as well as with village forestry and NPAs to prioritize sustainable management, while 
generating livelihood opportunities for local forest-dependent communities to benefit from the sustainable 
management of forest resources. This will include supporting the planning and implementation of VFMPs and 
VilFoCA to enable communities to benefit from provisions under the new forestry law, which enables 
communities to receive additional benefits for the sustainable management and utilization of forest resources. 
By conducting climate-informed PLUP, VFMPs and NPA management plans will build on these processes, and 
create a more holistic and harmonized planning approach facilitating improved forest landscape management, 
reflected in the plans developed, implemented and monitored by the project.  
• 
Strengthen law enforcement and monitoring: Project 2 will continue to bridge national strategies with 
regional realities, where the revised and improved legal and regulatory framework for forestry (supported under 
Project 1) will be applied at scale within the project region, improving the enforcement of new regulations. 
Project 2 will also establish PDMS in the 3 additional provinces under project 2, and support the 
operationalization of these systems (and related institutional strengthening) in all six provinces. A strengthened 
emphasis in Project 2 will be placed on ecosystem-based adaptation, and how forest management can 
strengthen the resilience of forest ecosystems and forest-dependent communities.  
• 
Improve the mobilization and monitoring of sustainable finance for investments in climate resilient and 
deforestation free sustainable land management:  
o 
Ensure climate finance is accessible to local beneficiaries: The Climate Change Funding Window brings 
concrete benefits to local beneficiaries, incentivizing villages to develop climate-informed village 
development plans with a vision of change. Its set up further ensures there are clear incentives for 
performance, and is transforming how climate finance is mobilized to local villages within Lao PDR.  
o 
Strengthen institutional capacities for mobilizing and channelling climate finance: Continued capacity 
building for EPF and FPF will support Lao PDR to improve the mobilization and channelling of funds for 
climate action (including from international funds, through the future GCF accreditation of EPF, and through 
additional results-based payments for REDD+, among others).  
o 
Development of additional incentives to mobilize private sector finance and facilitate a transition towards 
more sustainable value chains: The project’s matching grant-scheme targets agri-MSMEs, a key actor at 
the interface of production and markets, to support the development of sustainable value chains and the 
transition towards deforestation free and climate resilient agriculture and agroforestry value chains (Activity 
2.2.1). This activity will reward private sector enterprises, agri-MSMEs, and provide capacity building in 
sustainable agricultural practices and markets, which could potentially reduce the need to expand the 
agricultural frontier and therefore protect vital forest ecosystems.    
o 
Increase mobilization of additional climate finance: Project interventions are further expected to increase 
access to finance, and mobilize additional funds for climate action. The project includes measures to 
facilitate improved  access to international climate finance, including mechanisms related to the 
implementation of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, as well as from voluntary REDD+ initiatives, with cross-
cutting adaptation benefits (reflecting lessons learned from strengthening cross-cutting benefits from 
REDD+ within this project), based on market and non-market mechanisms. 226 Domestic government 
revenues may also potentially increase from fees, royalties, fines and taxes. 
 
226 The project will strengthen opportunities for REDD+ finance to contribute to cross-cutting interventions, with both climate change mitigation 
and adaptation benefits (e.g. FLR in degraded forest areas, climate resilient and deforestation free agriculture).

=== PAGE 79 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
235. For more information on the project’s various financing mechanisms, see also Chapters B.3-B.6. 
 
Figure 18: The Project’s Envisioned Paradigm Shift  
 
236. The following Figure 19 shows how the overarching Programme will result in a shift in the forest transition curve, 
and support forest recovery.  
Figure 19: Forest Transition Curve for the ER-Programme Area 
 
D.2.2 Potential for scaling-up and replication227  
237. The ER-Programme provides the basis for investments at scale to initiate the anticipated transformational change, 
and overcome the barriers facing Lao PDR to transition towards low-emission, deforestation free and climate 
resilient development pathways.  This project aims at scaling up successful approaches, and linking them to private 
sector engagement to mobilize additional finance for climate action, and ensure the long-term sustainability of 
project-supported investments.  
238. The Programme (Project 1 and 2) is already ambitious in its scale, impacting approx. 30% of Laos’ annual GHG 
emissions, reaching over 700,000 people in six provinces (many of whom are poor and live in remote areas) and 
covering approximately 35% of the national territory, 32% of the country’s forest cover, and where around 40% of 
 
227 For more information, refer to Chapter E.2.

=== PAGE 80 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
the country’s deforestation and degradation occurs. Deforestation and forest degradation exacerbate the 
vulnerability of local villagers and the ecosystems to climate change, and action is urgently needed in this region 
of Lao PDR to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems and local livelihoods to a changing climate. Beyond this, 
the project provides the basis for scaling up REDD+ and climate resilient and deforestation free sustainable land 
management, facilitating a cross-cutting approach, beyond the project’s six provinces to ten additional provinces, 
in order to cover the entire country.  
239. For Laos, essential enabling pre-conditions, both for the success of the project, and also for future replication and 
up-scaling in other provinces, are: (a) human and institutional capacities, and (b) sustainable financing. Both are 
cornerstones of the project’s Theory of Change, which focuses on capacity building, institutional strengthening and 
unlocking additional public and private financing streams for transforming the sector.  
 
D.2.3 Potential for knowledge and learning  
240. Project 2 has a knowledge management plan with comprehensive actions that will be applied (within the FS in 
Annex 2a).228 The GCF project provides relevant tools to enable decision makers, provincial governments and local 
communities to understand and learn about the benefits of REDD+ and climate resilient land management 
approaches in order to change the business-as-usual model and facilitate scaling up public and private investments 
in climate change mitigation and adaptation. The project is further committed to facilitating comprehensive 
communication and exchange of information to build awareness and capacity development on the revised forest 
regulations to ensure their proper application (including those supported under Project 1), as well as awareness on 
climate risks, and best practices for climate resilient agriculture, sustainable land management, ecosystem-based 
adaptation and gender equality and social inclusion. Project 2 further aims to increase the use of climate information 
in decision making processes, and ensure that land use is climate-informed to reduce strengthen adaptive 
capacities, and the overall resilience of ecosystems and local livelihoods to climate change. Collaboration with 
national universities will be sought involving them in climate resilient and deforestation free AFOLU related 
activities.  
241. To facilitate the adoption of climate-informed, sustainable agricultural and forest practices the project will use 
training of trainer (ToTs) programmes229 involving the extension staff of District Agriculture and Forestry Offices 
(DAFO) at the district level. This will help to ensure continued capacity building and knowledge transfer after project 
completion. In addition, a special emphasis will be given to: 
• 
Improving information systems and mapping,  
• 
Generation and application of climate change information (including climate risk and planning, implementing 
and monitoring suitable risk reduction practices) 
• 
Applying guidelines, with a strengthened emphasis on climate change adaptation, and  
• 
Training individuals able to use remote sensing data and generate maps to enable Provincial Offices of Forestry 
Inspection (POFIs) and District Offices for Forestry Inspection (DOFIs) to continuously monitor deforestation 
and forest degradation via PDMS. 
• 
Best practices for climate resilient and deforestation free agriculture, sustainable land management, SFM, FLR 
and EbA 
 
D.2.4 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment230  
242. The programmatic approach, through Projects 1 and 2, aimed to create an enabling environment for sustainable 
land and forest management and REDD+ in a systemic manner, helping to unlock results-based payments through 
support to the FCPF Emission Reductions Programme. The Programme gives special attention to support in policy 
and regulatory reform for forestry and land use planning.  
243. Project 1 advanced substantially with the revision of the regulatory framework, establishment of SOPs (e.g. for law 
enforcement and monitoring), and REDD+ mainstreaming within socio-economic development plans. As such, 
these activities have been removed from Project 2 (although Project 2 will benefit from these advancements, and 
will continue to raise awareness to facilitate compliance with the regulatory framework). In addition, Project 1 
facilitated the development of key guidelines that will continue to be used for Project 2, which will facilitate a 
streamlined implementation of Project 2 (e.g. PLUP 2.0, VFAG and VFM guidelines). 
 
228 Overall Project 2 has been designed based on lessons learned and experiences from Project 1, which are reflected throughout the FP. 
Some lessons learned, included the need for further capacity building (e.g. strengthened emphasis on extension within Activity 2.1.1), 
knowledge management and sharing of lessons learned (e.g. harmonization of local law enforcement processes), which have been 
incorporated into the design of the project. For more information refer to Annex 2c, which provides an overview of the progress and lessons 
learned from Project 1. 
229Several ToT and training modules have been developed under Project 1, that will facilitate upscaling under Project 2. Some may require 
revisions to strengthen adaptation and reflect best practices and lessons learned from Project 1, in which case they will be revised. Where 
new trainings are required, a similar approach involving ToTs will be applied that facilitates the institutionalization and effective management 
of knowledge.   
230 For more information, refer to Chapter E.2.

=== PAGE 81 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
244. Project 2 also dedicates an entire Component 1 to improving the enabling environment for sustaining the project’s 
activities and impacts beyond its duration (see Section B.3 for details). It focuses on (among others):  
• 
Gender equality and social inclusion (from planning to implementation and monitoring) 
• 
Sustainable financing for SFM and FLR in order to permanently close a structural funding gap for transforming 
the forest sector towards net zero emissions in 2050 (see below), while also strengthening resilience of 
vulnerable ecosystems and production systems, and the rural households who depend on them for their 
livelihoods, 
• 
Law enforcement and monitoring to ensure compliance with the regulatory framework, and safeguard the 
project’s social and environmental impacts, 
• 
Establishment of PDMS in the 3 additional provinces, and operationalization of PDMS in all six provinces 
• 
Participatory climate-informed land use planning, following PLUP 2.0 and the Project 2 supported climate 
change adaptation supplement, which will serve as the foundation for scaling up deforestation free and climate 
resilient investments in the AFOLU sector, 
• 
Socio-economic development planning in order to strengthen the authorities’ mandate to scale-up sustainable 
land management practices (with both mitigation and adaptation benefits) across the country and receive public 
budget resources for doing so,  
• 
Strengthening of village land use and natural resources management capacities, including by the creation of 
the VFAG management committees, 
• 
Capacity building of extension staff within DAFO to provide climate-informed extension and facilitate the 
adoption of best practices for climate resilient and deforestation free agriculture, scaling up PSAP through 
investments covered within the White List. This will ensure they deliver tailored support to local villagers, and 
will be able to replicate and scale this support and related extension services within the country. 
• 
Capacity building of EPF and FPF to mobilize, channel and monitor sustainable climate finance, 
• 
Capacity building of EPF to thrive for GCF Accreditation as a Direct Access Accredited Entity, and develop 
high-quality proposals to mobilize additional climate finance and 
• 
Revision of management plans for 4 NPAs, 1 NP, and development of management plans for 290 village 
forests, which will provide clear plans for inclusive and transparent forest management that generates livelihood 
benefits for local forest-dependent communities, while reducing deforestation and forest degradation and 
strengthening the overall resilience of vital forest ecosystems. 
 
D.2.5 Contribution to the national / local regulatory framework and policies  
245. A strategic component of the GCF Programme is to strengthen the policy and regulatory framework. The GCF 
Project 1 focused on 6 areas: (i) mainstreaming REDD+ into socio-economic development plans (SEDPs); (ii) 
strengthening the regulatory framework (revision, modification and drafting of relevant laws, decrees and 
regulations) to enable sustainable forest management and private sector investment in village-based agroforestry 
development; (iii) strengthening law enforcement and compliance monitoring; (iv) support land use planning and 
measures to improve tenure security; and (v) strengthening the forest and forest carbon MRV system. Project 2 
will build upon the work already being implemented under Project 1 and will continue to strengthen, amongst others, 
law enforcement, land use planning and tenure security of local village communities.  
246. With support of the GCF Project 1 and other development partners the regulatory framework has improved 
substantially, especially for forest management, and Laws such as the Land Law and Forest Law have been 
revised. Subsequent policies are being revised but often sub-national agencies still lack the capacities to fully apply 
these. Therefore, Project 2 will not support further revision of policies and the regulatory framework, but instead 
will focus on the coherent implementation of the regulatory framework through capacity building and implementation 
of sustainable deforestation free, climate resilient and low-emission investments and activities.  
247. In addition, the programme continues to support Lao PDR to meet their climate targets. It will support Lao PDR 
with the implementation of their updated NDC, which puts a strong emphasis on the forestry and agricultural sectors 
for both mitigation and adaptation (see B.1 for more detailed information). A strengthened focus on adaptation has 
thus been integrated into this project’s design, and the project is committed to building on synergies with ongoing 
and planned projects on climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Sections B.1 and D.5 provide more 
detailed information on the alignment with the regulatory framework. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
248. GCF-supported interventions will produce significant sustainable development benefits, and contribute to the 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
 
D.3.1 Economic-benefits  
249. The project will generate diverse economic benefits, including: 
• 
Poverty eradication livelihood improvement: Some of the poorest districts of the country are in the project 
area, which are among the most vulnerable to climate change. The poverty headcount-ratio (percentage of the

=== PAGE 82 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
population living below the national poverty line) in the project area ranges between 20.2% and 37%. The 
project will ensure the participation of poor and vulnerable households (Component 2 and 3), and help them to 
strengthen their resilience to climate change (e.g. through climate-informed land use planning and the 
identification of the most suitable land use practices, facilitating access to markets by strengthening of agri-
value chains and supporting agri-MSMEs, scaling up village forestry, and implementing conservation 
agreements with local communities in NPAs, among other measures).  
• 
Increased land productivity and incomes of supported households: investments in the implementation of 
PSAP promoted practices will help farmers increase yields and maintain land productivity. By strengthening 
the links between farmers at village level and agri-MSMEs and by strengthening the transformation, value 
adding, and marketing capacities of agri-MSMEs in support of climate resilient and deforestation free value 
chains, the predictability of demand for sustainably produced products will be enhanced, contributing to 
increasing incomes of supported farmers. In the long-term, incomes can also be enhanced through the 
sustainable commercial use of timber from village forests as outlined in the new forest law.   
• 
Strengthened adaptive capacities and resilience of local livelihoods to climate change in order to avoid 
future losses and damages: The project’s main beneficiaries are smallholder farmers in upland areas, whom 
are among the most vulnerable to climate change in Lao PDR (see Chapters B.1 and D.4 for more information). 
By promoting climate resilient agricultural practices, the project will also help strengthen villagers’ adaptive 
capacity – enabling them to adapt to climate change and reduce future impacts (e.g. through diversification, 
implementation of climate resilient practices, among others). This could help avoid losses and damages in the 
future, whereas diversification can help to strengthen farmers’ coping capacities and ultimately their resilience 
to climate change (see also CRVA in Annex 2d).   
• 
Improved mobilization and channelling of finance for climate action and sustainable land management: 
Improved mobilization (from public and private sources, supported under Activity 1.1.1) and channelling of 
climate finance to VFAGs will improve villagers access to funds for investments in low-emission and climate 
resilient AFOLU.  
• 
Strengthened business plans and value chains: Project support for agri-MSMEs will support businesses to 
develop bankable business plans, and will enable them to move towards more sustainable value chains. 
Support under Activity 2.2.1 will further improve the agri-MSMEs possibilities to access loans and private 
finance through developing investment ready business plans for the sustainable processing of promoted 
commodities under the “White List” supporting the development of more sustainable agricultural value chains.  
Tax revenue from taxes and charges may also rise as a result of this enhanced economic activity. 
 
D.3.2 Environmental and Social co-benefits  
250. Although this GCF Programme began as a mitigation-focused (REDD+) initiative, Project 2 incorporates 
interventions that will promote climate change adaptation – notably integrated land-use planning, improvements to 
irrigation infrastructure, reforestation in catchment areas and climate resilient agriculture. These linkages will help 
to strengthen the resilience of local livelihoods and ecosystems against climate change, which can contribute to 
positive long-term effects (environmental and social co-benefits) measured against the backdrop of climate change.  
 
Social-Benefits 
251. Project 2 is expected to continue to generate additional social benefits in the project area: 
• 
Improved food security and nutrition: Malnutrition is a permanent threat to the rural population in the project 
area, as the inhabitants depend on traditional smallholder rain-fed agricultural and shifting cultivation systems, 
which are particularly vulnerable to climate change. The prevalence of undernourishment in Laos is currently 
17.1% with higher rates in the project area.231 The project will increase the nutrition and food security of 
beneficiary households (Component 2) through improved deforestation free and climate resilient agricultural 
practices.  
• 
Health benefits: The project will generate various health benefits. As mentioned in Section B.1 Northern Lao 
PDR is particularly impacted by forest fires, which are projected to become more frequent and intense due to 
climate change and increasingly dry conditions. The project will support the implementation of measures to 
improve forest fire prevention and preparedness (e.g.  digging or ploughing fire breaks, controlled burning of 
fire breaks, building small water reservoirs for providing water for firefighting etc.), which will have a positive 
health benefit for local communities (e.g. reducing adverse respiratory and cardiac health impacts from smoke 
inhalation and haze).232 Ecosystem-based adaptation measures will further strengthen the resilience of local 
villagers against climate-related natural hazards that often result in injury or loss of life (e.g. floods, wildfires). 
 
231 https://www.adb.org/countries/lao-pdr/poverty. 
232 This is particularly relevant in northern Lao PDR, where there is a high correlation between poverty and exposure to harmful particulate 
matter due to forest fires. For more information refer to: Reddington, C.L., Conibear, L., Robinson, S., Knote, C., Arnold, S.R., V. Spracklen, 
D. 2021. Air Pollution From Forest and Vegetation Fires in Southeast Asia Disproportionately Impacts the Poor. GeoHealth. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GH000418

=== PAGE 83 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
Studies in other regions of Southeast Asia have found tropical deforestation has accelerated local warming, 
and worsened local’s exposure to heat and heat-related ailments.233  
• 
Inclusion of ethnic minorities: There are at least 23 specific ethnic groups present in the project area. The 
project aims to work with diverse ethnic groups, and provide targeted support that is culturally appropriate and 
targeted to their needs. Social inclusion is a cross-cutting theme within the GCF-supported Outputs, Activities 
and Actions. Project 2 aims to continue to promote an inclusive approach, ensuring beneficiaries from diverse 
ethnic groups and marginalised villages are included and empowered. An Ethnic Group Development Plan has 
been developed for Project 2, following the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and building on stakeholder 
consultations (see the Ethnic Group Development Plan in Annex 6d), highlighting the specific needs of ethnic 
and indigenous groups. Priorities outlined in the framework include: strengthening their voice in the context of 
village decision-making; access to land, forest and natural resources for livelihood purposes; respect for 
customary use of land (including for ancestral and spiritual uses; and appropriate access to information, 
including use of ethnic languages and simple imagery to accommodate lower literacy rates. Project 2 will 
continue to support the implementation of the plan and will closely monitor the project’s impact on ethnic 
minorities and social inclusion. For more information refer to the Ethnic Group Development Plan in Annex 6d. 
 
Environmental-Benefits  
252. In addition to the climate change mitigation and adaptation benefits described under B.3.1, the project is expected 
to generate key environmental benefits, including (among others): 
• 
Enhanced biodiversity conservation: Enhancing biodiversity conservation through the protection of natural 
forests and the promotion of more resilient and sustainable forest management in at least 1,039,350 ha of 
national parks and NPAs through the implementation of the full Programme.  Project 2 will work in 367,150 ha 
of NPAs (plus continuation on 672,000 ha of NPAs under Project 1), with particularly strong biodiversity 
benefits, including important habitats for diverse species (see FS in Annex 2a for more detailed information) 
for more detailed information on biodiversity). Supporting village forestry establishment and VilFoCA operations 
in each province will also help to restore landscapes, foster healthy and resilient ecosystems, and help establish 
biodiversity corridors. Biodiversity corridors will be further strengthened by their deliberate inclusion in the land 
use planning at village level. These efforts are aligned with those outlined in the country’s Biodiversity Strategy 
and Action Plan (2016-2025).  
• 
Enhanced provision of vital ecosystem services: Reducing deforestation and forest degradation, and 
implementing sustainable and climate resilient land use practices will help improve the provision of vital 
ecosystem services, including (among others): carbon storage, water regulation, climate regulation (e.g. micro-
climate buffering), habitat provision, flood regulation, and the provision of food, fibre and fuel. This will further 
benefit from watershed protection and more holistic land use planning under the PLUP 2.0 approach (with 
strengthened adaptation mainstreaming and capacity building under Project 2), which considers the interlinked 
dynamics of land use practices and ecosystem services.  
• 
Reduced unauthorized clearing of forested land: Improving land-use planning, governance, PDMS and 
enforcement tools, processes and capacities will also help reduce unauthorised clearing of forested land, and 
ensure that land use is based on sustainable, participatory and accurate plans.  
• 
Facilitation of sustainable production practices: Strengthening the development of sustainability oriented-
markets and climate resilient value chains will provide new incentives towards sustainable production patterns. 
Promoting the use of climate resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices will also help improve soil 
quality, strengthen agro-biodiversity (through intercropping and agroforestry systems), reduce soil degradation, 
erosion and sedimentation, and reduce agrochemical use (and thus the risk of soil and water contamination, 
and potential health impacts).234  
 
D.3.3 Gender-Sensitive Impact  
253. Women are disproportionately impacted by climate change and deforestation and forest degradation. Women, as 
the main collectors of forest products, know forests well and have seen the impact of deforestation and forest 
degradation on their livelihoods. As forests become increasingly degraded, women must either travel longer 
distances, or use less NTFPs for domestic consumption. Women are also highly dependent on agriculture for their 
livelihoods, where 63% of working women are employed in the sector.235 Consulted female stakeholders noted they 
can see the impact of some land use practices resulting in soil degradation and productivity declines (e.g. maize 
 
233 E.g. Parsons, L.A., Jung, J., Masuda, Y.J., Vargas Zeppetello, L.R., Wolff, N.H., Kroeger, T., Battisti, D.S., Spector, J.T. 2021. Tropical 
deforestation accelerates local warming and loss of safe outdoor working hours. CellPress Open Access One Earth. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.11.016  
234 The project will not promote nor procure synthetic fertilizers or pesticides. It will instead promote organic alternatives, integrated pest 
management and raise awareness of the risks of agro-chemical use. For more information please refer to the Pest Management Plan in the 
ESMF (Annex 6c).  
235 World Bank Data Bank n.d.

=== PAGE 84 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
monocropping), however they noted there is a need for additional technical and financial support to facilitate actual 
investments, and build capacities (while addressing barriers for women to access information and extension/ 
investment support on good agricultural practices) 236 They further noted the need for support in marketing, 
identifying suitable business opportunities and strengthening financial literacy and business skills for women.237 
Beyond this, women are often particularly adversely impacted by climate-related natural disasters, and support is 
needed to reduce their exposure and vulnerability to such hazards.238 
254. Project 2 has developed a Gender Assessment and a Gender Action Plan (GAP, Annex 8b), which builds on the 
assessment and action plan conducted for FP117. The GAP forms the basis for operationalizing the results and 
recommendations of the gender assessment. It contains specific gender elements to be implemented through 
project implementation, where gender equality is considered a cross-cutting element throughout the project’s 
outputs and activities. Project 2 will continue to work closely with the Lao Women’s Union to ensure the effective 
engagement of women. All project activities will proactively involve empowerment elements for village women, 
including promoting their leadership roles in local structures, including ensuring a quota of at least 30% female in 
village committees. The project will include training on business skills development for women that will help to 
address common participation gaps and barriers, including financial support as well as facilitate opportunities for 
women related to agroforestry, forest management and climate resilient agricultural activities. It will also strengthen 
awareness for women and men within the project area on climate risks and best practices to reduce these risks 
and strengthen the resilience of local communities and ecosystems. All extension staff and trainers supporting 
Project 1 will be trained on gender equality and social inclusion, including time-saving activities (see also Section 
G.2 below, and the gender assessment and gender action plan in annexes 6a and 6b). 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.4.1 Economic and social development level of the country and affected population 
255. Laos is a landlocked least-developed country (LLDC) bordered by Myanmar and China to the northwest, Vietnam 
to the east, Cambodia to the southwest and Thailand to the west and southwest. The country has a HDI of 0.613, 
ranking it 137th (out of 189) globally. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Lao PDR’s growth had been amongst the 
fastest in Asia, averaging more than 7.7% per year for most of the last decade. According to the World Bank country 
profile, growth is expected to be driven by the construction sector, supported by investments in large infrastructure 
projects (mainly energy), and a resilient services sector, led by wholesale and retail trade growth.  
256. Growth has been largely dependent on natural resources, and this has placed increasing pressure on the 
environment.  Environmental degradation is taking an economic toll on the country due the depletion of natural 
resources and adverse impacts on environmental services as well as to human health from pollution and waste: 
70% of the Lao population still depends on forests and waterways for income and nutrition. Lao PDR has 
recognized the limitations of this economic model and is implementing reforms to drive a greener and more inclusive 
model.  
257. Many of the country’s poorest people live in rural areas and are the most vulnerable to pollution, climate risks, and 
deforestation. The green growth agenda aims at improving local livelihoods by diversifying income sources and 
involving the private sector to spur market developments – for instance by promoting sustainable forest 
management and nature-based tourism. However, as described in Section B.2, various barriers persist that prevent 
a paradigm shift towards low-emission, deforestation free and climate resilient development pathways.  
 
D.4.2 Impact of COVID-19 on Lao PDR 
258. Since the development of Project 1, Lao PDR’s economy has been greatly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
UNICEF released a series of reports in 2021 that note the country’s economy could contract by 1.8-3.3%.239 In 
addition, the pandemic has generated substantial other impacts including loss of life and long-term health impacts 
for the population, increased unemployment, poverty, reduced nutrition, and an increase in gender-based violence, 
among others.240 A rapid assessment of Food Security and Agriculture conducted by World Food Programme 
 
236 FP117 Gender Assessment. 
237 FP117 Gender Assessment and the Gender Assessment for Project 2 (Annex 8a)  
238 Women are often particularly adversely impacted by climate-related natural disasters, as they often are responsible for caretaking and 
face increased risk of gender-based violence, poverty, insecure employment, and human trafficking.  These impacts are further exacerbated 
by their lower access to and management of resources, access to services and political representation, as well as the persistence of gender 
norms and stereotypes (with such barriers particularly pronounced for women from ethnic minorities - see the Gender Assessment for more 
detailed information). See also Desai, B.H., Mandal M. 2021. Role of Climate Change in Exacerbating Sexual and Gender-based Violence 
against Women: A New Challenge for International Law. Environmental Policy and Law, 51: 137-157. Uniacke, P. 2018. Climate Adaptation 
Strategies and the Role of Gender. The Asia Foundation. Available online: https://asiafoundation.org/2018/04/11/climate-adaptation-
strategies-and-the-role-of-gender/;   
239 UNICEF Lao PDR. 2021.  
240 UNICEF Lao PDR. 2021. Impact of COVID-19 Household Financial Security; UNICEF Lao PDR. 2021. Impact of COVID-19 on Tackling 
Nutrition Challenges;

=== PAGE 85 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
(WFP) in May 2020 found producers in Bokeo and Luang Namtha were among the hardest hit, especially cash 
crop producers (e.g. cardamom, rubber, tea, and coffee) and horticulture producers.241 This was particularly due to 
restrictions in movement, changes in market access and availability and prices of food.242 There is a need for 
additional technical and financial support in Lao PDR to contribute to a green-recovery, without placing an additional 
debt burden on Lao PDR(see D.4.4 below). 
 
D.4.3 Climate risk and vulnerability  
259. 
In its Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, Lao PDR identifies itself as an LDC with limited 
adaptive capacities that is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts.  The Economy and Environment 
Programme for Southeast Asia (EEPSEA) ranks Lao PDR as one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the 
region. Internationally, Lao PDR ranked as the 45th most vulnerable country to climate change in the world 
(out of 180 countries) in 2019.243 Focusing on the period from 2000 to 2019, Lao PDR ranked #52.244 As such, 
it ranks in the top 25-30% of vulnerable countries to climate change. The Lao Government, through their Draft 
Strategy on Climate Change of the Lao PDR Vision to the year 2050, Strategy and Programs of Action to the year 
2030, highlights the gravity of climate change noting “Droughts and flooding are expected to damage agriculture, 
irrigation systems, and roads and bridges, and impair crop production.” 245 They further stress the risk that climate 
change poses for the country’s food security, and estimates that over half of the population is “extremely vulnerable 
to climate change impacts”.246 As described in Section B.1, high rates of deforestation and forest degradation 
exacerbate the regions’ vulnerability to climate change. Climate action is urgently needed as climate change will 
have a detrimental effect on the population and the country’s economy.  
260. The forthcoming Third National Communication to the UNFCCC states that Northern Lao PDR is among the 
most vulnerable areas to climate change in the country, due to low adaptive capacities, high sensitivity, and 
high exposure to climate-related natural hazards. 247 As described in Section B.1, deforestation and forest 
degradation are closely linked with climate risk in Northern Lao PDR, and continued deforestation exacerbates the 
risk posed by climate change to local ecosystems and communities.  These provinces contain the districts with the 
highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the ER-Programme accounting area and contain the 
remaining forest areas most at risk of deforestation/forest degradation. Project 2 primarily address the three 
provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay in northern Lao PDR, where poverty rates are among the 
highest in the country, exceeding the national average by 23%. Food security is a major challenge for many 
households in rural areas with an estimated 25% of rural households in the region accounted as food-poor.248  
261. Supporting Laos in its effort to safeguard forests will be critical for the country and for the Indochina region at large 
that is rapidly depleting its natural resources, and exacerbating its risk and vulnerability to climate change. Urgent 
action is needed to implement cross-cutting measures to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while 
supporting ecosystem restoration, biodiversity conservation, building up the resilience of forest-dependent persons 
and rural households, and supporting a green-recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
D.4.4 Financing needs 
262. The NDC notes financing needs for the mitigation 2030 conditional targets is estimated at USD 4.76 billion. The 
cost for needed adaptation interventions is not provided in the NDC. The NDC further highlights that Lao PDR 
“seeks support from developed country parties in the design of innovative financial mechanisms that can blend 
public and private capital as a means of mitigating risks and unlocking private sector investment in climate project” 
(p.8),249 in additional to support on capacity building, policy design, and monitoring, among others.   
263. There is a structural funding gap facing Lao PDR, which limits the country’s ability to invest in low-emission and 
climate resilient development. In terms of public financing, the government is able to commit co-finance to the 
project amounting to EUR 7 million. Public budgets are extremely tight and are further constrained due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic response. Numerous development partners working on climate change, forestry and 
agriculture in Lao PDR have already committed grant financing, including to the GCF projects 1 and 2. The World 
Bank (FCPF Carbon Fund) is offering Lao PDR REDD+ results-based payments, but it is mentioned in FP 117 and 
the country’s ERPD that additional finance is required to help Lao PDR unlock these payments. This has been a 
 
241 WFP, World Food Programme. 2020. Rapid Assessment of Food Security and Agriculture in Lao PDR. 
242 WFP. 2020. Rapid Assessment of Food Security and Agriculture in Lao PDR. 
243 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L. 2021. Global Climate Risk Index 2021.  
244 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L. 2021. Global Climate Risk Index 2021. 
245 Government of Lao PDR [2020]. Draft Climate Change Strategy. 
246 Government of Lao PDR [2020]. Draft Climate Change Strategy.  
247 Following definitions under AR4. 
248 Pimhidzai, O., Fenton, N. C., Souksavath, P. and Sisoulath, V. (2014), Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for the Lao 
Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-
PDR-publication-version-12-19-14.pdf.  
249 Government of Lao PDR 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution.

=== PAGE 86 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
major goal of the overarching programme, and unlocked results-based payments will be reinvested into Project 2 
through the implementation of the approved REDD+ benefit sharing plan via Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2. 
264. Looking beyond grant finance, Lao PDR has limited ability to take on additional debt, as the “risk of external debt 
distress remains high”. Beyond this Moody’s downgraded Lao PDR’s issuer rating in August 2020, stating the 
country faces severe liquidity stress. As such, there is limited ability for Lao PDR, a LLDC, to take on additional 
loans for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Acknowledging the need to mobilize additional public and 
private sector finance for climate action, the project will serve to use grant finance from GCF to strengthen national 
funds and institutions, mobilize additional public and private finance, and address the structural funding gap facing 
the forestry sector in Laos. It further addresses key capacity gaps and will create an enabling environment that 
facilitates the adoption of cross-cutting climate measures in the land use sector by smallholder farmers and forest-
dependent persons in Northern Lao PDR. Please refer to Section B.5. for further details on financing alternatives, 
and the justification for the GCF support.  
265. The local private sector is also unable to finance the transition towards more sustainable forest and landscape 
management at scale in the absence of technical and financial support. From the supply side of capital, many 
financial institutions in Lao PDR have a limited operational footprint in rural areas, making it physically difficult for 
remotely located individuals and businesses in the agriculture and forestry sector to reach bank branches. Further, 
banks tend to have very conservative policies requiring high levels of collateral (mainly immovable assets such as 
land and buildings), high interest rates, and short-term repayment periods making investments in land use in 
general unattractive and particularly in sustainability-oriented investments which tend to have longer repayment 
periods.  From the demand side, and focused specifically on agri-MSMEs, which are key actors to support the 
development of climate resilient and deforestation free value chains, there remain significant needs for technical 
support to drive a transition towards more sustainable business models. Most agri-MSMEs are capital constrained 
and many lack proper business and financial planning, the financial literacy required to understand the types of 
lending products that are available as well as the process to apply for a loan. Long-term planning is often lacking, 
and operations are covering short-term needs only. Despite this, and through the strategic use of matching grants 
and tailored technical assistance, the project aims to mobilize EUR 1.8 million from agri-MSMEs to support climate 
resilient and deforestation free value chain development (Activity 2.2.1).  
  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.5.1 Inclusion within GCF country programme  
266. The GIZ Project ‘Scaling up the Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through 
improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2)’ is part of the Lao PDR GCF 
Country Programme 2020-2023 under Priority Area ‘Supporting an increase and maintenance of national forest 
cover through forest restoration, conservation, improved forest governance and private sector investment’.250 The 
country work programme highlights the alignment of the project with the country’s long-term adaptation objectives, 
where a strengthened focus on adaptation has been integrated within Project 2’s design (including promoting 
integrated land use planning and natural resource management, promoting climate resilience in forest ecosystems 
and NPAs, and promoting climate resilient agricultural systems, among others).251 The country programme further 
highlights the nomination of EPF by the Lao PDR NDA to become a national AE, and readiness support provided 
by GIZ. By continuing to work with EPF the project will continue to build their capacities and support them as they 
advance with their accreditation process, and eventually develop and implement their own projects to strengthen 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
267. The project is also included in the GIZ AE work programme. 
D.5.2 Coherence with existing policies and commitments 
268. As mentioned in Section B.1.5 (and described in detail in the FS in Annex 2a), the project is closely aligned with 
the Government of Lao PDR´s socio-economic development plans and strategy, as well as priorities for climate 
change mitigation and adaptation in the agriculture, forestry, and other land use sector in Lao PDR. Since the 
approval of FP117 by GCF, the design of Project 2 has been adapted to reflect the (draft) Climate Change Strategy 
(2021), updated NDC (2021) - including a strengthened focus on adaptation and cross-cutting measures in the 
AFOLU sector, and Forestry Strategy to 2035, among others.  
269. Lao PDR is highly committed to implement REDD+ to achieve its NDC target in the forestry sector. The engagement 
with the FCPF Carbon Fund and the ER-Programme is seen as key for the transformation of the forest and land 
 
250 Government of Lao PDR. 2021b. Lao PDR Green Climate Fund Country Programme 2021 - 2023 
251 See Table 6 (page 12) in the Country Programme Document for more detailed information on the long-term adaptation objectives in key 
sectors in Lao PDR.

=== PAGE 87 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
use sector in northern Laos. In recent years the Government of Lao PDR could already show success in reducing 
deforestation and forest degradation.  
 
D.5.3 Capacity of AE and EEs to deliver 
270. Project 2 builds on the approved GCF Project FP117, where GIZ with its headquarters in Germany serves as AE, 
and GIZ with its management structure in Laos and EPF as EEs. Thus, all EEs all have demonstrated experience 
implementing a GCF project, and have shown they have sufficient capacities to deliver.  
271. GIZ is one of the largest international providers of capacity development and technical assistance on climate 
change worldwide. GIZ as AE already developed and submitted several funding proposals to GCF, with 4 approved 
proposals under implementation (FP117, FP132, FP103, FP059). 
272. EPF has been acting as an Executing Entity under Project 1 and is responsible for channelling EUR 11 million to 
project beneficiaries at provincial and district level (e.g. PAFOs, DAFOs), private sector and final beneficiaries (e.g. 
VFAGs). EPF served as an implementing agency for the USD 41 million World Bank LENSII project, facilitating 
investments in conservation at the local level. They also implemented the following projects (among others): 
• 
Sustainable Forest and Land Management in the Dry Dipterocarp Forest Ecosystems of Southern Loo PDR 
(Safe Ecosystem Project, GEF \D00094709, UNDP): 1.2 million USD  
• 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through improved governance and sustainable 
forest landscape management (Project 1, GCF, GIZ): 11.1 million EUR 
• 
Ecosystem-based Adaptation in Lao PDR, (GCF, UNEP): 8.6 million USD. 
273. The EPF also received technical support from a GIZ-implemented GCF Readiness Project to become a GCF 
Accredited Entity alongside Project 1 (readiness activities concluded with the successful submission of the Online 
Accreditation System (OAS) application by the EPF in October 2019) and got in January 2021 the second phase 
of the Readiness Project approved by the GCF to continue the Readiness Support which will be implemented 
without Delivery Partner.  
274. Additional information on the AE and EEs’ capacities to implement the project are provided in Section B.4. 
 
D.5.4 Role of the National Designated Authority (NDA) 
275. As mentioned, this project is embedded in the Programme (FP 117), and has thus been informed by substantial 
engagement with the NDA, government ministries and other key stakeholders. Regular communication and updates 
have been shared with the NDA and key government ministries throughout the programme/ project 1 development 
process. Representatives of the NDA have attended cross-sectoral multi-stakeholder workshops to provide 
feedback on the project and the broader ER-Programme. A letter of no-objection was provided by the NDA for FP 
117, confirming the project conforms to the country’s national priorities, strategies and plans, and that it is in 
accordance with relevant laws and regulations. GIZ reports continuously to the NDA regarding the implementation 
of Project 1 ‘Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management’, i.e., through the submission of the GCF Inception Report and the 1st 
Annual Performance Report (APR) in March 2021 and the 2nd APR in March 2022. 
276. The Concept Note of Project 2 was submitted to the NDA in July and November 2021. Individual meetings between 
GIZ and the NDA regarding the development of Project 2 have been organized on January 25th and March 3rd, 
2022. In November 2021, the NDA moderated a number of consultation meetings between NDA, UNDP, GIZ, and 
MAF in order to discuss possible implications of the geographical and technical overlap of the GIZ GCF Project 1 
and 2 and the UNDP GCF Project, which was under preparation at this time. On December 9th, 2021, the NDA 
organized a meeting on ‘Coordination and Consultation with Accredited Entities on Pipeline of GCF Projects in the 
Lao PDR GCF Country Programme 2021 – 2023’ and on December 15th, the ‘Green Climate Fund (GCF) Annual 
Update Meeting’ has been conducted by the NDA. On both occasions, GIZ had been invited to present the progress 
on Project 1 as well as an update on Project 2 development. 
277. Thus, the NDA has been involved throughout the development of both Projects 1 and 2. A letter of no-objection 
has been provided by the NDA for Project 2 on 27.05.2022 (Annex 1), confirming the project conforms to the 
country’s national priorities, strategies and plans, and that it is in accordance with relevant laws and regulations. 
 
D.5.5 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
278. The programme (projects 1 and 2) contributes to the implementation of the ER-Programme and National REDD+ 
Programme, both of which have been developed based on extensive stakeholder consultations. These processes 
have laid a strong foundation for the design of the GCF programme.  
279. Projects 1 and 2 have been developed through extensive engagement with diverse stakeholders, including civil 
society organizations (e.g. Lao Women’s Organization, among others), development organizations, private sector 
actors (e.g. Agri-MSMEs), men and women from local villages in the project region, and governmental actors from 
diverse sectors and levels of government. For the elaboration of FP 117, consultations with over 1,066 local men

=== PAGE 88 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
and women from local villages were conducted, including men and women from diverse ethnic groups, in all six 
provinces.  
280. The design of Project 2 has been informed by lessons learned from Project 1, and stakeholder feedback received 
due to the ongoing implementation of the project´s stakeholder engagement plan.252 Additional consultations with 
543 persons (30% women) have been conducted during the project development process to inform the Funding 
Proposal and its supporting Annexes, including: national and provincial workshops (all six provinces), one on one 
stakeholder consultations with civil society, private sector, 253 governmental agencies, as well as stakeholder 
consultations at the district and village levels in Oudomxay, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri. The stakeholder 
consultations at local level included male and female villagers from diverse ethnic backgrounds. At district level, 
governmental institutions, the Lao Women’s Union and the Lao Front for National Development have been 
consulted. In general, stakeholders noted the relevance of the project to strengthen their livelihoods and generate 
both climate and sustainable development benefits.254 Annex 7 provides an overview detailing how stakeholder 
recommendations have been integrated into project design.   
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
D.6.1 Efficiency and effectiveness   
281. The project is estimated to contribute to reducing 4.6 million tCO2e relative to the FREL over its 4-year project 
implementation period. The mitigation cost for the project is 12.25 EUR per tCO2eq and the cost to the GCF is 5.08 
EUR per tCO2eq. For the Programme (Projects 1 and 2), the mitigation potential is estimated at 11.7 million tCO2eq 
relative to the FREL over a 7-year implementation timeframe. The mitigation cost for the Programme is EUR 10.04 
per tCO2eq and the cost to the GCF is estimated at EUR 3.21 per tCO2eq.255 
 
D.6.2 Financial viability   
 
282. The activities under Component 1 of Project 2 are of a public good nature and will not generate financial returns 
but will contribute to the overall objective of reducing emissions from deforestation and increasing the resilience of 
local communities and ecosystems to climate change. The activities under Component 1 are suited for receiving 
grant funding. Component 2 will scale the adoption of sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation free 
agricultural practices (PSAP) and technologies and Component 3 will scale SFM and FLR in village forests and 
NPAs.  
 
283. Activities under Components 2 and 3 will generate enhanced financial reflows for target beneficiaries relative to 
business-as-usual practices. However, given that target beneficiaries are for the most part subsistence farmers, 
which rely on shifting cultivation in upland areas and face knowledge, capacity, and market access constraints, 
positive financial returns would not be feasible in the absence of the GCF project grant and the significant co-
finance that the project will mobilize both as loans and grants. The ability of the GoL to take on additional loans to 
support the activities in the project is limited as according to the IMF’s Debt Sustainability Analysis, “Lao PDR’s risk 
of external debt distress remains high, suggesting the urgent need to tighten fiscal policy, strengthen public financial 
management, and develop a comprehensive medium-term debt management strategy”. Despite these constraints, 
the government borrowed EUR 24.1 million from ADB and EUR 11.35 million from IFAD to complement GCF 
Projects 1 and 2. On these grounds, the proposed GCF grant provides the adequate level of concessionally for this 
project (see Chapter B.5 for a more detailed description of the approach followed to ensure minimum levels of 
concessionally).  
 
284. The economic rate of return to the GCF finance is of close to 31%.256 The economic rate of return is estimated 
based on the financial flows from Components 2 and 3 as well as from the value of abated emissions due to project 
implementation (See Financial and Economic Assessment in Annex 3). The project’s economic rate of return can 
be considered conservative as it does not integrate any other social or environmental benefits that will be generated 
during its the implementation.  
 
 
252 The Programme´s stakeholder engagement plan will be revised during the project development process, and, as necessary, adjustments 
will be made to strengthen stakeholder engagement in the context of Project 2.  
253 Private sector interviews involved consultations with 39 stakeholders, including agri-MSMEs, collectors of NTFPs and other actors working 
in topics related to agriculture production and processing factories, among others. 
254 The results of these consultations are described in greater detail in FP117´s Feasibility Study (Annex 2a), Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA, Annex 6a), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7), Gender Assessment (Annex 8a), and Ethnic Group Development 
Plan (Annex 8d). 
255 Calculations are based on budget allocations for investment and do not consider budget allocations for PMC, M&E and incidentals 
256 The ERR is sensitive to the price of carbon utilized as an assumption to monetize ERs as well as to other financial assumptions. A sensitivity 
analysis is presented in the Financial and Economic Assessment in Annex 3.

=== PAGE 89 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
D.6.3 Application of best practices 
 
285. The agriculture and forestry sectors are identified as key for climate change mitigation and agriculture as a key 
sector for climate change adaptation in the country’s UNFCCC technology needs assessments for adaptation and 
mitigation257 as well as in the NDC the country’s draft Climate Change strategy. Land use management practices 
currently in use in the project area tend to have low productivity and for the most part cannot be considered as 
climate resilient, as good agricultural practices nor as sound forest management practices. The concepts of good 
agricultural practices alongside additional principles to ensure that agricultural practices result in climate resilient 
and deforestation free agriculture have been integrated in the PSAP approach developed under Project 1 and 
further strengthened and scaled up under Component 2 of Project 2. The implementation of forestry activities under 
Project 1 found that the current approach is effective and well-tailored to the local context in the project area. 
Supporting the intention laid out in the latest NDC, adaptation will be strengthened across all project outputs and 
activities to tap the synergies between adaptation and REDD+, and facilitate the upscaling of climate resilient and 
deforestation free sustainable land management.  
286. The TNA outlines a range of recommended interventions, such as watershed protection and reforestation, irrigation, 
climate-smart agriculture and crop diversification, that are currently being promoted under Project 1 and will be 
further scaled up under Project 2. These interventions reflect best-practices such as participatory land use planning 
(PLUP) and the application of modern technology (such as GPS, remote sensing and GIS). Guidelines facilitating 
participatory planning processes,  
287. As highlighted in Chapter B.3, Project 2 will build on the improvements to the regulatory framework, SOPs and 
guidelines developed within Project 1. These guidelines have been developed considering best practices and 
lessons learned from related projects and initiatives in Lao PDR (including those described in Chapter B.3 and the 
Feasibility Study in Annex 2a), and will facilitate replication and upscaling. Additional support will be provided in 
Project 2 to strengthen climate change adaptation and cross-cutting synergies, supporting the NDC’s intention to 
promote climate resilience in farming systems and the management of forest ecosystems, and strengthen 
integrated land use planning and environmental management.258  
288. Lessons learned from Project 1 have been closely considered during the elaboration of Project 2, and are reflected 
in the design, as highlighted throughout Chapter B.3 (and further described in the Feasibility Study in Annex 2a).  
 
 
 
 
257 Lao PDR (2017) Barrier Analysis and Enabling Framework for Climate Change Adaptation; and Lao PDR (2017) Barrier Analysis and 
Enabling Framework for Climate Change Mitigation accessed: https://unfccc.int/ttclear/tna/reports.html 
258 Government of Lao PDR. 2021. Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). Vientiane, Lao PDR.

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
The following Table provides an overview of the GCF impact level paradigm shift potential criteria under the Integrated Results Management Framework. Annex 2e 
provide more detailed information on the rating of the current state of each baseline.  
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
At the time of this Funding 
Proposal 
Formulation 
(2021-2022), 
upland 
farmers in six northern 
provinces, 
whom 
are 
among the most vulnerable 
to climate change, will be 
adversely 
impacted 
by 
climate 
change 
as 
business as usual practices 
put their livelihoods, food  
security 
and 
agri- 
and 
forest ecosystems at risk. 
Accelerating deforestation 
and forest degradation in 
the six provinces, which are 
together responsible for 
around 40% of national 
deforestation, 
further 
exacerbates the impact of 
climate change and related 
losses and damages (see 
Medium 
Paradigm shift would involve a transition away 
from business as usual baseline activities that 
drive deforestation and forest degradation, 
and exacerbate climate risk and vulnerability. 
Instead the project would create a paradigm 
shift towards climate resilient and 
deforestation free sustainable land 
management. This would be facilitated by the: 
▪ 
Elaboration of climate-informed PLUP 
▪ 
Improvements in monitoring and forest 
law enforcement 
▪ 
Improvements in access to international 
and domestic (public and private) finance 
for climate action,  
▪ 
Strengthening of capacities of national 
institutions to access, manage and 
monitor climate finance and impacts. 
▪ 
Adoption of low-emission, deforestation 
free and climate resilient agricultural 
practices 
 
Project interventions are projected to deliver 
4.6 million tCO2eq emission reductions over a 
4-year period, without considering additional 
impacts from replication and up-scaling. This 
represents a significant step towards a 
paradigm shift for GHG emissions, and will 
support Lao PDR to unlock additional results-
based payments from the FCPF Carbon Fund. 
 
At the same time, Project 2 will strengthen the 
resilience of 153,700 direct beneficiaries 
(76,850 men, 76,850 women) comprised of 
some of the most vulnerable communities in 
Lao 
PDR, 
through 
supporting 
them 
to 
strengthen their adaptive capacities and adopt 
more resilient livelihood activities. Indirectly, 
the project will support 332,991 persons 
(166,496 men, 166,496 women) living in the 
supported target districts who will benefit from 
improved consideration of climate information 
in decision making and land use planning 
processes, and improved capacities of district 
staff on climate change adaptation and

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter B.1 for further 
information).  
Despite initial results from 
the 
implementation 
of 
FP117 a paradigm shift 
towards low-emission and 
climate resilient forest and 
land use practices will not 
be reached as outlined in 
the 
programmatic 
approach described within 
FP 117 without additional 
support to ensure local land 
and forest management 
practices fully transition to 
climate 
resilient, 
low-
emission and deforestation 
free agriculture and forestry 
with the aim of further 
unlocking 
emission 
reduction payments and, 
hence, secure long-term 
finance for the Lao forestry 
sector. 
 
▪ 
Strengthening 
of 
low-emission, 
deforestation and climate resilient agri-
value chains, with a focus on agri-MSMEs 
▪ 
Implementation 
of 
climate-informed 
sustainable village forest management 
▪ 
Elaboration of climate-informed protected 
area management plans, that support 
REDD+ and strengthen the resilience of 
communities located within and around 
the NPA 
▪ 
Strengthening of adaptive capacities of 
local authorities and villagers through 
strengthening awareness of climate risk 
and vulnerability and the use of climate-
information in land use planning and 
decision-making processes, as well as 
raising 
awareness 
and 
supporting 
investments in suitable risk reduction 
practices (e.g. investments in forest 
landscape restoration, climate-resilient 
and deforestation-free agriculture). 
mitigation. Overall, the programme will directly 
build the resilience of 273,700 beneficiaries 
(136,850 men and 136,850 women), and will 
indirectly benefit 723,382 persons (361,691 
men and 361,691 women).259  
 
The 
project 
will 
further 
support 
the 
implementation 
of 
climate 
resilient 
land 
management activities on 2,100,000 ha of 
forest and agri-ecosystems. This includes the 
adoption 
of 
climate 
resilient 
agricultural 
practices on 17,000 ha of agri-ecosystems, and 
sustainable forest management on 191,500 ha 
through VFAGs.  
 
Replicability 
At the time of this Funding 
Proposal 
Formulation 
(2021-2022), 
Project 
1 
(FP117) laid the ground for 
the 
transformational 
change in the project area, 
including supporting policy 
mainstreaming, 
strengthening 
the 
Medium 
If capacities can be built and additional finance 
(international and domestic, public and private) 
can 
be 
mobilized, 
climate 
resilient, 
deforestation 
free 
and 
sustainable 
land 
management could be replicated and scaled-
up within other villages, village clusters, 
districts, and provinces in Lao PDR, with key 
insight on lessons learned and best practices 
This project aims at scaling up successful 
approaches, and linking them to private sector 
engagement to mobilize additional finance for 
climate action, and ensure the long-term 
sustainability of project-supported investments. 
Specifically, the project will support the 
replication of PLUP, as well as deforestation- 
and climate resilient agricultural practices, 
based on a White List and the standardized 
PSAP/ VFAG approach, which is particularly 
 
259 Refer to FP Chapter D.1 for detailed information on beneficiary calculations and assumptions.

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory framework, and 
implementing 
and 
improving the MRV system 
(with the establishment of 
provincial 
deforestation 
monitoring 
systems), 
among 
others. 
It 
also 
supported interventions on 
the ground in 3 provinces, 
namely: 
Houaphan, 
Sayabouri 
and 
Luang 
Prabang.  
However, to fully reach the 
paradigm shift towards low-
emission 
and 
climate 
resilient forest and land use 
practices, 
additional 
technical 
and 
financial 
support 
is 
needed 
to 
replicate 
and 
scale-up 
investments 
in 
climate 
resilient and deforestation 
free 
sustainable 
land 
management 
in 
6 
provinces. 
 
for upland areas in neighbouring countries 
such as Vietnam, Thailand and Myanmar.  
Beyond this, the project would provide key 
experiences that inform the operationalization 
of Lao PDR’s REDD+ strategy. The 
implementation of the Lao PDR ER-
Programme under Projects 1 and 2 and the 
institutional arrangements in place to manage 
results-based payments from REDD+, will 
also facilitate the implementation of REDD+ at 
the national level (including Southern Lao 
PDR). While the ecosystems and landscapes 
differ in Southern Lao PDR, the financing 
mechanisms, participatory land use planning 
processes, standard operating procedures 
and monitoring systems, as well as capacity 
building processes would provide a flexible 
framework, where climate change adaptation 
has been mainstreamed, to facilitate the 
replication and scaling up of deforestation 
free, climate resilient and low-emission 
sustainable land management.  
relevant for rural upland agricultural producers 
in the region. This will help strengthen the 
adaptive capacities of local farmers and forest-
dependent communities.  
It will further support the replication and 
eventual scaling up of more resilient and 
sustainable 
(village) 
forest 
management 
across six northern provinces. This will be 
facilitated by the recent agreement of the 
Government of Lao PDR to channel RBPs to 
these 6 provinces, as agreed in the FCPF 
Benefit Sharing Plan, which will support 
replication and upscaling in the region (e.g. 
supporting communities in and around national 
parks with conservation agreements, and 
supporting village forest management). PDMS 
will also be replicated in the three additional 
provinces under Project 2 (Bokeo, Oudomxay 
and Luang Namtha). 
The project’s phased and gradual approach to 
scaling up forest management (such as VFM, 
sustainable forest management activities within 
NPAs), is suitable and needed to gradually 
build up the capacities of government staff, and 
local forest-dependent men and women.  It 
builds on past experiences in Lao PDR, and not 
only supports the development of management 
plans (based on thorough participatory land 
use planning), but also provides hands-on 
capacity building and finance to implement the 
annual operational plans. The anticipated 
bonus 
payments 
(i.e. 
performance-based 
payments) will bridge the phase until forests 
can be commercially used as outlined under 
article 120 of the revised forest law. In addition, 
with the approved Benefit Sharing Plan under 
the ER-Programme sub-national agencies will 
receive finance to provide their services and 
village communities will receive finance to 
further implement their agriculture and forest 
management plans.

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability 
At the time of this Funding 
Proposal 
Formulation 
(2021-2022), 
the 
Government of Lao PDR 
has shown commitment 
and ownership to REDD+ 
and strengthening climate 
resilience in Lao PDR, e.g. 
through the new Forestry 
Law, 
National 
REDD+ 
Strategy to 2025 and Vision 
to 2030, among others. Lao 
PDR’s latest NDC (2021) 
emphasizes the need to 
strengthen 
linkages 
between adaptation and 
REDD+, however without 
additional 
technical 
and 
financial support – such 
efforts are limited. 
In 
terms 
of 
needed 
technical support, capacity 
building is critical at the 
sub-national level, where 
capacities are low and staff 
turnover is high. This limits 
the overall adoption and 
sustainability 
of 
investments in sustainable 
land management.  
In 
terms 
of 
financial 
support, a major barrier for 
investing in low-emission 
and climate resilient land 
use is the limited availability 
of 
public 
and 
private 
Low 
 
The ER-Programme, in which both Projects 1 
and 2 contribute to, provides the basis for 
investments at scale to initiate the anticipated 
transformational change, and overcome the 
barriers facing Lao PDR to transition towards 
low-emission, deforestation free and climate 
resilient development pathways.  This project 
aims at scaling up successful approaches, and 
linking them to private sector engagement to 
mobilize additional finance for climate action, 
and ensure the long-term sustainability of 
project-supported investments. That said, it is 
clear that the situation in Lao PDR is complex, 
and such a transition needs to be gradual and 
grounded in the local context. 
The target scenario would ensure that 
adaptation is adequately mainstreamed into 
guidelines, manuals and procedures for PLUP, 
PSAP, VFAG and VFM. In addition, it would 
have 
sufficient 
human 
and 
institutional 
capacities in place to plan, implement and 
transparently 
and 
effectively 
monitor 
investments in low-emission, deforestation 
free and climate resilient AFOLU at scale, 
considering a holistic landscape approach. 
This would range from awareness of climate 
risk and vulnerability, best practices for low-
emission, best practices for deforestation free 
and 
climate 
resilient 
sustainable 
land 
management, 
gender-equality 
and 
social 
inclusion, and robust monitoring practices. It 
would further involve the application of PDMS, 
and 
strengthened 
capacities 
on 
forest 
monitoring and law enforcement, to ensure 
compliance with PLUP, PSAPs, and VFMPs. 
In addition, access to public and private 
finance for climate action would be increased, 
Essential enabling pre-conditions, both for the 
sustainability and success of the project, as 
well as for future replication and up-scaling in 
other 
provinces, 
are: 
(a) 
human 
and 
institutional capacities, and (b) sustainable 
financing. Both are cornerstones of the 
project’s Theory of Change, which focuses on 
capacity building, institutional strengthening 
and unlocking additional public and private 
financing streams for transforming the AFOLU 
sector. 
Project interventions are expected to increase 
access to finance, and mobilize additional 
funds for climate action. The project includes 
measures to strengthen access to international 
climate finance, including mechanisms related 
to the implementation of Article 6 of the Paris 
Agreement, as well as from voluntary REDD+ 
initiatives, 
with 
cross-cutting 
adaptation 
benefits, based on market and non-market 
mechanisms. Project measures will also 
strengthen national institutions’ capacities (e.g. 
supporting EPF to become accredited to the 
GCF) to access, manage and monitor climate 
finance (Activity 1.1.1).  
 
Project activities also seek to engage the 
private sector to ensure the sustainability of 
results. Specifically, through the project’s 
matching 
grant-scheme 
tailored 
to 
agri-
MSMEs, a key actor at the interface of 
production and markets, the project will support 
the development of sustainable value chains 
and facilitate transition towards deforestation 
free and climate resilient agri- and agro-forestry 
value chains (Activity 2.2.1).  
 
The long-term sustainability of measures 
supported by the project, as well as their 
continued replication and scaling will be

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
finance (see also Sections 
B.2 and B.5): 
▪ 
Lao PDR faces severe 
liquidity stress and has 
a limited capacity to 
take on further loans 
for climate action,  
▪ 
Producers and agri-
MSMEs have limited 
access to financing 
(limited FIs in rural 
areas), and often do 
not 
meet 
the 
necessary conditions 
(e.g. lack of collateral).  
▪ 
While private sector 
finance 
for 
climate 
action is considered 
critical 
to 
help 
fill 
financing gaps, there 
is a mismatch between 
private 
sector 
and 
public 
sector 
objectives and climate 
action. There tends to 
be 
a 
short-term 
perspective in land use 
management from the 
private 
sector 
and 
producers, driven by 
market 
conditions, 
which 
drives 
investments 
in 
unsustainable 
land 
management.  
and mechanisms to channel climate finance 
would be strengthened (e.g. through the EPF 
or FPF).  
Beyond this, villagers would have 
strengthened adaptive capacities and 
increased incomes through adopting 
alternative, more resilient, sustainable 
livelihood opportunities. This could be through 
investing in climate resilient value chains (e.g. 
via agri-MSMEs), through VFM benefitting 
from changes in the forest law to market 
sustainable produced forest and NTPFs from 
village forests, or through implementing 
climate resilient agricultural practices that limit 
losses due to climate change, and increase 
yields and/ or diversify income. 
facilitated by the institutionalization of trainings, 
capacity building, and through the development 
of SOPs and clear guidance, guidelines and 
procedures. 
Capacities 
of 
POFI, 
DOFI, 
PONRE, MONRE, PAFO, DAFO and EPF will 
be 
strengthened 
throughout 
project 
implementation 
on 
climate 
risk 
and 
vulnerability, 
climate 
change 
adaptation, 
climate resilient, deforestation free and low-
emission SLM.  
 
The operationalization of PDMS in all 3 
provinces, combined with capacity building 
support, will enable POFI to conduct near real 
time monitoring of forest cover change, and 
provide 
increased 
transparency 
and 
accountability 
to 
detect 
large 
scale 
deforestation. Improved monitoring, combined 
with investment support and capacity building 
on sustainable land management, will improve 
the overall sustainability and success of the 
measures, which in turn will facilitate Lao PDR 
to unlock further results-based payments in the 
future. 
 
The project interventions will facilitate greater 
(and 
more 
sustainability-oriented) 
private 
sector 
investment 
in 
the 
forestry 
and 
agriculture sectors. The matching grant-
scheme under this project will enable private 
sector investments from MSMEs – which play 
a key role in the agricultural sector in Lao PDR 
- with a focus on developing sustainable, 
climate resilient, and deforestation free value 
chains in support of ensuring the sustainability 
of the PSAP promoted practices.  
 
In terms of mobilizing additional sources of 
climate finance to ensure the sustainability of 
interventions, the project will support the Lao 
PDR to assess and implement the readiness 
actions necessary to participate in the market-

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
based schemes that emerge in the context of 
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Additionally, 
Lao PDR will be supported in assessing 
options and actions required for participating in 
market and non-market voluntary REDD+ 
initiatives for accessing results-based finance 
for emission reductions in excess of the Carbon 
Fund contract volume. Finally, the project will 
support Lao PDR in fundraising efforts for 
meeting its adaptation investment gap.  
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
The following Table outlines the GCF outcome level core indicators related to reduced emissions and increased resilience. For more information on the GHG 
calculations and methodology refer to the GHG Methodology Note in Annex 22.   
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final260 
 
MRA4 Forestry and land 
use 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Government sources: 
• 
Approved Reference 
Level (RL) of the FCPF 
ER-PD 
• 
Biennial Update Report 
(BUR) to the UNFCCC 
• 
Official REDD+ Office 
Reports  
 
Project sources:  
▪ 
Project M&E in 
cooperation with JICA  
Mid-term evaluation report 
to have information on CO2 
emission reductions / 
sequestration 
Project 2: 
 
Net annual forest-
sector GHG 
emissions of 8.5 
million tCO2eq 
Project 2: 
 
1 million tCO2eq 
of avoided 
emissions and 
removals 
Project 2: 
 
4.6 million 
tCO2eq of 
avoided missions 
and removals  
Lifespan: 4 years 
Project 2 
Lifespan 
target 
of 
GHG 
emissions: 4.6 million tCO2eq – 
given that emission reductions 
are calculated against a Forest 
Reference 
Emissions 
Level 
(FREL) the emissions over a 
longer 
lifespan 
are 
not 
calculated.  
 
Annual emission reductions: 
1.14 tCO2eq (average over 
lifespan). 
 
 
260 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme ex-ante estimate: 
11.7 million tCO2eq 
 
GHG emission reductions have 
been calculated based on the 
methodology 
used 
for 
the 
preparation of the Reference 
Level (RL) of the Lao PDR 
Emissions 
Reduction 
Programme (ER-P), which was 
submitted and approved (in 
June 2018) by the FCPF 
Carbon Fund and is compliant 
with 
the 
Carbon 
Fund 
Methodological 
Framework. 
More detailed information is 
provided in the GHG Emission 
Reduction Methodology Note in 
Annex 22. 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
▪ 
Data from Village 
Authorities obtained 
during FPIC 1 
▪ 
Data from District 
Authorities 
▪ 
Project M&E 
Evaluation reports to have 
information on adaptation 
impacts 
Project 1 target: 
120,000 persons 
from project 1 
(60,000 male, 
60,000female) will 
be continued to be 
supported by 
Project 2 
390,391 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(195,196 men, 
195,195 women) 
under project 1 
Project 2: 
82,110 direct 
beneficiaries 
(41,055 men, 
41,055 women) 
238,716 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(119,358 men, 
119,358 women) 
 
Project 2: 
273,700 direct 
beneficiaries 
(136,850 men, 
136,850 women) 
723,382 indirect 
beneficiaries 
(361,691 men, 
361,691 women) 
 
Direct beneficiaries calculated 
based 
on 
the 
following 
assumptions: 
▪ 
530 
villages 
will 
be 
supported in Project 2 (240 
villages 
with 
continued 
support from project 1, and 
an additional 290 villages 
under Project 2).  
▪ 
Population data is based 
on Lao Population and 
Housing 
Census 
Data 
2015 
(https://lao.unfpa.org/sites/
default/files/pub-pdf/PHC-
ENG-FNAL-WEB_0.pdf) 
▪ 
For Project 1, an average 
of 500 inhabitants per 
village 
was 
used 
to 
calculate the number of 
direct beneficiaries, based

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
on the Lao Housing and 
Population Census, which 
focused 
on 
three 
provinces: 
Houaphan, 
Luang 
Prabang 
and 
Sayabouri.  
▪ 
An average value of 530 
inhabitants per village was 
assumed for Project 2 
villages (based on the Lao 
Housing and Population 
Census, considering the 
inclusion of an additional 3 
provinces. 
▪ 
It is assumed al villagers in 
the target villages are 
direct 
beneficiaries, 
as 
they will benefit from land 
use planning and other 
project-supported 
interventions.  
Indirect 
beneficiaries 
calculated 
based 
on 
the 
following assumptions:   
▪ 
Population in all 29 districts 
(17 districts within Luang 
Prabang, Sayabouri and 
Houaphan, 
and 
an 
additional 12 districts from 
Bokeo, 
Oudomxay 
and 
Luang 
Namtha) 
benefit 
from strengthened legal 
and regulatory framework, 
improved monitoring and 
government capacities on 
climate change mitigation 
and adaptation.

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
Indirect 
beneficiaries 
= 
population 
in 
all 
29 
supported districts – the 
number 
of 
direct 
beneficiaries 
▪ 
17 districts covered under 
Project 1  
▪ 
12 districts under Project 2  
▪ 
District 
population 
data 
from Lao Population and 
Housing 
Census 
Data 
(2015)  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities 
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or 
new climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
▪ 
FPIC monitoring 
▪ 
PSAP monitoring data 
▪ 
Project M&E   
 
Evaluation report to have 
information on adaptation 
impacts 
Project 1 target: 
53,720 persons 
from project 1 
(26,860 men, 
26,860 women)  
Project 2: 
0 
Project 2  
18,900 
beneficiaries 
(9,450 men, 
9,450 women) 
adopting more 
climate resilient 
livelihood 
options 
Project 2  
75,604 
beneficiaries 
(37,802 men, 
37,802 women) 
adopting more 
climate resilient 
livelihood 
options 
Calculated 
based 
on 
the 
number of beneficiaries who 
access PSAP funds. 
158 persons accessed PSAP 
funds on average per village 
under project 1 during the first 
round of PSAP implementation. 
An additional 103 persons 
could access PSAP funds as 
part of the bonus payment 
assuming 
65% 
of 
bonus 
payment is channelled towards 
agricultural activities. 
Programme target: 
129,323 beneficiaries adopting 
improved and/or new climate 
resilient livelihood options 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low-emission 
▪ 
PLUP and VFMP 
Monitoring Data 
▪ 
Participatory land use 
plans developed under 
Activity 1.2.2 
Project 1 target: 
920,000 ha 
Project 2:  
1,500,000 ha of 
terrestrial 
Project 2: 
2,122,000 ha of 
terrestrial 
Programme level – the final 
target in Project 2 includes 
continuation of activities that 
started under Project 1. Total

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and/or climate-resilient 
management practice 
▪ 
Village Forest 
Management Plans 
developed under 
Activity 3.3.1 
▪ 
Protected Area 
Management Plans 
developed under 
Activity 3.2.1 
▪ 
Project M&E  
▪ 
Mid-term evaluation 
report to have 
dedicated section on 
adaptation impacts 
ecosystems 
brought under 
improved 
sustainable and 
climate resilient 
land 
management 
practices, of 
which: 
▪ 
1,100,000 
ha are 
forest 
ecosystem 
▪ 
400,000 are 
agri-
ecosystems 
ecosystems 
brought under 
improved 
sustainable and 
climate resilient 
land 
management 
practices, of 
which: 
▪ 
1,422,000 
ha are forest 
ecosystems 
▪ 
700,000 are 
agri-
ecosystems 
area of all land use plans for 
530 villages.  
Area of agricultural land was 
calculated assuming 1,320.75 
ha of agriculture land per village 
(the average agricultural area 
per village under Project 1) x 
530 villages. 
Area 
of 
forest 
land 
was 
calculated 
assuming 
the 
inclusion of village forests, 5 
NPAs and 1 NP. 
Village forests supported: 
▪ 
180,000 
ha 
of 
village 
forests from Project 1 will 
continue to be supported 
by Project 2 
▪ 
Project 2 is expected to 
support 290 new villages 
with VFM.  The average 
area of village forests 
covered under Project 1 
was 700 ha. Therefore, it is 
estimated that new VF 
groups under Project 2 will 
cover 203,000 ha. 
 
In terms of NPAs: 
▪ 
672,200 ha are NPAs 
supported under Project 1, 
that will be continued to be 
supported under Project 2 
▪ 
367,150 ha are additional 
NPAs that are included 
within Project 2 in the 3

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
newly 
added 
provinces 
(Bokeo, Oudomxay and 
Luang Namtha) 
 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-forest, 
freshwater and coastal 
marine areas brought 
under resoration and/or 
improved ecosystems 
 
Project 1 target: 
852,200 ha of 
National Park, 
NPAs and village 
forests 
Project 2: 
1,100,000 ha of 
National Park, 
Protected Areas 
and village 
forests 
Project 2: 
1,422,000 ha of 
National Park, 
Protected Areas 
and village 
forests 
Area of national parks, NPAs 
and village forests covered 
within the programme. 
Village forests supported: 
▪ 
180,000 
ha 
of 
village 
forests from Project 1 will 
continue to be supported 
by Project 2 
▪ 
Project 2 is expected to 
support 290 new villages 
with VFM.  The average 
area of village forests 
covered under Project 1 
was 700 ha. Therefore, it is 
estimated that new VF 
groups under Project 2 will 
cover 203,000 ha. 
 
In terms of NPAs: 
▪ 
672,200 ha are NPAs 
supported under Project 1, 
that will be continued to be 
supported under Project 2 
▪ 
367,150 ha are additional 
NPAs that are included 
within Project 2 in the 3 
newly 
added 
provinces 
(Bokeo, Oudomxay and 
Luang Namtha)

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
The following Table provides an overview of enabling environment-related GCF core indicators under the Integrated Results Management Framework. Annex 2e 
provides additional information on the rating for the current state.  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to strengthening 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low 
emission climate-resilient 
development pathways in a 
country-driven manner 
Project 1 advanced with the 
strengthening 
of 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for REDD+ in 
Lao PDR. This included, 
supporting 
various 
regulations to mainstream 
REDD+ and sustainable 
land 
and 
forest 
management, 
updating 
development 
plans. 
In 
addition, project 1 started 
institutional 
strengthening 
and capacity building in 3 of 
6 
provinces 
(Houaphan, 
Luang 
Prabang 
and 
Sayabouri). 
With 
these 
advances, there are clear 
experiences that can be 
replicated in the remaining 
3 provinces (e.g. trainings 
on gender equality, social 
inclusion, 
FPIC, 
PLUP, 
PSAP, VFAGs and VFM, 
establishing 
PDMS, 
capacity building).  
 
In addition, project 1 has 
generated 
valuable 
experiences and supported 
capacity building of EPF 
through providing EPF the 
low 
The target scenario would 
see 
the 
capacities 
of 
government 
officials 
in 
PONRE, DONRE, PAFO, 
DAFO, POFI and DOFI 
strengthened 
in 
all 
six 
provinces, enabling them to 
continue to support and 
eventually 
replicate 
and 
scale up investments in 
climate 
resilient, 
deforestation free and low-
emission sustainable land 
management. 
 
In terms of finance, the 
target scenario would see 
Lao PDR access additional 
sources of climate finance 
(e.g. 
adaptation 
fund, 
mechanisms under Article 6 
of the Paris Agreement; and 
voluntary 
REDD+ 
initiatives), that will support 
the country to implement 
measures 
to 
meet 
the 
climate change targets set 
out in NDC and Climate 
Change Strategy. 
 
In addition, EPF would 
become accredited to GCF, 
▪ 
Project 2 will support 
the establishment of 
proven 
management 
systems 
in 
the 
remaining 3 provinces 
(e.g. 
PDMS), 
and 
provide 
ongoing 
capacity 
support 
to 
government staff at the 
provincial and district 
level in all 6 provinces, 
understanding 
that 
upscaling 
and 
replication is a gradual 
process. 
This 
will 
ensure 
capacity 
building ranges from 
improving 
planning 
(considering 
best 
practices for adaptation 
mainstreaming, FPIC, 
gender equality and 
social 
inclusion), 
as 
well as implementation 
of best practices for 
PLUP, climate resilient 
and 
deforestation 
agriculture, SFM and 
FLR, and transparent 
and 
effective 
monitoring. 
National level (one country)

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
role 
of 
EE. 
Through 
supporting EPF with the 
establishment 
of 
their 
climate 
change 
funding 
window, 
project 
1 
has 
improved 
channelling 
of 
climate finance to priority 
investments within villages 
across Houaphan, Luang 
Prabang and Sayabouri. 
EPF has since begun the 
process of applying for GCF 
accreditation, 
although 
additional 
support 
is 
needed to support them 
with this process.  
 
While these advancements 
are a step in the right 
direction, there are several 
barriers that persist in Lao 
PDR that limit the transition 
to low-emission and climate 
resilient 
development 
pathways. First of all, Lao 
PDR is a LDC, and there 
are insufficient government 
resources and capacities 
for 
climate 
change 
adaptation and mitigation. 
Lao PDR’s NDC (2021) 
highlights the urgent need 
to 
mobilize 
additional 
climate finance from the 
public and private sector to 
invest in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, 
where 
forestry 
and 
agriculture are among two 
of its priority sectors. It 
enabling the fund to plan, 
implement, 
and 
monitor 
climate finance projects. 
 
▪ 
It will build on the 
manuals, 
guidelines, 
training materials and 
other 
resources 
developed 
under 
project 
1, 
while 
providing 
additional 
support to mainstream 
adaptation throughout 
these processes and 
materials 
(strengthening 
the 
linkages 
between 
climate 
change 
mitigation 
and 
adaptation, 
and 
facilitating investments 
in resilience building 
within 
the 
AFOLU 
sector). 
▪ 
Project 2 will also help 
fill 
the 
critical 
gap 
related 
to 
financing 
climate action. It will: 
▪ 
Support 
EPF 
to 
continually strengthen 
their capacities, gain 
experience managing a 
matching 
grant 
scheme, and support 
its 
accreditation 
process 
to 
access 
international 
climate 
finance, and develop, 
implement and monitor 
high 
quality 
climate 
change projects. 
▪ 
Build the capacities of 
FPF to prepare them to 
eventually sustainably

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
 
further notes the need to 
strengthen the synergies 
between 
REDD+ 
and 
climate change adaptation, 
which are often untapped. A 
key opportunity for this is to 
integrate adaptation within 
PLUP, PSAP and VFM, 
however until now there is 
no systematic approach. 
 
manage and disburse 
potential 
climate 
finance sources (e.g. 
Climate 
Change 
Funding 
Window, 
REDD+ Results-based 
Payments under the 
FCPF, 
and 
other 
sources) 
▪ 
Support Lao PDR with 
a set of comprehensive 
measures 
that 
will 
facilitate the additional 
mobilization of climate 
finance to meet the 
country’s NDC – this 
will include support to 
the readiness process 
for 
participating 
in 
mechanisms 
under 
Article 6 of the Paris 
Agreement 
(including 
supporting the process 
of developing eligibility 
criteria for programs, 
projects, and units); 
action 
plans 
for 
meeting 
the 
requirements 
of 
voluntary 
REDD+ 
initiatives; 
and 
supporting the NDA to 
develop 
a 
financing 
strategy identify and 
fundraise 
climate 
finance 
to 
meet 
conditional 
NDC 
targets and the climate 
change 
adaptation

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
 
investment 
needs 
outlined in the NDC 
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformatio
n at the sectoral, local, or 
national level 
Poverty 
and 
lack 
of 
alternative 
livelihood 
opportunities (e.g. off-farm 
employment) have resulted 
in a high dependence on 
land 
and 
forests 
for 
household income in the 
project 
area. 
Project 
1 
developed 
the 
PSAP 
approach for transitioning to 
deforestation 
free 
production in target villages. 
Further engagement of the 
private sector to support the 
development 
of 
deforestation 
free 
value 
chains is required. Agri-
MSMEs are critical actors to 
support the development of 
these value chains given 
their position as a critical 
actor at the intersection of 
deforestation, 
production 
systems and value chains.   
However, they are often left 
out 
of 
discussions 
on 
sustainability, and here is a 
notable 
absence 
of 
financing opportunities for 
agri-MSMEs to invest in 
sustainable forestry, agro-
forestry, and deforestation 
free 
climate 
resilient 
agriculture activities. These 
factors 
contribute 
to 
creating a bottleneck for the 
development 
of 
medium 
The 
targeted 
scenario 
would 
see 
deforestation 
free and climate resilient 
agriculture and agroforestry 
practices implemented by 
producers. Implementation 
would 
be 
supported, 
incentivized, 
and 
maintained through more 
predictable market demand 
for 
deforestation 
free 
commodities 
from 
value 
chain actors, especially by 
agri-MSMEs. This would 
lead to strengthened and 
more 
sustainable 
agricultural value chains.   
 
In terms of finance, the 
target scenario, would see 
the availability of finance for 
agri-MSMEs 
seeking 
to 
undertake investments in 
sustainability 
oriented 
activities.  
 
Project 2 will scale the 
implementation 
of 
the 
PSAP approach (Activity 
2.1.1) in the three new 
provinces. This will facilitate 
the 
transition 
to 
deforestation 
free 
and 
climate resilient agricultural 
production systems in the 
targeted 
villages 
and 
support 
producers 
to 
enhance their productivity. 
Specifically, the approach 
will address key drivers of 
deforestation, 
such 
as 
agricultural expansion and 
unsustainable 
pioneering 
and 
rotational 
shifting 
cultivation.  
The approach of Project 2 
also seeks to integrate 
farmers into climate resilient 
and 
low-emission 
agricultural value chains. 
Through supporting private 
sector 
actors, 
and 
specifically, 
agri-MSMEs 
purchasing 
commodities 
from target villages (Activity 
2.2.1) to enhance their 
capacities and sustainability 
performance 
and 
with 
targeted financial support 
for sustainable investments 
the 
project 
aims 
to 
strengthen 
these 
value 
chains 
and 
support 
a 
Multiple sub-national areas 
within a country

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
 
deforestation 
free 
and 
sustainability oriented value 
chains. 
market-shift 
towards 
deforestation 
free 
and 
climate resilient agriculture. 
 
In terms of forestry, the 
project will support villagers 
to benefit from changes in 
the 
forest 
law 
to 
economically benefit from 
the 
sustainable 
management 
of 
village 
forests (Component 3). This 
is a new provision under the 
new forestry law, and the 
project 
enters 
at 
an 
opportune 
moment 
to 
support villagers from forest 
management planning to 
implementation 
and 
monitoring, 
while 
strengthening 
income-
generating opportunities for 
local villagers from SFM 
and FLR.  
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
The following table outlines the project specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs). Baseline values reflect progress made under Project 1. 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1: Governance 
and the implementation of 
low-emission and climate-
informed planning is 
Area (ha) of village 
agricultural and forested 
land covered by PLUPs 
and under more 
▪ 
Approved participatory 
land use plans/ PLUP 
monitoring 
Project 1 target: 
 
Project 2: 
 
Project 2: 
 
Average area per village 
under PLUP was calculated 
based on average values 
from Project 1, where the

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthened and 
sustainable financing 
sources are accessed 
sustainable and climate-
resilient management 
▪ 
PDMS and reports from 
POFI/ DOFI 
▪ 
Project M&E 
920,000 ha 
1,290,000 ha 
2,100,000 ha 
average PLUP village land 
use plan covered 3,838 ha. 
530 villages: Comprised of 
170 villages from Project 1 
and 70 from KfW village 
forestry, 
plus 
290 
under 
Project 
2 
(240 
in 
new 
provinces and additional 50 
in existing provinces) 
Output 1.1 Organisational 
structure and capacities of 
domestic (financial) 
institutions are 
strengthened to access, 
mobilize, manage and 
monitor the use of climate 
finance from diverse public 
and private sources 
 
Number (#) of public 
institutions with 
strengthened capacities 
to manage and monitor 
climate finance from 
diverse public and 
private sources  
 
▪ 
Documentation of 
trainings (attendance 
sheets, materials) 
▪ 
Project M&E 
▪ 
Gap assessment and 
action plan Article 6  
▪ 
Conformance plan with 
requirements of REDD+ 
voluntary initiatives 
NDA financing strategy for 
NDC implementation  
Project 2: 
 
0 public institutions  
 
Project 2: 
 
1 institution  
Project 2: 
 
2 institutions  
Public institutions (EPF and 
FPF) 
Output 1.2 Participatory 
village Land Use Plans are 
developed, are climate 
informed and integrate 
measures to strengthen 
climate resilience 
# of climate-informed 
participatory village 
LUPs developed 
▪ 
Approved and finalized 
participatory land use 
plans / PLUP monitoring 
Project M&E  
Project 1 target: 
240  
Project 2: 
320 
Project 2: 
530 
170 from project 1 and 70 
from KfW village forestry, 
plus 290 under project 2 (240 
in 
new 
provinces 
and 
additional 
50 
in 
existing 
provinces) 
Outcome 2: Vulnerabilities 
of villagers are reduced 
and their livelihoods are 
improved by engaging in 
climate resilient, 
deforestation free value 
chains and access to 
markets 
Area (ha) under 
sustainable, 
deforestation free and 
climate resilient 
agricultural practices  
 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
PSAP work plan and 
PSAP monitoring 
▪ 
VFAG documentation 
and registration for 
cooperation on 
sustainable agricultural 
practices 
▪ 
Village Agricultural 
Activity and Investment 
Plan 
▪ 
Field survey results 
Project M&E 
Project 1 target: 
 
14,400 ha 
 
Project 2: 
 
0 
 
 
 
Project 2: 
 
 4,350 ha 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 2: 
 
17,400 ha 
 
 
 
 
Project 
2 
will 
target 
approximately 17,400 ha. 
This 
was 
calculated 
considering 
the 
following 
assumptions: the average 
landholding 
of 
upland 
dependent families is of 1.2 
hectares. The project will be 
able 
to 
support 
PSAP 
implementation 
on 
an 
average 
of 
50 
upland 
dependent 
families 
per 
village 
in 
290 
villages

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
 
through the VFAG initial 
payment and the bonus 
payment (this would come to 
a total of 14,500 families with 
approximately 
17,400 
hectares in total). The VFAG 
initial payment will be on 
average of EUR 10,800 and 
can reach at least 27 families 
with EUR 400 for PSAP 
implementation 
(under 
project 1 there have been 29-
30 families accessing PSAP 
funding under VFAGs)..It is 
assumed that villages will 
receive 
a 
bonus 
performance-based payment 
averaging EUR 10,000 and 
that 65% of that bonus 
payment will be channelled 
to 
PSAP 
activities 
and 
support an additional 20 
upland dependent families.  
 
This 
assumes 
also 
that 
across the 3 new provinces 
there are 523 people/village 
on average living in a total of 
922 
rural 
villages. 
That 
corresponds to an average of 
circa 100 families per rural 
village (5.3 persons/family).  
Assuming the figures are 
similar in the 3 provinces of 
Project 1, and in the 290 
target villages in total, this 
adds up to a total of 29,000 
families overall. PSAP only 
addresses 
the 
upland 
farming families, which are

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
 
estimated to be 60% of the 
total.  
 
 
Total 
Programme 
Target: 
31,800 ha. 
 
% of beneficiaries that 
report an increase in 
overall climate 
resilience 
▪ 
Household surveys at 
baseline, mid-term and 
end of the project   
Project M&E 
0% 
 
18%  
beneficiaries 
report an 
increase in 
overall climate 
resilience 
At least 75% of 
beneficiaries 
report an 
increase in 
overall climate 
resilience  
This will be measured based 
on household survey results. 
From 
the 
households 
participating in PSAP (as 
described 
in 
the 
assumptions/ note above), at 
least 75% of participating 
households in the survey 
report an increase in their 
resilience. 
Output 2.1 Villagers are 
trained by capacitated 
government staff, and 
enabled to produce 
sustainable, climate 
resilient and deforestation 
free agricultural and 
agroforestry products, 
strengthening their access 
to sustainability-oriented 
markets 
# of villages received 
funding for PSAP 
implementation from the 
VFAG for climate 
resilient and 
deforestation free 
agriculture and agro-
forestry 
 
▪ 
PSAP work plans  
▪ 
PSAP and VFAG 
monitoring 
▪ 
VFAG documentation 
and registration for 
cooperation on 
sustainable agricultural 
practices 
▪ 
Village Agricultural 
Activity and Investment 
Plan 
▪ 
Field survey results 
Project M&E 
Project 1 target: 
 
170 
 
Project 2: 
 
0 
 
Project 2: 
 
130 
Project 2: 
 
290 
170 villages received funding 
for 
PSAP 
implementation 
from VFAG in Project 1 
 
It is assumed all 290 villages 
supported under Project 2 
will receive funding for PSAP 
implementation.  
Output 2.2 Agri-MSMEs 
are capacitated, and have 
improved incentives and 
access to finance to invest 
in marketing and 
processing for locally 
sourced deforestation free 
and climate resilient 
agricultural products 
 
 
# of agri-MSMEs 
receiving matching 
grants to invest in 
climate resilient, low-
emission and/or 
deforestation free value 
chains 
▪ 
Signed matching grant 
agreements 
▪ 
Business plans 
Project M&E 
Project 2: 
 
0 
Project 2: 
 
15 
Project 2: 
 
60 
Assumes that there will be 60 
agri-MSMEs supported that 
will 
be 
able 
to 
access 
matching 
grants 
with 
average 
grants 
across 
categories of EUR 30,000

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
261 The average area was reduced to 700 ha per village to be more conservative, as village forest size in the additional 3 provinces is likely to be slightly smaller. This is partly linked with the size of 
NPAs, which are larger in area in the 3 NPAs covered under Project 1, where villagers in the same districts as these NPAs tend to have larger village forests.   
Outcome 3: Sustainable 
management, protection 
and rehabilitation of forest 
ecosystems is improved 
Area (ha) under more 
resilient and sustainable 
forest practices across 
forest categories (village 
forestry and protected 
areas) 
▪ 
Approved Protected 
Area Management 
Plans  
▪ 
Approved Village Forest 
Management Plans 
▪ 
VFM and VilFoCA 
monitoring 
▪ 
Project M&E 
▪ 
Monitoring reports of 
PoFI and DOF 
Project 1 target: 
 
852,200 ha 
Project 2: 
 
1,100,000 ha 
Project 2: 
 
1,422,000 ha 
Area (ha) under sustainable 
forest practices across forest 
categories = area of village 
forest and NPAs supported 
by the project. Project 2 will 
continue supporting NPAs 
and Village Forests Areas 
that are supported under 
Project 1.  
 
Village forests supported: 
▪ 
180,000 ha of village 
forests from project 1 will 
continue 
to 
be 
supported by Project 2 
(with an average of 750 
ha per village forest) 
▪ 
Project 2 is expected to 
support 
290 
new 
villages with VFM.  The 
average area of village 
forests covered under 
Project 2 was assumed 
at 700 ha.261 Therefore, 
it is estimated that new 
VF groups under Project 
2 will cover 203,000 ha. 
▪ 
In total VFM will cover 
383,000 ha. 
 
In terms of NPAs: 
▪ 
672,200 ha are NPAs 
supported under Project 
1, that will be continued 
to be supported under 
Project 2

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
367,150 
ha 
are 
additional NPAs that are 
included within Project 2 
in the 3 newly added 
provinces 
(Bokeo, 
Oudomxay and Luang 
Namtha) 
▪ 
In total, these 5 NPAs 
and 
1 
NP 
cover 
1,039,350 ha 
 
Output 3.1 Village 
communities are trained 
by capacitated 
government staff and 
have the financial 
resources to implement 
sustainable (village) forest 
management plans that 
contribute to REDD+ and 
strengthen the resilience 
of forest ecosystems and 
the livelihoods that 
depend on them 
# of village forest 
management plans 
developed and under 
implementation that 
contribute to 
strengthened resilience 
▪ 
Approved Village Forest 
Management Plans 
▪ 
Project M&E  
▪ 
Grant requests from 
VFAG for VMP 
implementation 
▪ 
Monitoring reports of 
PoFI 
Project 1 target: 
 
240 
Project 2: 
 
340 
Project 2: 
 
530 
240 villages supported under 
Project 1 with VFM, who will 
receive continued support 
under Project 2 (as described 
under Chapter B.3). 
290 additional villages will be 
supported under Project 2 
(240 
in 
Bokeo, 
Luang 
Prabang 
and 
Oudomxay, 
and 50 in Houaphan, Luang 
Prabang and Sayabouri) 
Output 3.2 National 
Protected Area (NPA) 
management plans are 
developed and 
communities are enabled 
and actively engaged in 
implementing 
conservation agreements 
in NPAs that enable 
sustainable forest 
management and forest 
conservation 
a) # of climate-informed 
NPA management plans 
revised and under 
implementation 
 
b) # of village forest 
conservation 
agreements signed and 
under implementation 
▪ 
Approved Protected 
Area Management 
Plans  
▪ 
Approved VilFoCA 
▪ 
Project M&E 
▪ 
PDMS and monitoring 
reports of PoFI and 
DOF 
Project 2 baseline: 
 
a) 0  
 
b) 41 
Project 2: 
 
a) 4 
 
b) 80 
Project 2: 
 
a) 6 
 
b) 140 
All NPA and National Parks 
have management plans that 
will require revision for the 
period from 2025-2030 
VilFoCA 
in 
baseline 
developed by development 
partners (4 in Nam Sam 
NPA, 23 in Nam et Phou 
Louey National Park, 14 in 
Nam Pouy NPA, 0 in Phou Hi 
Phi, 0 in Nam Ha NPA, 0 in 
Nam Kan NPA). 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators

=== PAGE 111 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-benefit 1: Improved 
food security 
Percentage (%) of direct 
beneficiaries (male and 
female) who confirm 
improved food security 
▪ 
Survey (mid-term, and 
final survey) 
▪ 
Project M&E 
 
0% 
50% of female 
beneficiaries 
50% of male 
beneficiaries 
70% of female 
beneficiaries 
70% of male 
beneficiaries. 
Surveys to be conducted in 
target villages at project mid-
term and project-end. 
Co-benefit 2: Enhanced 
conservation of 
biodiversity  
Area of NPAs where 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation are 
implemented with strong 
biodiversity benefits, 
including important 
habitats for diverse 
species including the 
black gibbon, among 
others 
▪ 
Approved Protected 
Area Management 
Plans, VilFoCA  
▪ 
Project M&E 
▪ 
Monitoring reports of 
PoFI and DOF 
 
Project 1 target:  
 
670,000 ha 
Project 2: 
 
 900,000 ha 
Project 2: 
 
1,039,350 ha 
Baseline figures cover the 2 
NPAs and 1 National Park 
covered under Project 1 
(total area circa 672,200 ha): 
▪ 
70,000 ha Nam Sam 
NPA  
▪ 
411,000ha Nam et Phou 
Louey NP 
▪ 
191,200 ha Nam Pouy 
NPA 
 
Total Figure under project 2 
includes 3 additional NPAs 
supported in Bokeo, Luang 
Namtha 
and 
Oudomxay 
(combined area 367,150 ha): 
▪ 
87,350 ha Phou Hi Phi 
NPA  
▪ 
222,400 ha Nam Ha 
NPA 
▪ 
57,400 ha Nam Kan 
NPA 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
The following Table describes all project activities and sub-activities. For further information on their timing, refer to the Implementation Timetable in Annex 5.  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Climate change funding 
window and sustainable finance  
Activity 1.1.1 will strengthen institutional 
capacities 
to 
channel 
and 
mobilize 
additional climate finance (EPF and FPF). 
It will further support EPF with their GCF 
accreditation process. It also will support 
Lao PDR to assess additional options for 
finance for REDD+ results, with cross-
▪ 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Enhancing the 
capacities of EPF & FPF to manage 
and monitor climate finance, including 
results-based payments 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
1.1.1.2 
 
 
Options 
assessment and action plan for 
▪ 
Capacity 
development 
plan 
for 
enabling EPF and FPF to manage and 
monitor climate finance implemented 
▪ 
Gap assessment and action plan for 
enabling the participation of Lao PDR 
in market mechanisms under Article 6,

=== PAGE 112 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
262 In some district and target villages, donor-funded initiatives such as the GIZ LMPD project have supported land use planning. These land use plans will not require a new land use planning exercise 
and the programme will build upon and support their implementation and monitoring 
cutting climate change benefits, in excess 
of the contract volume of the FCPF Carbon 
Fund; support the readiness activities for 
participating in mechanisms under Article 6 
of the Paris Agreement; and will support the 
NDA in developing a financing strategy for 
climate change adaptation and for meeting 
the targets in the country’s ambitious NDC.  
securing long-term financing for NDC 
implementation in the AFOLU sector 
including options to address issues 
related to corresponding adjustments 
▪ 
Viability assessment for Lao PDR 
participation 
in 
existing 
REDD+ 
voluntary market and non-market 
mechanisms  
▪ 
Conformance 
plan 
to 
meet 
the 
requirements 
of 
market-oriented 
REDD+ 
Financing 
strategy 
and 
implementation 
plan 
NDC 
implementation  
Activity 1.2.1 Law enforcement and 
monitoring  
Activity 
1.2.1 
will 
strengthen 
law 
enforcement and monitoring to ensure 
transparent and robust forest monitoring. It 
will involve training provincial and district 
staff 
on 
best 
practices 
and 
SOPs 
developed under Project 1, supporting the 
development of 3 PDMS (Bokeo, Luang 
Namtha and Sayabouri), operationalization 
of PDMS in all 6 provinces, harmonization 
of 
approaches 
and 
improvement 
of 
knowledge management for strengthened 
law enforcement. 
 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
1.2.1.1 
Training 
to 
facilitate implementation of enhanced 
law enforcement 
▪ 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Operationalization 
of provincial deforestation monitoring 
systems (PDMS) 
▪ 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Harmonization of 
approaches 
and 
improvement 
of 
knowledge 
management 
for 
strengthened law enforcement 
▪ 
3 new PDMS established for additional 
provinces included under Project 2 
(Bokeo, 
Oudomxay 
and 
Luang 
Namtha) 
▪ 
POFI and DOFI staff trained on PDMS, 
and are able to monitor forest cover 
change with new remote sensing 
technologies according to SOPs 
▪ 
PDMS operational in all 6 provinces 
▪ 
PDMS monitoring approaches are 
harmonized 
▪ 
Annual summary reporting protocols 
from the village level made available at 
the DPMU 
Activity 1.2.2 Land use planning and 
improved tenure security 
Activity 1.2.2 will support mainstreaming of 
climate change adaptation into PLUP 2.0 
processes (through the development of an 
adaptation supplement), followed up 
training of PLUP teams at the provincial 
and district level on climate change 
adaptation, best practices for PLUP, FPIC, 
gender equality and social inclusion 
(GESI). With strengthened capacities, 
tools and supporting materials, PLUP 
teams then conduct PLUP in 290 villages 
(240 villages in Bokeo, Luang Namtha and 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
1.2.2.1 
Mainstreaming 
climate-change adaptation into land 
use planning manuals and guidelines,  
provincial core PLUP trainers on 
climate risk and vulnerability and 
suitable interventions to strengthen 
climate resilience 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
1.2.2.2 
Participatory 
village land use planning (PLUP) in 
target project districts (linked with 
Activity 1.2.1 and Components 2 and 
3) in hotspot areas262 
▪ 
Village land use plans developed and 
under implementation 
▪ 
Land use plans (developed and under 
implementation) have at least 70% 
compliance 
▪ 
At least 70% of all adult villagers in 
target (of which 50% are female) 
villages state that they feel actively 
included in the PLUP process

=== PAGE 113 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
 
Oudomxay, and 50 villages in Houaphan, 
Luang Prabang and Sayabouri), which will 
guide the implementation of investments 
under Components 2 and 3.  
▪ 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 Monitoring and 
enforcement of land use plans 
 
Activity 1.2.3 Knowledge management, 
FPIC, safeguards and gender 
Activity 1.2.3 focuses on knowledge 
management and communication related 
to the project. It further involves the 
implementation of the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) and 
Gender Action Plan (GAP), and ensures 
compliance with FPIC procedures and 
safeguards (where the FPIC process is 
cross-cutting throughout the project 
outputs and activities).  
▪ 
Sub-activity 
1.2.3.1 
Knowledge 
management and communication 
▪ 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.2 Implementation of 
the 
Environmental 
and 
Social 
Management 
Plan 
(ESMP) 
and 
Gender 
Action 
Plan 
(GAP) 
and 
ensuring compliance with FPIC and 
safeguards 
▪ 
Project 
communication 
plan 
implemented 
▪ 
Awareness campaigns designed and 
implemented in newly added project 
provinces and districts  
▪ 
Project 
website 
maintained 
and 
regularly updated 
▪ 
Safeguard-related 
activities 
systematically recorded 
Activity 2.1.1 Promotion of sustainable, 
climate informed and deforestation free 
agricultural practices and technologies 
Activity 2.1.1 will facilitate the 
implementation of sustainable, climate 
informed and deforestation free 
agricultural practices and technologies in 
290 villages in the 6 provinces. It will 
involve institutional strengthening on 
PSAP at the provincial and district levels, 
climate change adaptation mainstreaming 
in PSAP processes and manuals, working 
with villagers to develop and implement 
PSAP investment plans that are tailored to 
their local context and priorities (which 
build on climate-informed PLUP developed 
under Activity 1.2.2), and support ongoing 
knowledge management and learning to 
continually strengthen and improve the 
PSAP approach and generate new 
information on best practices for 
deforestation free and climate resilient 
agricultural practices. Transferring of funds 
for PSAP investment plan implementation 
will be linked with VFAGs, established and 
operated under Activity 2.1.2. 
▪ 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1 Capacity building 
and 
knowledge 
management 
for 
sustainable, 
climate 
resilient 
and 
deforestation 
free 
agricultural 
practices and technologies  
▪ 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2 Scaling of PSAP 
planning approach to 290 villages  
▪ 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.3 Implementation of 
PSAP 
Agricultural 
Activity 
and 
Investment Plan   
▪ 
DAFO and TSC staff trained on climate 
resilient good agricultural practices, 
related to the White List, and the 
PSAP/ VFAG process 
▪ 
Climate resilient and deforestation free 
agricultural practices adopted, leading 
to increased yields, disaggregated by 
crops 
▪ 
For climate resilient and deforestation 
free 
agricultural 
practices: 
Each 
eligible village receives approximately 
EUR 10,800 upfront as an incentive 
payment, and later approximately EUR 
10,000 in the form of a performance-
based bonus payment (contingent on 
performance and forest area size) 
▪ 
Participation 
rates 
of 
women 
in 
community meetings are at least 40% 
Activity 2.1.2 Investments in sustainable, 
climate informed and deforestation free 
agricultural practices and agroforestry 
Activity 2.1.2 will support the set up and 
implementation of Village Forestry and 
Agriculture Grants (VFAG), following the 
▪ 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Scaling up the 
VFAG approach to 290 villages  
▪ 
VFAGs set up and operational in 290 
villages, channelling funds from EPF to 
local villages for PSAP investment plan

=== PAGE 114 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
 
guidelines developed under Project 1. 
VFAG will serve as the mechanism which 
will receive EPF grants, channelling funds 
to the village level.  
▪ 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.2 Capacity building 
of new VFAG committees  
▪ 
Sub-activity 
2.1.2.3 
Monitoring 
of 
VFAGs 
implementation (under Activity 2.1.1), 
and VFM (under Activity 3.1.1)  
Activity 2.1.3 Watershed forest 
management to support small-scale 
irrigation investments 
Activity 2.1.3 complements ADB 
investment in 11 small-scale agricultural 
irrigation schemes through support to 
ensuring that the forested landscapes in 
the catchment areas of the irrigation 
projects remain intact through improved 
land management (including good 
agricultural practices) and through 
reduced pressure from drivers of 
deforestation and degradation (e.g. lack of 
alternative livelihood opportunities, 
poverty, malnutrition, low agricultural 
productivity, lack of value adding activities 
and weak negotiation/marketing skills). 
▪ 
Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 Market oriented 
production 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
2.1.3.2 
Watershed 
ecological services protected 
▪ 
Sub-activity 
2.1.3.3 
Improved 
nutritional status 
▪ 
11 market assessments conducted for 
dry season and upland crops 
▪ 
Small-scale 
irrigation 
schemes 
modernized, covering a command area 
of at least 2,900 ha 
▪ 
3 district nutrition teams operational 
Activity 2.1.4 Implementation of benefit 
sharing plan for climate-smart agriculture 
and sustainable livelihoods for forest 
dependent communities 
Activity 2.1.4 will support the 
implementation of the ER-Programme’s 
benefit sharing plan, with a focus on 
supporting community-level investments 
climate-smart and deforestation free 
agriculture  
▪ 
Sub-activity 2.1.4.1 Operationalization 
of benefit sharing plan for sustainable 
agriculture and sustainable livelihoods 
for forest dependent communities 
▪ 
Benefit sharing plan implemented, 
including investments in community 
infrastructure, 
and 
climate-smart 
agriculture practices 
Activity 2.2.1 Catalysing private sector 
investments in sustainable climate-
informed and deforestation free value 
chains 
Activity 2.2.1 will channel support agri-
MSMES to enhance their sustainability 
performance through targeted technical 
assistance support and will provide 
matching grants through EPF to eligible 
agri-MSMEs in 6 provinces to improve 
their access to finance for sustainable 
investments; support the development of 
sustainable value chains, and increase 
overall investments in sustainable 
deforestation free, low-emission and 
climate resilient agriculture.  
▪ 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1: Climate resilient 
and deforestation free value chain 
development  
▪ 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2: Matching grants 
to 
support 
agri-MSMEs 
develop 
climate resilient and deforestation free 
value chains   
▪ 
Signed cooperation agreements with 
60 agri-MSMEs from 6 provinces to 
work on climate resilient deforestation 
free business plans 
▪ 
60 agri-MSMEs access matching 
grants, mobilizing at least EUR 1.8 
million of private finance 
 
3.1.1 Village Forest Management (VFM) 
Activity 3.1.1 involves the development, 
implementation and monitoring if VFMPs. 
Additional attention will be paid to 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.1 Mainstreaming of 
climate change adaptation in VFMPs 
and training DAFO and PAFO on 
▪ 
Adaptation mainstreamed in VFMP 
guideline 
▪ 
290 VFMPs approved in target villages

=== PAGE 115 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
 
mainstreaming climate change adaptation 
within VFMPs. 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
within 
village forestry 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2 Development of 
VFMPs 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.3 Implementation 
and monitoring of VFMPs 
▪ 
Village forests sustainably managed 
under approved VFMPs for 290 
villages 
▪ 
Participation 
rates 
of 
women 
in 
community meetings are at least 40% 
3.1.2 Implementation of benefit sharing 
plan for Sustainable Forest Management 
(SFM) and Forest Landscape Restoration 
(FLR) 
Activity 3.1.2 will support the 
implementation of the ER-Program’s 
benefit sharing plan, with a focus on 
supporting community-level investments in 
SFM and FLR.  It will be implemented by 
the World Bank. 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.1.2.1 Operationalization 
of benefit sharing plan for SFM and 
FLR 
▪ 
Benefit sharing plan implemented, 
including investments in SFM and FLR 
3.2.1 National Protected Area (NPA) 
management 
Activity 3.2.1 will continue to support the 
sustainable management of NPAs and 
national parks (NPs) through improved law 
enforcement, NPA management and 
Village Forest Conservation Agreements 
(VilFoCA) 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.1 Capacity building 
on climate change adaptation and 
NPA management 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.2 Improvement of 
management and law enforcement in 
NPA conservation landscape 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.3 Development of 
new and amendment of existing 
Village Forest Conservation 
Agreements (VilFoCA) 
▪ 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.4 Implementation of 
VilFoCA (sustainable land use, forest 
conservation and management 
▪ 
Development of new and revision of 
existing VilFoCA in 5 NPAs and 1 
National Park 
▪ 
Forests in 5 NPAs and 1 National Park 
sustainably managed in cooperation 
with local guardian villages under 
approved NPA management plans and 
through VilFoCA. 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 116 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
263 Overall, the set-up of the Monitoring System of Project 1 has shown to be functional, including its technical aspects (using a Cloud Database), the staffing requirements (see chapter below) and 
the structure of the system (Action Inputs, Steps, Activity Requests, Units). Also, the integration of the Monitoring System with the safeguards and gender monitoring systems has shown to be 
efficient and effective. Thus, the same approach will be replicated for Project 2. 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements 
289. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (in addition to the ESMP and GAP) will comply with the relevant GCF policies, as stipulated in the AMA, FAA 
and project-related Financing Agreements and Implementation Agreements with Executing Entities and Implementation Partners, which EEs will extend to sub-
grantees. 
 
290. The project will apply a customized results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system.  The M&E system will track project inputs, activities and sub-
activities. Outputs and impacts, as well as associated financial flows across all outputs in all project provinces and districts. 
 
291. This system will be based on: 
• 
GIZ Standard Operating Procedures (“GIZ’s evaluation policy – principles, guidelines and requirements”) 
• 
M&E System from Project 1 (ensuring it is optimized based on the lessons learned during implementation)263 
• 
Project 2 monitoring and evaluation plan (Annex 11) 
• 
Project 2 integrated results management framework and logical framework 
• 
Project 2 implementation timetable (Annex 5) 
• 
Project 2 operations manual (Annex 21) 
• 
Requirements of GCF’s Annual Performance Report 
• 
Procedures and requirements of project partners and stakeholders in Lao PDR 
 
292. The oversight for M&E and reporting lies with the GCF AE. The NPMU in Lao PDR will implement the M&E system and work closely with the PPMUs, DPMUs, 
GIZ EE in Vientiane, as well as government and development partners. 
 
Recruitment of M&E staff 
Immediately when Project 2 commences, GIZ’s GCF AE will make available one expert to oversee and coordinate the project M&E and reporting routines. As 
soon as GCF project proceeds become available in Laos, the project will recruit M&E specialists. The specialist will work closely together and support the 
management of the M&E system and provide on-the-job training for dedicated M&E experts from the NPMU, six PPMUs and other stakeholder of the system 
where requested. In addition, the experts will maintain the Cloud Database, and additional specialist inputs may be required for certain technical areas (e.g. 
agriculture or forestry).  
Independent monitoring and evaluation studies 
293. GIZ AE will initiate a mid-term evaluation and a final evaluation of Project 2.  
294. GIZ evaluations are carried out by GIZs’ independent evaluation unit. This unit is steered by a corporate unit that is separate from operational business and 
reports directly to the Management Board. Moreover, evaluations are conducted with the support of external evaluators.

=== PAGE 117 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
295. GIZ applies the ‘Evaluation criteria for German bilateral development cooperation’ (2006, revised 2020) on a standard basis in project evaluations. These are 
based on the six evaluation criteria agreed by the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD): relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, overarching development results (impact), coherence and sustainability.  
296. Additionally to the six OECD DAC evaluation criteria, the following five GCF criteria will be evaluated: Gender equity, country ownership, innovativeness in 
results areas, replication and scalability as well as unexpected results.  
297. Regarding GCFs’ Evaluation Principle: Impartial, objective and unbiased and relevance, use and participation: All provisions for upholding the GCF evaluation 
principles described in Chapter V (a-d) of the Evaluation Policy are followed (see DAC standards and DeGEval evaluation standards). In line with the UNEG 
norms, evaluation team members selected by GIZ must not be directly responsible for the policy setting, design or management of an evaluation project. 
298. Regarding GCFs’ Evaluation Principle: Credibility and Robustness: As a matter of principle, GIZ takes care to use an appropriate combination of quantitative 
and qualitative methods of empirical social research in evaluations. The mix of methods is adapted to the object of the evaluation and the evaluation questions. 
To ensure robust evidence, GIZ uses a theory-based approach as a minimum standard for its central project evaluations. The contribution analysis has proven 
to be a suitable design. The aim of contribution analyses is to collect empirical evidence on whether and to what extent contributions to observed changes can 
be associated with a project. Furthermore, the analyses should increase the understanding and knowledge of what works, what does not work and why.  
299. Projects will be rated based on the six OECD/DAC and on the GCF evaluation criteria. Each of the OECD/DAC and GCF criteria is rated on a scale of 1 to 100. 
Using a points system serve to increase the transparency of ratings, whilst enabling better comparability between individual projects.  
300. An Interim Independent Evaluation Report and a Final Independent Evaluation Report will be submitted to the GCF as per timeline agreed in the funded activity 
agreement (FAA). 
301. Results from the mid-term evaluation should be reflected within the project design, to influence upscaling, and improve overall project implementation (adaptive 
management).  
 
Data collection and frequency 
302. The NPMU will coordinate data collection for implemented activities through responsible executing departments / divisions at the district and provincial level. 
The PPMU will supervise and guide the monitoring and evaluation. Each PPMU will aggregate monitoring reports based on DPMU inputs at least every six 
months. The NPMU will aggregate all the PPMU reports and make a summary report available to GIZ’s AE unit at head office, again at least every six months. 
 
Measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) of reduced GHG emissions 
303. The MRV of reduced emissions is an essential activity for monitoring the project’s efficiency and effectiveness as well as for continued learning across the 
programme. In cooperation with JICA, FP117 included a dedicated technical assistance package that was specifically devoted to the measurement and reporting 
of achieved emission reductions, which ensures a system is in place that will continue to support GHG MRV under Project 2. The MRV will be subject to 
verification by the FCPF Carbon Fund (as a basis for results-based REDD+ payments). Methodologically, the same approach will be used as for the Reference 
Level development (see Section D.1 and Annex 22a).

=== PAGE 118 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
304. A detailed analysis of Project 2 risks is provided in Chapter 12 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2a). Environmental 
and social risks are considered in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA, Annex 6a), and 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP, Annex 6b). Gender-specific risks are considered in the 
Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (Annexes 8a and 8b, respectively). 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 - Selected Risk Factor 1 – Loss of capacities and knowledge due to turnover among 
project related government staff 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
High staff turnover and limited numbers of government extension staff impedes retention of skills and knowledge in 
the relevant sectors and institutions. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Lessons accrued during project 1 showed that emphasis on documentation and dissemination are important to 
facilitate knowledge retention, capacity building and knowledge exchange. This includes the development and 
utilization of clear and user-friendly guidelines and protocols (including those developed under project 1, including, 
but not limited to: PLUP 2.0, PSAP, VFAG and VFM guidelines), the institutionalization of trainings/workshops (e.g. 
developing training modules and supporting training of trainers, to facilitate replication and upscaling of trainings), 
and improving knowledge management systems. 
• 
Continuous engagement with relevant authorities at the national, provincial and district level will further help 
strengthen knowledge exchange and maintain organizational knowledge. National, provincial and district PMUs 
and project steering committees will further help to sustain this exchange (see also Chapter B.4). 
• 
Experience from project 1 has also shown that training of multiple staff members in each department / province/ 
district or team will mitigate the risk of knowledge and capacity drain. Such an approach will be continued within 
Project 2.  
• 
A knowledge management plan has been developed for Project 2, which is available in Chapter 7 of the Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2a).   
Selected Risk Factor 2 - Weak forest law enforcement and corruption 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
While efforts to reduce corruption in the forest sector have improved law enforcement and reduced 
corruption, there is still a risk that corruption could persist. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Project 1 developed SOPs improved investigative procedures, whistle-blower systems and improved anti-
corruption safeguards that form the basis of efforts for law enforcement and forest monitoring. Continued support 
under Project 2 Activity 1.2.1 will further strengthen law enforcement, increase transparency and reduce corruption 
in the forest sector (e.g. training on aforementioned procedures, systems and safeguards, establishment and 
operationalization of PDMS). PDMS includes a transparent reporting system that is effective, accessible and 
culturally appropriate to permit reporting at village-, district-, province- and national-level. Lessons learned from 
project 1 highlighted the relevance of this tool, and the need for continued support for scaling up PDMS within the 
project area (see Activity 1.2.1 in Section B.3 for more detailed information).  
• 
Project 1 further strengthened the regulatory framework, supporting revisions in the Decree on Protected Areas 
(ongoing), Forestry Strategy 2021-2035 the National REDD+ Strategy (April 2021), technical guidelines for village 
forest management planning (June 2021), among others, which have created a stronger basis for reducing

=== PAGE 119 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 
 
deforestation and forest degradation – including forest law enforcement and monitoring. Project 2 will continue to 
raise awareness on the legal and regulatory framework. 
• 
Projects 1 and 2 support to improve land use planning and implement sustainable land management activities (e.g. 
PSAP, VFM), further provides tailored incentives to facilitate the sustained adoption deforestation free and climate 
resilient sustainable land management activities. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 - Insufficient demand from agri-MSMEs for matching grants and limited participation 
of private sector actors in the implementation of project activities 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Investments in climate resilient and deforestation free value chains may not materialize. This could be due to various 
factors (e.g. private sector actors do not want to participate in the project activities and prefer to continue using BAU 
practices or face competing priorities, private sector actors may not meet the project’s eligibility criteria, or business 
plans do not meet a sufficient quality). 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Private sector assessments undertaken for Project 1 and interviews undertaken for the feasibility study of Project 
2 reveal that there is willingness by companies to participate in the project and receive technical support for 
strengthening operational capacities and diversifying their business models.264  
• 
Project 2 will hire an international technical specialist, with expertise on agriculture and private sector engagement, 
to support all activities under Component 2, given the project’s strengthened emphasis on Component 2 and private 
sector investments through agri-MSMEs.  
• 
The project will contract a technical assistance provider to support the process of identifying, screening, shortlisting, 
and selecting agri-MSMEs to partner with the project. They will further support agri-MSMEs throughout the 
matching grant cycle. This will ensure there are sufficient companies seeking to benefit from the access to matching 
grants, and will support them throughout the matching grant cycle (e.g. with business plan development, 
compliance with white list and eligibility criteria, and processes to seek additional alternative sources of finance 
(e.g. bank loans). 
• 
The process to access matching grants will be reflective of the capacities available among agri-MSMEs in northern 
Lao PDR. The design of the matching grant component under Activity 2.2.1 has been informed by consultations 
with other donors in Lao PDR, including World Bank and ADB, on best practices and experiences for developing 
matching grant schemes.265 
Selected Risk Factor 4 – Promoted investments implemented by villagers and agri-MSMEs could become 
more financially attractive and create perverse incentives that could accelerate deforestation and forest 
degradation 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Promoted investments implemented by villagers and agri-MSMEs could become more financially attractive and 
create perverse incentives that could accelerate deforestation and forest degradation.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Awareness raising is cross-cutting throughout project activities on climate change and the importance of forests for 
both climate change mitigation and adaptation, and other socio-economic and environmental benefits.  
 
264 Under Project 1, detailed interviews were conducted with agri-MSMEs in Luang Prabang and Sayabouri. The main objectives of the survey 
were to review the current Agri-MSME landscape in the 2 provinces, assess common business models, attempt a first categorization of 
companies, and assess their financial situation and need for external financing. Additional private sector analyses have been undertaken in 
the Project 1 target provinces, with interviews of 167 companies/traders. As a result, 18 products were identified that matched with the 
“White List” under Project 1 developed (including broom grass, job's tear, paper mulberry, rice, cardamom, rattan, red bean, bamboo, tea, 
coffee and sesame). 
265 For example, it was strongly recommended to include technical assistance to support MSMEs to develop business plans and support them 
with administrative procedures, which has been reflected within the project design. More detailed information is provided within the Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2a).

=== PAGE 120 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 
 
• 
Investments in PLUP, law enforcement and monitoring will facilitate improved transparency and monitoring and law 
enforcement, improving the detection and enforcement of infractions. Villagers will be incentivized to  
• 
At the village level, the PLUP developed under activity 1.2.2 informs the PSAP process which with its White List 
outlines sustainable practices that have already been screened for their sustainability and suitability for the project 
area and Village Forest Management Plans. In addition to law enforcement, compliance with the plans will be 
promoted through village peer pressure and incentivized through bonus payments and a second VFAG funding 
cycle. 
• 
Eligibility criteria are developed which will screen agri-MSMEs, and contracts with agri-MSMEs will further include 
legal commitments to deforestation free and sustainable practices. The implementation of business and investment 
plans by agri-MSMEs will be continuously monitored by a contracted TA provider to ensure that they contribute to 
climate resilient and deforestation free value chain development.   
• 
Long-term relationships between farmers and companies are being actively facilitated with a focus on sustainability 
and TA will be used as an essential tool to link agri-MSMEs receiving matching grants with producers adopting 
deforestation free and climate resilient practices 
Selected Risk Factor 5 – limited institutional and cross-sectoral coordination limits the effectiveness of 
project activities 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Sub-optimal cross-sectoral coordination and potential conflicting interests may limit the adoption and effectiveness of 
REDD+ and related measures.   
Mitigation Measure(s) 
▪ 
Chapter B.1.5 outlines the project’s alignment with the national policy framework, where it is evident the project is 
well aligned with the priorities of the Government of Lao PDR. This project has been developed together with the 
Government of Lao PDR, through extensive consultations and meetings with government actors and other 
stakeholders at the national, provincial, district and village level.  Country ownership, which is central to addressing 
the barriers identified in B.2 as well as other challenges related to coordination, is further highlighted under Chapter 
D.5, where current efforts highlight the government’s commitment to the project.  
▪ 
Improved cross-sectoral planning and dialogue between key actors (including MPI, MAF, MONRE, PONRE, PAFO, 
POFI) is a cross-cutting measure throughout various project activities.  
▪ 
The GCF Project 2 continues to build on the strengthened relationships and cross-sectoral planning established 
through the REDD+ Task Force and promotes continuous dialogue and ongoing capacity building and coordination. 
It continues to strengthen multi-stakeholder ownership of REDD+ based on donor projects/programmes. As in 
Project 1, the National and Provincial REDD+ Task Forces will support project steering, and ultimately facilitate 
ongoing cross-sectoral coordination.  
▪ 
REDD+ Results-based payments from the FCPF Carbon Fund provide an additional incentive for the Government 
to maintain strong ownership over the GCF programme and commitments to achieving the Project 2 results.   
▪ 
Improved land use planning under PLUP (Activity 1.2.1) will continue to improve monitoring and enforcement of 
land use based on plans. PSAP and other agricultural support under Component 2 and improved planning and 
monitoring of forest areas under Component 3, will increase accountability and enforcement, ultimately limiting 
encroachment, over-harvesting and unsustainable forest use.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 - Noncompliance of land use plans 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
High 
Description 
Participating households may not comply with land use plans that are developed and approved and undertake illegal 
harvesting activities to generate income. Ethnic groups poor households could be particularly affected, as they are the 
most likely to experience economic dislocation due to their reliance on the land.  
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 121 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
As in Project 1, participation in Project 2 activities is voluntary and based on the principle of (FPIC). A Grievance 
mechanism will be clearly communicated in culturally appropriate ways in the same manner it has been done in 
Project 1 participating villages, and villagers are able to access the mechanism to file any grievance (see ESIA 
for more details on the grievance redress mechanism).     
▪ 
The PLUP methodology ensures that land use plans are developed using participatory stakeholder processes 
and aligned to priorities and interests of each village thereby reducing risks of non-compliance.  
▪ 
PLUP teams will be trained on social inclusion and how to target the inclusion of marginalized or vulnerable 
households. Awareness will be raised on current practices and their impacts, as well as sustainable land 
management,   
▪ 
VFAG will provide incentives that will help overcome opportunity costs and support the transition to sustainable 
land use – through PSAP and VFMP this will be combined with regular patrolling and forest cover monitoring 
(Activity 1.2.1) are accompanying measures to mitigate encroachment in forest areas. 
▪ 
Capacity building and supported investments in monitoring, knowledge dissemination, and training/capacity 
building and awareness-raising will help improve compliance and adoption.  
▪ 
Extension and training materials will include visuals such as videos, pictures, and other tools to communicate 
content, including translations to key languages (as necessary). Strengthened capacities and technical support 
for ongoing monitoring will assess potential trade-offs or unforeseen impacts and will identify the need for 
potential adjustments.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 – insufficient capacities within the Forest Protection Fund slow project activities 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Low 
Description 
The capacity development process of FPF takes too long and FPF is unable to channel RBPs and project funding 
during the implementation of the project 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
▪ 
Dedicated support to FPF is considered in activity 1.1.1, including the provision of support for the FPF to enhance 
its governance structure, and processes to be able to meet international fiduciary and safeguard standards as well 
as to be able to screen, assess, and monitor climate mitigation and adaptation projects in the forestry sector.  
▪ 
A contingency plan is in place, as FPF currently does not meet fiduciary requirements to channel results-based 
payments as co-finance for Project 2 (for Activities 2.1.4 and 3.1.2). As stated in the draft Benefit Sharing Plan 
(BSP)266, “the activation of the contingency plan puts the DoF as the modality to receive and disburse the advance 
and results-based payments under the ERPA, while committing to improve the FPF’s capacity to meet World Bank’s 
fiduciary requirements. Under this modality, the REDD+ Division under the DoF will oversee funds disbursement 
and reporting”. Once FPF is deemed ready to take-over fund management by DoF, the WB will conduct a complete 
and comprehensive fiduciary assessment.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 – Risk of money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and sanctions 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Prohibited practices 
Low 
High 
Description 
Risk of project funds being used for money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and sanction risks.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
▪ 
None of the project activities will be undertaken in any jurisdiction which is subject to or affected by United Nations 
Security Council Resolutions (UNSC).  
▪ 
No individual or entity that is listed on any UN sanctions list will be involved in any manner with the project or its 
activities, either as a counterpart, executing entity, implementation partner nor beneficiary.  
▪ 
The project will not provide direct cash payments from EPF to villagers. EPF transfers funds amounting to an 
average of 10.800 EUR to each established VFAG account, plus the equivalent of 1.500 EUR for the first year of 
 
266 https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/country/lao-pdr.

=== PAGE 122 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 
 
VFMP activities. Only the elected VFAG committee is entitled to withdraw funds from the VFAG account (multiple 
signatures) and only based on the approved “PSAP investment plan” and the “annual village forest management 
activity plan”. In the PSAP investment plan the participating families of upland farmers are listed with their selected 
White List activity, the grant amount to receive from the VFAG (up to 400 EUR), their own contributions, and the 
items to be funded by the VFAG funds. Depending on the type of agricultural inputs required, some of these will be 
purchased directly by the beneficiary family (e.g. tools and small materials) against receipt, while seeds or planting 
material will generally be ordered and purchased by DAFO in bulk. Only for those items that the family will purchase 
directly, cash payments will be made by the VFAG committee to the individual family. This could be for any of the 
White List activities, as selected by the particular family. Official receipts will need to be provided to VFAG in return. 
These measures (VFAG committees, and ensuring alignment with the White List and approved VFM annual plan 
and PSAP investment plans) will prevent fraud, abuse, money laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited practices. 
Procedures are described in greater detail within the Project Operations Manual and related guidance (see Annex 
21).  
▪ 
In addition to controls applied for VFAGs (described above), the project will follow GIZ (AE)’s approved 
Procurement and Consultant Guidelines, which have been reviewed and accepted by the GCF as part of its 
accreditation process. Procurement will be carried out by the EEs and procurement activities will be agreed upon 
between the AE and EEs as part of the annual operational planning. When awarding contracts for goods, works 
and consulting services to be financed in full or in part from the GCF grant, the EE shall observe the regulations for 
public procurement, which apply in the EE’s country. Minimum standards are presented within the Project’s 
Procurement Plan in Annex 10a to the FP. A Procurement Operational Manual, with guidelines and templates to 
provide guidance for the implementation of the procurement plan, will be developed. Project procurement will be 
transparently documented, as per the Plan in Annex 10a.   
▪ 
The EPF has, in the frame of the Readiness Support to help them become accredited to the GCF, developed a 
code of business conduct where principles to be considered related to money laundering and anti-terrorist financing 
are described. The document pending final approval by the EPF board. In addition, the process to detect anti-
money laundering, anti-terrorist and financial provisions have been updated.  
▪ 
Complaints and allegations of impropriety, wrong-doing or other related issues in the project will managed following 
GIZ’s Compliance Management System (CMS). GIZ’s CMS is based on Standard 980 issued by the German 
Institute of Public Auditors (IDW PS 980) and the international management standard ISO 37301.The CMS includes 
a code of ethics, annual compliance reporting,267 an anti-corruption policy, and a whistleblowing procedure. GIZ’s 
whistle blowing procedures includes an anonymous entry channel for information on serious violations of GIZ’s 
internal principles of conduct, internal rules as well as applicable laws (e.g. related to corruption and bribery, 
embezzlement, fraud, misappropriation, conflicts of interest, sexual misconduct and sexual exploitation, and 
violation of human rights).   
 
 
 
 
267 E.g. The 2020 GIZ Annual Compliance Report is available at the following link: https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2020-en-annual-giz-
compliance-report.pdf

=== PAGE 123 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
  
G.1.1 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
305. The ESIA of the project is provided in Annex 6a. The ESIA rates the risk of the project as category B (medium risk). 
There are potential adverse impacts due to the project’s activities, but they are not unprecedented in the project 
area, they are site-specific and limited to the project’s footprint, are neither irreversible nor cumulative, and there 
are good measures available to avoid, mitigate and/or manage these risks and potential adverse impacts.   
306. The project is expected to generate primarily positive impacts and is well aligned with the country’s context 
as well as the overarching policy and regulatory framework, as outlined in Chapters D.1- D.5. That said, 
the project area represents a diverse set of socio-economic, cultural and environmental conditions. The complex 
and interacting dynamics of landscapes, ethnic groups and policy implementation (among others) have created a 
diverse set of responses at village and household level that comprise people’s livelihoods. The socio-economic 
risks that may arise during implementation will be higher in some areas than others and are also likely to fluctuate 
over time. This underscores the importance of the site-specific ESMP that has been developed for the project (see 
Annex 6b). The high percentage of non-Lao-Tai ethnic groups in the project area also requires a higher degree of 
risk management as per the GCF Indigenous People Policy to ensure they equitably benefit from the project and 
their livelihoods are adequately safeguarded. 
307. Self-assessments conducted by MAF and MoNRE vis-à-vis REDD+ readiness indicate that districts, particularly in 
remoter areas, are often understaffed, under-budgeted and under-equipped. District Agriculture and Forest Offices 
(DAFOs) do not necessarily have anyone available who has had more than minimal exposure to REDD+ and 
climate change concepts, nor gender equality and social inclusion. Project 1 put effort into capacity development 
of respective local government staff and extension services, and Project 2 will continue to build on these efforts. 
308. Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is at the core of the project’s approach. All activities under Project 2 are 
oriented around FPIC.268 FPIC and other participatory approaches have been implemented under Project 1 and will 
be continued and upscaled under Project 2 (Figure 12 in Chapter B.3 depicts the project’s overall implementation 
approach, including the FPIC process).269 The project’s Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP, Annex 6d) further 
outlines the FPIC process, as well as other key considerations for ensuring social inclusion and safeguarding the 
rights of ethnic minorities.  
 
G.1.2 Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
309. The ESMP is provided in Annex 6b and EGDP in Annex 6d. Designed in response to the risks identified in the 
ESIA, the purpose of the ESMP is to provide a practical plan to manage the environmental and social risks and 
impacts associated with the project’s activities, as well as to allow for meaningful and inclusive multi-stakeholder 
consultations and engagement. The ESMP takes into account the circumstances of vulnerable, marginalized 
individuals and members of ethnic groups that are affected or potentially affected by the project. The ESMP also 
aims to assist Lao government counterparts, in cooperation with the Project Management Units and GIZ team, to 
maintain and/or improve the project’s environmental and social management system during project implementation. 
The ESMP will help to ensure that all activities proposed under Project 2 are screened, assigned appropriate 
environmental and social risk categories and that the environmental and social risks and impacts are sufficiently 
assessed. Where impacts and potential impacts are identified and if these are unavoidable, proper mitigation 
measures will be planned to compensate for residual impacts and to provide for restoration. 
310. The ESMP has been drafted based on the ESMP developed for Project 1, with revisions to ensure it is fit for purpose 
for the revised activities under Project 2. It has further been adapted based on lessons learned and experiences 
from the implementation of Project 1 to streamline its implementation from an operational perspective. It is 
compliant with the GCF Revised Environmental and Social Policy (adopted in 2021), and the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, and it has therefore extensively incorporated the International Financial Cooperation (IFC)’s 
Performance Standards on Environment and Social Sustainability, the World Bank’s Safeguards Policy and the 
Lao national safeguards regulatory and policy framework. 
 
 
268 A detailed description of the project’s FPIC process is provided in the Ethnic Groups Development Plan (Annex 6d). 
269 Project 2 will apply the same FPIC process as Project 1. This process builds upon experience from diverse past projects (including with 
VFM under the CliPAD project), and during the Project 2 development process the Project 1 team highlighted that these processes are 
perceived as effective and well-tailored to the local context. Support for this approach was reiterated during stakeholder consultations, 
including by villages participating within Project 1.

=== PAGE 124 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 
 
G.1.3 Project Risk Mitigation Approach 
311. Of the eight IFC Performance Standards (PS) the project triggers all eight, and its management system will 
require the development of mitigation hierarchies to manage and mitigate risks (as per Performance Standard 1 
and the Indigenous Peoples Policy, see Table 13 below). For more detailed information refer to the ESIA and 
ESMP in Annex 6a-b.  
 
Table 13: Overview of environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts, and mitigation measures 
PS 
E&S Risks and Impacts 
Mitigation measures 
PS 1: 
Assessment 
and 
management 
of E&S risks 
and impacts 
The project will have a 
suitable ESMP in place for its 
duration. 
The 
ESMP 
for 
Project 2 builds on the 
environmental 
and 
social 
safeguard 
management 
system developed for Project 
1, which has been found to be 
an effective system for risk 
management. This system 
involves several tools to 
screen for risk, monitor risk 
and 
has 
established 
a 
mitigation hierarchy. It further 
provides a detailed overview 
of the specific roles and 
responsibilities for ESS and 
risk 
management, 
and 
ensures 
that 
increased 
dialogues take place at local 
levels.  
▪ A detailed ESMP has been developed, including the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) and EGDP, Annex 6b), accompanied by a 
stakeholder engagement plan (Annex 7), and a gender action plan (Annex 8b).  
▪ For all activities implemented with villagers at the local level (e.g. PLUP under 
Activity 1.2.2 and activities within Components 2 and 3), participation is 
voluntary and based on FPIC. FPIC agreements will be made with all 
participating villages prior to the implementation of interventions. 
PS2: Labour 
and working 
conditions 
The ES risk is assessed as 
low. Programme staff will be 
in capacity building, advisory 
and management positions. 
Forest workers sustain injury 
during cutting operations 
▪ Develop safety operational procedures for all programme activities that may 
pose risks to people or equipment including for GoL partners and other 
stakeholders involved in programme implementation 
▪ Organize training on safety procedures 
▪ Staff supporting the implementation of activities related to forest management 
to be trained on OHS good practices, protocols and equipment (including 
protective equipment) 
▪ Support the procurement of safety equipment including cut-resistant pants 
and protective goggles that should be used by beneficiaries to reduce risk. 
PS 3: 
Resource 
Efficiency 
and Pollution 
Prevention 
The risk is assessed as low. 
While 
use 
of 
chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides is 
not promoted, the use can 
still not be fully excluded. 
Crop processing facilities can 
generate small amounts of 
solid 
and 
liquid 
wastes 
depending due to their small 
scale of operation. 
▪ Follow the Lao Pesticide Law, and the Pesticide Management Plan (PMP) 
developed for the ER-PD´s ESMF and promote awareness raising on 
pesticide safety procedures (the PMP has been attached to ESIA Annex 10). 
▪ Promotion of agrochemical-free agriculture through the application of good 
agricultural practices. Bio-controls will be promoted. 
▪ Inclusion of management of waste and pollution during production should be 
included in the business and investment plans developed by Agri-MSMEs 
supported by the project.  
▪ Continued consultations and socio-economic monitoring at the village and 
Agri-MSME level throughout program implementation 
PS 4: 
Community 
health, 
safety and 
security 
 
This performance standard 
may be relevant to the project 
in the context of the potential 
use of pesticides/herbicides 
in project-promoted annual 
cropping and plantations. 
▪ The project promotes agrochemical-free agriculture through the application of 
good agricultural practices. The project will not directly procure nor promote 
agrochemicals. The project will ensure compliance with the Lao Pesticide Law, 
and follow the Pesticide Management Plan (PMP) developed for the ER-PD´s 
ESMF. The management, use and disposal of agrochemicals must be 
monitored, and protocols are in place to deal with potential negative social 
and/or environmental impacts. Best practices and additional information are 
outlined in the Pest Management Pan (available in ESIA).  
PS 5: Land 
acquisition 
and 
involuntary 
resettlement 
Secure land tenure remains 
an issue. In rural areas most 
parcels have no titles. Many 
upland 
areas, 
customary, 
communal lands may not be 
recognized by the State.  
The project may unintendedly 
contribute 
to 
changed, 
▪ The project will implement PLUP, based on proven best practices, FPIC and 
regular consultations to ensure an inclusive process that enables all village 
members to benefit from the project. Participation in the project is voluntary, 
and the project´s complaint and GRM will be communicated to all participants 
to ensure that complaints and grievances can be filed in an accessible and 
culturally appropriate manner. 
▪ The FPIC process will ensure that land access considerations – including 
gender-, ethnic- and income-differentiated risks – are fully incorporated into

=== PAGE 125 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 
 
reduced or denied access to 
land through some of its 
activities (for example PLUP 
for 
different 
land-uses) 
resulting 
in 
unintended 
negative livelihood impacts. 
the PLUPs developed by the project. The ancestral and spiritual land and 
forest use will be respected. 
▪ Technical support will be provided for villagers through capacity development 
/ trainings and extension support. Capacity development of government staff 
at the provincial and district level will ensure there are sufficient capacities to 
facilitate implementation and will further include efforts to improve 
inclusiveness and gender equality in participatory processes. 
▪ Project 1 supported communal and collective land use planning to provide 
tenure security for forest and agricultural land and its outputs. These activities 
will be continued and upscaled under Project 2. 
PS 6: 
Biodiversity 
conservation 
and 
sustainable 
management 
of living 
natural 
resources 
There is potential that some 
of the agricultural activities, 
especially 
promotion 
of 
agroforestry, will turn the 
Revegetated (RV) category 
of land to plantations, thus 
reducing biodiversity.  
Project activities in NPAs and 
national parks will need to 
closely 
monitor 
potential 
adverse 
impacts 
on 
biodiversity.  
▪ PLUP will ensure improved and more holistic land use planning.  
▪ In terms of agriculture, the project promotes specific production models, which 
have been pre-screened for their sustainability and suitability in the project 
area (e.g. of multi-cropping approaches, such as Maize and Cassava 
intercropping with soy bean/mung bean). Detailed extension and supporting 
materials are available to facilitate implementation of best practices (see 
Feasibility Study in Annex 2a). 
▪ To mitigate adverse E&S impacts, the project has established clear exclusion 
and eligibility criteria for screening agri-MSMEs supported by the project.    
▪ In terms of forestry, the project promotes best practices for SFM and FLR, 
using native and locally adapted species. NPA management will build on best 
practices piloted under the ICBF project, and the revision of NPA management 
plans and elaboration of VilFoCA will facilitate the sustainable management 
regimes are operationalized by local communities, while ensuring their 
livelihoods are strengthened through SFM and FLR.  
▪ The project will support training of trainers, and improve extension support to 
local farmers to increase crop productivity, improve soil conditions, and reduce 
soil erosion, among other benefits (see also Chapter D.3).   
▪ It will further support capacity building and awareness on climate change and 
best practices to enhance biodiversity, ecosystem resilience, SFM and FLR.  
▪ Implementation of regular monitoring of land use changes. PDMS and 
institutional strengthening will further improve transparency, effectiveness and 
accountability related to forest monitoring. 
PS 7: 
Indigenous 
peoples 
 
The project area contains 
more people of the non-Lao-
Tai ethnic groups than of the 
Lao-Tai ethnic group in most 
of the selected districts. 
▪ The project will minimise, mitigate and compensate appropriately when project 
activities impact indigenous people’s rights, regard-less of whether there is a 
legal recognition of land titles, resources and territories.  
▪ Application of FPIC throughout project implementation (3 phases) 
▪ EGDP developed for the project to promote social inclusion, provide a targeted 
approach for ethnic groups to benefit from the project activities, and ensure 
the project does no harm (see ESMP in Annex 6b). 
PS 8: 
Cultural 
heritage 
During project preparation 
and consultation, no cultural 
heritage places, building or 
monuments were identified in 
the 
project 
area. 
Nonetheless, 
residual 
uncertainty remains. 
▪ If objects of cultural heritage are uncovered by the project, the procedures 
described in the World Bank ESMF Annex 12, ‘Chance Finds Procedure’, will 
be followed (as outlined in World Bank ESMF included as Annex 6c) 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
312. The project’s Gender Assessment (GA) is provided in Annex 8a and the Gender Action Plan (GAP) is provided in 
Annex 8b. The GA builds on the assessment conducted for FP117, but has been revised to ensure the GAP is ‘fit-
for-purpose’ reflecting the adjusted design and expanded area under Project 2. The revisions of the GA and GAP 
have updated the baseline information, including adjustments to changes in the legal, regulatory and policy 
frameworks, discussions with the Project 1 team on lessons learned and implementation experiences, and have 
further been informed by stakeholder consultations with CSOs, Lao Women’s Union, the Lao National Front for 
Construction, government staff at the national, provincial and district level, and local men and women at the village 
level in the project area (for more information refer to the GA in Annex 8a and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
in Annex 7).  
313. As mentioned in Section D.3, women in the project area are disproportionately vulnerable to climate change. At the 
same time they still face discrimination in many aspects of their lives despite government policy to promote gender 
equality and protect women’s and children’s rights.  This discrimination, in turn, results in ongoing barriers for them

=== PAGE 126 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
 
 
to participate in public life and to access many of the services to which they have a right, and further exacerbates 
their vulnerability to climate change. The project design addresses the identified gender gaps (see Annex 8a for an 
extended list): 
  
Table 14: Overview of gender gaps and recommendations integrated into the design of Project 2 
Gender Gap 
Recommendation 
The current capacities of Government staff at all 
levels to actively integrate gender and ethnic 
considerations 
into 
their 
management 
and 
implementation approaches are very limited, and the 
majority of field staff are male. 
The project will train all concerned Government staff, including Lao 
Women´s Union (LWU) on gender, climate resilient and deforestation free 
sustainable land management and social inclusion. It will further implement 
targeted trainings to support the capacity development of female staff for 
all implementing Government agencies. 
The consultations showed that women are considered 
the main users of forest resources, but rarely 
participate in forest management and monitoring due 
to lack of education and traditional norms. 
The project ensures that village forest management committees are 
accessible for women, including a quota of at least 30% of female 
members. LWU will support consultation processes to help strengthen 
gender equality in programme implementation. 
The consultations at village level showed that 
environmental awareness is still very limited, 
especially women have limited or no access to 
information related to environment and climate 
change. 
The project will promote awareness-raising campaigns through the use of 
interactive tools and gender-/ethnic-sensitive communication materials and 
extension support. A specific focus will be on raising awareness on climate 
change impacts and mainstreaming adaptation across project activities. As 
men and women are impacted differently by climate change impacts, these 
activities will be gender responsive and will pay attention to the 
differentiated needs and priorities of men and women. 
Forest monitoring and law enforcement efforts often 
do not explicitly consider gender aspects, and thus 
may overlook women’s role in forest use and 
protection 
The programme will continue to support inclusion of women in law 
enforcement measures (e.g. patrolling) and ensure consistent monitoring. 
Early experiences with gender-sensitive “good practices” of female-led 
patrolling groups will be used for scaling up activities in the three new 
provinces.  
Legally, women and men have the same rights to 
land. Reality shows that women´s land tenure is less 
secure than men´s. Women are often not actively 
included in decision-making steps of land use 
planning. The subsequent forest management plan 
and agricultural activities are then seen as a 
specialized step which women are even less part of. 
PLUP processes supported by the project will be vigilant in actively 
including all women and men in the target villages (e.g. separate meetings). 
Quotas will to be set to encourage women´s inclusion meetings, project 
measures (e.g. business skill training), and in village management 
committees (at least 30%). Again, LWU will function as a facilitator and 
skills developer for village women, if budget is allocated accordingly. 
Best practices for gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) will be 
mainstreamed through all trainings for government and programme staff. 
Women are often excluded from economic activities 
and markets. Their access is limited by safety 
concerns, traditional norms and higher workload (time 
poverty) 
All training modules and materials will be gender-sensitive, with GESI 
considerations mainstreamed. All extension agents and trainers will be 
trained by the safeguard, gender and M&E specialist on GESI. For 
participatory processes (PLUP, PSAP, VFAG and VFM), special attention 
will be paid to setting meetings at suitable times to ensure women’s 
participation, and facilitation staff will ensure the differentiated needs and 
specific challenges faced by men and women (e.g. time poverty) inform the 
measures integrated into PLUPs, PSAP investment plans, NPA, VilFoCA 
and VFM plans.  
Female headed households are given priority in the selection of PSAP 
participants. 
Gender-responsive monitoring will be conducted that permits active 
management and learning throughout programme implementation.  
Budget will be provided for the provision of translators and the translation 
of materials into local languages, as necessary. 
Women are often less able to access loans from 
larger financial institutions (e.g. may not have land 
titles), and may be more reluctant to take loans. 
The project will ensure the participation of women in VFAG committees 
(30% quota), thereby attaining financial management capacities and 
gaining access to financial resources.  
The participation of female owned Agri-MSMEs will be promoted. In 
addition, women-only business skills courses will be conducted for village 
clusters to strengthen the establishment and management of women-led 
and/ or owned agri-MSMEs. Targeted support to develop and strengthen 
business plans will further support female entrepreneurs to access finance.

=== PAGE 127 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123 
 
 
 
 
314. Based on the identified gender gaps and recommendations, the following are some of the measures and targets 
that are integrated in the project’s GAP (for more detailed information, refer to Annex 8b): 
• 
The Lao Women’s Union is part of the Project Steering Committee and joins key village level activities  
• 
‘Climate resilient and deforestation free sustainable land management and Gender’ workshops held for DAFO, 
DOFI, and LWU staff – each in a different province 
• 
Target established for 40% participation of women in community meetings 
• 
Target established for 50% of women in target communities state that they felt actively included in project-
related village meetings.270  
• 
Training courses related to gender-based violence (GBV), sexual harassment (SEH) and violence against 
women and children (VAWC) delivered by the project to its own staff. Where possible, the project will also 
support gender sensitization for men and women, and disseminate resources to participating communities 
related to combatting GBV, SHE and VAWC. 
• 
Facilitating the establishment and monitoring of women-led village patrolling groups, and disseminating best 
practices and lessons learned  
• 
All training modules developed by the programme are reviewed by the programme’s gender specialist prior 
to implementation to ensure mainstreaming of GESI 
• 
Village forest management committee guidelines (developed under Project 1) will be followed, which set 
standards of accessibility for women, with a quota of at least 30% female committee members 
• 
Major communication materials and awareness raising campaigns are reviewed by the project’s 
safeguard/gender specialist 
• 
Gender consideration is explicitly integrated in the business partner screening, and targets are established to 
support women-owned or -led agri-MSMEs. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
G.3.1 Financial Management 
315. The financial management of the project will follow GIZ’s internal rules and regulations. GIZ has bank accounts 
with Deutsche Bundesbank and Commerzbank. GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project but 
will ensure that all funds provided are clearly identifiable and distinguishable from GIZ’s other funds by setting up 
separate cost units exclusively for the funds disbursed by the GCF for each funded activity (ledger accounts). Funds 
received and expenditures incurred will be booked to the respective cost unit according to generally accepted 
accounting principles and procedures accepted by the German Government. As a general principle, GIZ disburses 
funds to recipients in accordance with the progress of the project. The Executing Entities (GIZ Laos, the 
Government of Lao PDR) have to report on the proper use of funds and defined progress as a prerequisite for any 
further disbursement. Independent external auditors will perform annual financial audits of the project in line with 
International Auditing Standards. 
316. At the beginning of each year, an annual plan is prepared, which expresses which activities are to be implemented 
by the project owners (NPMU, PPMU, DPMU) in the coming year. These annual plans are divided into quarterly 
plans at the beginning of each quarter. From these quarterly plans, a quarterly budget is then prepared for each 
Project Owner, which is paid to the respective Project Owner after approval by the Project Owner, the Project 
Director and the NPMU by the EPF. Each Project Owner reports on the use of these quarterly budgets to the EPF 
on a monthly basis. This reporting (Excel-based) is then read into the EPF''s central accounting system (ACCPAC). 
In addition, these monthly financial reports form the basis of the EPF''s financial reporting to GIZ. In addition to the 
disbursement of budgets to the Project Owners (NPMU, PPMU, DPMU), funds are disbursed annually to the partner 
villages as Village Forest Agriculture Grant (VFAG). For this purpose, each partner village prepares an annual 
budget, which is transferred to the villages by the EPF. 
 
G.3.2 Procurement  
317. In the case of procurement by GIZ, GIZ will follow its own procurement guidelines. GIZ is required to comply with 
the relevant contracting rules as established in the German Act against Restraints of Competition (GWB), the 
 
270 A mid-term and end of project survey will be conducted. See Chapter E for more detailed information.

=== PAGE 128 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124 
 
 
 
 
German Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts (VgV) and, if applicable, the Contracting Rules for the Award 
of Public Service Contracts (VOB, VOL/B and UVgO) when procuring services, construction work and supplies.  
318. When awarding contracts for supplies and services (including consultancy services) to be financed in full or in part 
from the financing contract, the external Executing Entities will observe their own national regulation for public 
procurement and will in any case comply with the provisions mentioned in the Procurement Guidelines for projects 
funded by GCF/GIZ.  
319. The Procurement Guidelines shall not contradict the applicable national procurement law and/or regulations for 
public procurement, which apply in the Executing Entities country. In principle, the regulations of the Executing 
Entities country are to be observed; the procurement procedures mentioned in the Guidelines are obligatory 
minimum standards (an overview of these minimum standards is available under Annex 10). While implementing 
a project with public funds the Executing Entities should take reasonable account of economic efficiency as well as 
ecological and social aspects. 
320. The project’s procurement plan is available in Annex 10. 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 129 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
☒ a. Feasibility Study  
☒ b. Theory of change 
☒ c. Comparison table of Projects 1 and 2 
☒ d. Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (excel and word documents) 
☒ e. Log frame ranking explanation 
☒ f. VFAG guideline 
☒ g. PSAP guideline 
☒ h. PLUP guideline 
☒ i. District selection 
☒ j. Market assessment 
☒ 
Annex 3 
☒ a. Economic and financial analysis 
☒ b. Economic and financial valuation summary 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☒ a. Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  
☒ b. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
☒ c. Environmental and Social Management Framework for the ER-Programme (ESMF) 
☒ d. Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
☒ a. Summary of consultations  
☒ b. Stakeholder engagement plan   
☒ c. Transcripts of field consultations  
☒ 
Annex 8 
☒ a. Gender Assessment  
☒ b. Gender Action Plan  
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letters, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☒ a. Inception report

=== PAGE 130 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
☒ b. Annual performance report 2020 
☒ c. Annual performance report 2021 
☒ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
Project 1 Enhanced Due Diligence for the EPF 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects) 
☒ a. GHG mitigation calculation 
☒ b. GHG note 
☒ 
Annex 23 
Other Annexes 
☒ a. FCPF Benefit Sharing Plan

=== PAGE 131 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 132 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF 
Board approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ) GmbH 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 9, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of the Lao PDR 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-en-annex-6a-
esia.pdf 
 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-la-esia-
esmp.pdf 
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
 
This is the website of the official GIZ project commissioned 
by BMZ. 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and recommendations for the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 9, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of the Lao PDR 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-en-annex-6b-
esmp.pdf

=== PAGE 133 ===
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-la-esmp.pdf 
 
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
 
This is the website of the official GIZ project commissioned 
by BMZ. 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and recommendations for the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 9, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Lao 
Explanation on language 
Lao is the official language of the Lao PDR 
Link to disclosure 
Ethnic Groups Development Plan (EGPD) 
English: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-en-annex-6d-
ethnic-groups.pdf 
 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-la-ethnic-
groups-development-plan-egdp.pdf 
 
Gender Assessment (GA) 
English: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-en-annex-8a-
gender-assessment.pdf 
 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-la-gender-
assessment.pdf 
 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
English: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-en-annex-8b-
gender-action-plan.pdf 
 
Lao: 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2022-la-gender-
action-plan.pdf

=== PAGE 134 ===
Other link(s) 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/17463.html 
 
This is the website of the official GIZ project commissioned 
by BMZ. 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Monday, September 12, 2022 
Place 
 
The ESIA,  ESMP,  Gender  Assessment  (GA), Gender  Action   
Plan (GAP) and Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) were 
made available at all Provincial offices (hard copies) as of the 
list below.  
In addition, this information will also be available in the 27 
target district offices. 
 
 
No 
Offices 
Name of 
Road 
Village 
District 
Office 
Telephon
e 
Houaphan 
1 
PAFO 
Houaphan 
N/A 
Thatmeaung 
Xamneau  
064 312 
034 
2 
PLFND 
Houaphan 
Phathi 
Xamneau 
Xamneau  
064 
312077 
3 
PLWU 
Houaphan 
Phathi 
Xamneau 
Xamneau  
064 
312080 
Luang Prabang 
1 
PAFO LPB 
N/A 
Phabathtai 
Luang 
Prabang 
071 
212014 
2 
PLFND LPB 
Sisavangvong  
Watthat 
Luang 
Prabang 
071 
212063 
3 
PLWU LPB 
Thatbosod 
Luang 
Prabang 
071 
212171 
Sayaboury 
1 
PAFO SAY 
N/A 
Simoungkho
un 
Sayaboury 
074 
211084 
2 
PLFND SAY 
N/A 
Simeuang 
Sayaboury 
074 
211022 
3 
PLWU SAY 
N/A 
Simeuang 
Sayaboury 
074 
211225 
Oudomxay 
1 
PAFO ODX 
2E 
Monetai 
Xai 
030 
9571104 
2 
PLFND ODX 
2E 
Phoukhieu 
Xai 
081 
312120 
3 
PLWU ODX 
2E 
Phoukieu 
Xai 
081 
312026 
Luang Namtha 
1 
PAFO LNT 
Luang 
Namtha 
Xaysombou
n 
Luang Namtha 
086 
312086 
2 
PLFND LNT 
Luang 
Namtha 
Oudomsin 
Luang Namtha 
086 312 
037 
3 
PLWU LNT 
Luang 
Namtha 
Oudomsin 
Luang Namtha 
086 
312063 
Bokeo 
1 
PAFO BK 
Khonkeo 
Khonkeo 
Houayxay 
084 
211510 
2 
PLFND BK 
AH3 
Oudom 
Houayxay 
084 211 
010 
3 
PLWU BK 
AH3 
Phaoudom 
Houayxay 
020 5996 
8887

=== PAGE 135 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, March 13, 2023* 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 16 September 
2022, the following update has been made: The date of the GCF Board meeting in which the 
funding proposal is to be considered has been updated to B.35 date.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 136 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP200 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2) 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH 
Country/(ies): 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project builds on the successes of FP117. [GIZ 
Laos Project 1]. It continues to mobilize 
substantial additional funding from the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund 
at USD 42 million and mobilizes Euro 40.27 
million of co-financing. 
Like FP117, the project has co-financing from 
multiple parties using various financial 
instruments – grants, loans and equity. The timely 
availability of such co-financing is necessary for 
the successful implementation of project 
activities. 
The project learns from FP117. It now includes 20 
per cent of GCF financing for adaptation result 
areas focusing on increasing adaptive capacities 
of upland farmers. It is now considered to be a 
cross-cutting project, mainstreaming adaptation 
activities across the proposed interventions.  
The social and economic effects of COVID-19 
continue to be a concern. As with any project 
focused on capacity development and system 
change, difficulty lies in maintaining the quality of 
operations. There is a need to strengthen 
incentives for non-remission.  
The project is expected to facilitate replication 
and upscaling as well as the broader distribution 
of REDD+ finance as the capacities of Ministry of 
Forestry of Lao PDR are built, and they become 
fully capable of managing funds for REDD+. 
The Forest Protection Fund (FPF) is not yet 
fulfilling the fiduciary standards of the World 
Bank and the Environment Protection Fund (EPF) 
has to handle the flow of funds for the time being.  
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum IX, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
In Laos, forest cover accounts for 58 per cent of the country’s surface area, significantly
lower than the 70 per cent forest cover of the mid-1960s. In the past 15 years, net forest loss has
amounted to approximately 680,000 hectares (ha). Six provinces in northern Lao Peoples’
Democratic Republic (PDR) (Bokeo, Luang Namtha, Luang Prabang, Oudomxay, Sayabouri, and
Houaphan) experienced more than 40 per cent of the country´s deforestation and forest

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 137 
 
 
degradation (in area terms) during the period from 2005–2015. Moreover, the situation 
regarding forest degradation – which encompasses reductions in forest carbon stocks, changes 
in biodiversity and livelihoods – is as concerning as deforestation.  
4. 
Historical greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to deforestation and forest degradation 
in Lao PDR amounted to 40.01 million tCO2eq/year in the period 2005–2014, 38.33 million 
tCO2eq/year in the period 2015–2016. and 37.29 million tCO2eq/year in the period 2017–2018. 
Carbon removals due to reforestation and forest restoration accounted for 7.53 million 
tCO2eq/year during the period from 2005–2014, and 8.00 million tCO2eq/year during the 
period from 2015–2018. Overall, the agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors are 
responsible for 78 per cent of all emissions of Lao PDR. 
5. 
The Government of Lao PDR has introduced bold policies and reforms, including 
ambitious nationally determined contribution (NDC) targets (70 per cent forest cover), a 
national REDD+ strategy, a timber export ban and a new forest law. For the last 10 years, Lao 
PDR has progressed substantially towards REDD+ readiness, notably through the acceptance of 
the forest reference (emission) level, the finalized REDD+ Strategy, the strategic and social 
environmental assessment and the environmental and social management framework, as well 
as the final acceptance of the Emission Reductions Programme Document with the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund. Therefore, Lao PDR is now strategically well-
placed for Phase 2 of REDD+ (implementation) to reduce forest-sector emissions and achieve 
true paradigm shift, which means considering forest landscapes fundamental to the low-
emission and climate-resilient development pathways of the country.  
6. 
This proposal1 (known as Project 2) follows FP117 “Implementation of the Lao PDR 
Emission Reductions Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest 
landscape management” (known as Project 1). Both are embedded in a programmatic context 
and share a similar theory of change, using a phased approach. The proposal under 
consideration is complementary and additional to FP117.  
Table 1. Summary table of programme 
 
Project 1 (FP117) 
Project 2 
Programme  
(project 1 and 2) 
Project sites 
3 out of 6 provinces of 
the Lao Emission 
Reductions Programme 
(Houaphan, Luang 
Prabang and Sayabouri) 
6 out of 6 provinces of the Lao Emission Reductions 
Programme (Houaphan, Luang Prabang, Sayabouri, 
Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay) 
+240 villages in Luang 
Namtha, Oudomxay and 
Bokeo 
+50 villages in Houaphan, 
Luang Prabang and 
Sayabouri 
+ Continuation of activities 
in Project 1 
 
Implementation 
period (years) 
4 
4 
7 (1-year overlaps) 
Result areas (GCF 
funding) 
Mitigation 
Mitigation (80%) and 
adaptation (20%) 
Cross-cutting  
Mitigation benefit 
(tCO2eq) 
7.1 million 
4.6 million 
11.7 million  
 
1 As noted in the Secretariat Assessment for FP117, “Board approval for the project presented in this funding 
proposal [FP117] is wholly separate from, and does not pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.”

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 138 
 
 
Adaptation 
benefit (total 
beneficiaries) 
510,392 
486,690  
997,082  
7. 
As with FP117, the proposal remains fully aligned with the Lao PDR GCF Country 
Programme (updated in February 2019), which identifies REDD+ as one of four mitigation 
priorities, and the increase and maintenance of forest cover as one of five short-term priorities. 
8. 
With an implementation period of four years, this proposal will be implemented in all 
six provinces of the Lao PDR Emissions Reduction Programme (Houaphan, Luang Prabang, 
Sayabouri, Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay). While Project 1 focused on areas which have 
the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area, Project 2 
will concentrate on areas where poverty and nutrition are main issues, namely Luang Namtha, 
Bokeo and Oudomxay. Found on the next page is the summary figure for the proposed 
interventions. The project is categorised as Category B based on the Environmental and Social 
Policy of GCF.  
9. 
The project design is considered appropriate as it addresses both cross-cutting climate 
objectives. The climate change contribution of Project 2 is detailed below: 
(a) 
Mitigation: the project is expected to reduce emissions by 4.6 million tCO2eq (an average 
of 1.15 million tCO2eq/year), consisting of 3.3 million tCO2eq in emission reductions due 
to reduced deforestation and forest degradation, and increase removals equivalent to 
1.3 tCO2eq. The total impact of the programme is estimated to be 18 per cent reduction 
of annual emissions compared to FCPF Reference Level. The funding proposal has high 
impact potential. 
(b) 
Adaptation: learning from Project 1, Project 2 intends to monitor its generated 
adaptation co-benefits. Laos is a least developed country (LDC) with limited adaptive 
capacities and resources. As demonstrated especially in annex 2, it is one of the most 
climate-vulnerable countries in the region. Its economy is dependent on sectors which 
extract and rely on natural resources. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for 16 
per cent of the gross domestic product and employ 64 per cent of the Lao workforce. 
These are also the key areas identified in the country’s national adaptation programme 
and NDCs.  
10. 
The programme, both Project 1 and 2, aims to address the decades of forest loss, with 
support from many institutions. Laos PDR is actively seeking to implement an ambitious REDD+ 
emission reductions programme. Building on and coordinating with complementary initiatives, 
Laos PDR can leverage GCF funding to further remove investment, policy and financing barriers 
to unlock future results-based payments, domestic taxes and fees and create a sustainable 
environment for deforestation-free development.  
11. 
The financial instruments and mechanisms for Project 2 include grants, EUR 32.82 
million, for the total GCF contribution; and co-financing is committed at EUR 41.26 million. 
These include contributions from the Government of Lao PDR, Federal Ministry for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, Germany (BMZ), Asian Development Bank (ADB), International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), KfW, and the World Bank (via FCPF). The estimated 
co-financing ratio is 1:1.2 for the four-year project.  
12. 
The executing entities (EE) for the project are the Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) in Laos and the Government of Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic (represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 139 
 
 
Figure 1. Summary figure for the proposed interventions 
 
Source: Figure 11. Overall project overview from funding proposal, page 28

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 140 
 
 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
13. 
The project aims to catalyse a shift in land use, land-use change and forestry, and 
establish viable models for the management of forestry and landscapes. The project will have 
three outputs: (i) creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ implementation; (ii) market 
solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation; and (iii) climate change mitigation through 
forestry. These outputs are composed of closely interrelated activities, including those aimed at 
the development of capacities of stakeholders; support for integrated multi-level planning; 
strengthening of enforcement and monitoring; knowledge management; investments in good 
agricultural practices and agroforestry; a private sector value chain; investments in rural 
infrastructure and watershed management; village forest management; and sustainable forest 
management.  
Component 1: Enabling environment for REDD+ implementation (total cost: EUR 8.77 million; GCF 
cost: EUR 6.9 million) 
14. 
The primary focus of this component is to unlock GHG emission reductions traded by the 
Climate Change Funding Window (established under Project 1) of the Environmental Protection 
Fund (EPF) to the FCPF in exchange for results-based payments amounting to approximately 
USD 42 million. 
15. 
This component strengthens the enabling environment for REDD+ through the following 
means: enhancing the availability of financing investments in climate resilient and 
deforestation-free agriculture, forestry and land use; and improving the enforcement of the new 
regulatory framework completed under Project 1. Project 2 will further strengthen the 
framework to improve the implementation of cross-cutting measures, with both climate change 
adaptation and mitigation benefits, in line with the latest NDC to the United Nation’s Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This will include ensuring land use and forestry 
planning are climate-informed, and selected measures not only support reducing deforestation 
and reducing emissions, but strengthen the resilience of local livelihoods, ecosystems and food 
security.  
16. 
While scaling up Project 1 practices across all six provinces, the proceeds and lessons 
learned will be used to strengthen the implementation of activities under the GCF programme 
and sustain them beyond implementation lifespan. In addition, this component includes 
targeted measures to strengthen the capacities of national institutions (e.g. Forest Protection 
Fund and the EPF). This component will be co-financed by BMZ, KfW and Government of Laos 
PDR.  
Component 2: Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation (total cost: EUR 37.61 
million; GCF cost: EUR 14.11 million) 
17. 
This component addresses key drivers of deforestation and forest degradation and 
contributes to delivering emission reductions through reducing the expansion of agricultural 
activities into forested landscapes. It addresses deforestation and forest degradation through 
the Promotion of Sustainable Agricultural Practices (PSAP) and the definition of 31 sustainable 
farming models in a “White List”. These farming models also include aspects of adaptation to 
climate change through selection of robust crop varieties, the promotion of intercropping, 
mixed cropping and agroforestry systems, and the adoption of low-emission processing 
methods applied by farmers. By promoting various farming models, the project also aims to 
support agricultural diversification, which will build the resilience of smallholder farmers who 
are often dependent on one or two climate-sensitive crops (e.g. upland maize). Project 2 will see 
a continuation of the implementation of the PSAP approach and the associated “White List”, 
with funding from the Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAGs) developed under Project 1. 
PSAP activities will simply be scaled up to an additional 290 villages (240 in Luang Namtha,

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 141 
 
 
Bokeo and Oudomxay and 50 additional villages in Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang). 
Matching grants by Project 2 channelled through EPF will facilitate access to finance for micro, 
small and medium-sized agri-enterprises and increase overall investments in the development 
of sustainable deforestation-free, low-emission and climate resilient value chains. 
18. 
This component also includes aligned activities supporting small-scale irrigation 
investments. These activities build on the ongoing ADB initiative, “Sustainable Rural 
Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector” project and the “Partnerships for Irrigation 
and Commercialization of Smallholder Agriculture” funded by IFAD. The ADB project in 
combination with the IFAD project both seek to address sustainable rural economic growth and 
watershed management in the provinces of Luang Prabang, Xiengkhouang, Sayabouri and 
Houaphan. These activities are financed by ADB, IFAD, and the Government of Lao PDR (without 
GCF financial support). 
19. 
In addition, this component includes activities related to implementation of a benefit 
sharing plan for climate-smart agriculture and sustainable livelihoods for forest dependent 
communities. Projects 1 and 2, and the implementation of the Benefit Sharing Plan in the 
context of the FCPF Emission Reduction Payment Agreement are closely aligned. Through 
World Bank co-financing, this activity will sustain the implementation and results of activities 
under this component beyond the lifespan of GCF Project 2.  
Component 3: Climate change mitigation and adaptation through forestry (total cost: EUR 19.37 
million; GCF cost: EUR 8.06 million) 
20. 
Component 3 builds upon Components 1 and 2, and strengthens the resilience of forest 
ecosystems and the livelihoods of forest-dependent villages, while reducing emissions through 
sustainable forest landscape management and the promotion of forest landscape restoration. 
21. 
Activities under Component 3 build on past experiences in Lao PDR, and not only 
support the development of climate-informed and sustainable management plans (based on 
thorough participatory land-use planning), but also provides hands-on capacity-building and 
finance to implement the annual operational plans. Guidelines developed under Project 1 are 
used to replicate and scale up village forest management, National Protected Area management 
and Village Forest Conservation Agreements in all six provinces. The anticipated bonus 
payments (performance-based payments) will bridge the phase until forests can be 
commercially used as outlined under article 120 of the revised forest law. In addition, with the 
approved Benefit Sharing Plan under the Emission Reductions Programme, subnational 
agencies will receive finance to provide their services and village communities will receive 
finance to further implement their management plans.  
22. 
Project 1 laid the ground for transformational change in the project area, However, to 
fully reach the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate resilient forest and land-use 
practices, additional support is needed – as outlined in the programmatic approach within 
FP117 and throughout the proposal.  
Project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting (total cost: EUR 8.33 million; GCF 
cost: EUR 3.75 million) 
23. 
Activities related to project management, coordination, monitoring and reporting 
include GCF project management and coordination by the National Programme Management 
Unit (NPMU) and Provincial Programme Management Unit (PPMUs); and monitoring and 
reporting.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                                Scale: High

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 142 
 
 
24. 
This is a cross-cutting programme with 80 per cent of the impact potential allocated for 
the forest and land use results area (mitigation), 10 per cent for ecosystems and ecosystem 
services (adaptation) and 10 per cent for the most vulnerable people, communities and regions 
(adaptation). The feasibility study (annex 2) contains the climate problem statement, which 
includes a well-documented and adequately referenced description of the implications of 
climate change in Laos especially on its vulnerable populations. This also includes proper 
calculations of the estimated emission reductions due to reduced deforestation.  
25. 
As a mitigation project, the results expected are 11.7 tCO2eq in reduced emissions from 
forest degradation over 7 years (calculations were made using Unique following the same 
methodology as used by the Lao PDR Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry for the Forest 
Reference Emissions Level and Forest Reference Level submitted to UNFCCC. The emission 
reductions will occur by:  
(a) 
Reducing emissions from deforestation (a reduction in deforestation of 15 per cent, 
equivalent to 2,565 ha); 
(b) 
Reducing emissions from forest degradation (a reduction of forest degradation of 2 per 
cent, equivalent to 12,420 ha); and  
(c) 
Enhancing forest carbon stocks (an increase of restoration by 15 per cent, equivalent to 
24,638 ha). Unlike Project 1, Project 2 does not have reforestation activities. 
26. 
Adaptation benefit is expected to reach a total of 486,690 beneficiaries. This is 
composed of smallholder farmer and forest families who live in rural areas. The beneficiary 
rationale is detailed in the programme’s theory of change, which is provided in the funding 
proposal and in the operations manual (annex 21) and the relevant guidelines (annex 2f, 2g and 
2h). These are deemed to be appropriate and are in line with the GCF investment criteria 
indicators. Calculation details can be found in the funding proposal under Section D.1. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
                                          Scale: High  
27. 
The project, during its four-year implementation period, is expected to unlock REDD+ 
results-based payments of USD 42 million from the FCPF Carbon Fund. The project provides a 
strategic and unique opportunity to achieve a paradigm shift in the forest and land-use sector of 
Lao PDR while mitigating GHGs from the forest sector. Lao PDR has embraced REDD+ as a way 
to address its principal source of GHG emissions and proposes innovative institutional and 
financial arrangements (e.g. REDD+ funding window, deforestation-free agricultural supply 
chains) to ensure long-term sustainability of the investments. 
28. 
The identified elements driving a paradigm shift – scale-up and replication, knowledge 
and learning, creation of an enabling environment and contribution to the regulatory 
framework and policies – will apply at both the project and programme levels. At the 
programme level, considerable scope exists to scale up/replicate in the remaining 11 provinces 
of Lao PDR as well as in neighbouring countries with similar landscape/forestry contexts. 
29. 
The project will enable a paradigm shift across different sectors and business activities: 
agriculture, forestry and financial sectors in particular will be targeted as key sectors for 
transformation. Within these sectors, the project will work throughout the agricultural and 
forestry supply chains, including input suppliers, producers, traders and processors. The project 
will target sectors and commodities where there is strong and consistent demand to ensure the 
profitability of the supported sectors. 
30. 
New finance streams for forests will be mobilized, which will serve as a model for the 
rest of the country. The project will generate opportunities for leveraging additional private 
sector funds and de-risking investments, creating the needed platform for channelling 
investments into rural northern areas of Lao PDR and scaling up to the entire country and

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 143 
 
 
region. Also, while capacities will be built in the main environmental funds (the EPF and the 
Forest Protection Fund), the project is expected to facilitate replication and upscaling as well as 
the broader distribution of REDD+ finance as the funds’ capacities are built and they become 
fully operational and capable of managing funds for REDD+. 
31. 
Also, the implementation approach of the project under a programmatic context 
provides the opportunity to gather data and learn iteratively for more effective and adaptive 
design. It also offers the potential for crowding in substantial sustainable financing from 
diversified sources (more emission reductions, additional domestic revenues, larger 
endowment for the REDD+ funding window), thereby ensuring long-term financial 
sustainability. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
32. 
As with Project 1, Project 2 creates economic, environmental, social and gender co-
benefits beyond the typical climate mitigation and adaptation benefits. It directly contributes to 
targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 and 13.A of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 13 (climate action) and 
contributes to multiple other SDGs, as follows:1 SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) 
targets 8.2, 8.3, 8.5, 8.9 and 8.10; SDG 15 (life on land) targets 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.5, 15.6, 15.9, 
15.A and 15.B; SDG 2 (zero hunger, achieve food security and promote sustainable agriculture) 
targets 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.A; and SDG 5 (gender equality) targets 5.5, 5.A and 5.B. Indirectly, the 
programme contributes to SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 3 (health and well-being), SDG 12 
(responsible consumption and production) and SDG 17 (partnerships for the goals). 
33. 
Regarding the economic pillar, the project is expected to improve the livelihoods and 
income of rural poor population groups; support small and medium-sized enterprises; and 
strengthen domestic resource mobilization. As for the social pillar, the project will contribute to 
reducing hunger and improving nutrition and health through improved agricultural 
productivity; improving employment opportunities, including for women and ethnic groups; 
and improving gender equality through economic, training and entrepreneurial activities. 
Finally, with regard to the environmental pillar, the project will reduce GHG emissions from the 
forestry sector and increase carbon sequestration from the atmosphere, and contribute to the 
sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources (notably, forests and land).  
34. 
In terms of environmental benefits, the Project will promote the sustainable 
management of 2.1 million hectares of natural forest ecosystems. This is achieved through the 
Promotion of Sustainable Agricultural Practices, the 31 sustainable farming models in a “White 
List”, and participatory land use planning, which is an essential prerequisite and forms the base 
for Village Forest Management Plans. All these activities will be financially supported by the 
VFAGs arrangement under the EPF.  
35. 
All these improved land uses contribute to mitigation co-benefits through the 
sequestration and emission reductions of 11.7 MtCO2eq over 7 years. Co-benefits from 
biodiversity protection from habitant restoration and conversion are also expected.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
                                                       Scale: High  
36. 
As mentioned in FP117, Lao PDR is an LDC that is ranked 139 out of 189 on the Human 
Development Index. The northern area of Lao PDR has historically been the poorest and most 
rural region of the country.  
37. 
The agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors are major contributors to GHG 
emissions and key drivers of deforestation. Despite REDD+ efforts, it has been difficult to 
 
1 See <https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/>.

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 144 
 
 
reverse current trends based on public efforts alone. The programme occupies a unique space in 
closing this gap, because of its concrete potential of unlocking substantial additional funding 
(USD 42 million) from the FCPF.  
38. 
The forthcoming Third National Communication to the UNFCCC states that northern Lao 
PDR is among the areas most vulnerable to climate change in the country, due to low adaptive 
capacities, high sensitivity and high exposure to climate-related natural hazards. The Project 
focuses primarily on three provinces – Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay – where poverty 
rates are among the highest in the country, exceeding the national average by 23 per cent. Food 
security is a major challenge for many households in these areas with an estimated 25 per cent 
of rural households in the region accounted as food-poor.  
39. 
The proposal also seeks to facilitate financial access. Currently, there is a structural 
funding gap facing Lao PDR, which limits the country’s ability to invest in low-emission and 
climate resilient development. Public budgets are extremely tight and are further constrained 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic response. Moreover, when looking beyond grant finance, Lao 
PDR has limited ability to take on additional debt, as the risk of external debt distress remains 
high.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
40. 
As with FP117, the proposed project is aligned with and directly delivers on the 
priorities outlined by the country’s policies on national development, climate change, forestry 
and agriculture. The Government is also offering an in-kind contribution of EUR 6.9 million 
concretising country ownership.  
41. 
As previously noted, the programme has formed part of the GCF project pipeline for Lao 
PDR since 2017 and has been formally prioritized by both the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry and the national designated authority, as reflected in Lao PDR Country Programme. 
The project structure enhances decision-making in the country’s relevant national and local 
institutions and systems and augments its current forestry policies.  
42. 
The experience and track record of GIZ, the accredited entity (AE), and the selected 
executing entities (EEs) demonstrate a capacity to deliver. GIZ has shown that it has adequate 
resources and sector-specific experience and expertise, as shown by the selection of EEs and the 
ongoing relationship between GIZ and the Government. Ownership is evidenced through a 
memorandum of understanding, stakeholder consultations and a long-term working 
relationship with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, resulting in a shared decision-
making responsibility to implement the national programme. This is further discussed in this 
assessment in the section reviewing risks. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high  
43. 
From the perspective of both mitigation and adaptation, the programme exhibits 
medium-high efficiency for GCF funding in comparison with the relevant benchmarks. The 
project’s cost per tCO2 is EUR 5.7/tCO2, and is in line with the average cost in the GCF portfolio 
for forest and land use project of USD 6 /tCO2. 
44. 
The project shows good economic returns. The AE estimates an overall economic 
internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at 31 per cent above the social discount rate of 10 
per cent considered for the analysis. The AE included both the sustainable agricultural practices 
components and the adoption of sustainable forest management practices. The AE derived this 
result using a conservative social cost of carbon of USD 5 /tCO2. The results of the economic 
analysis could have been even higher if a higher social cost of carbon was adopted. The EIRR is

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 145 
 
 
also robust to sensitivity analysis. With an increase in costs or drop in revenues of 15 per cent, 
the EIRR is still above 10 per cent.  
45. 
Looking at the appropriateness of the level of concessionality, the AE developed a 
financial analysis for the revenue generating sustainable agricultural practices components. The 
AE analysed 14 sustainable agriculture practices. 13 out of 14 practices show high internal rates 
of return with an average of 30 per cent. This is a positive outcome for the scalability and 
sustainability in the long run of these activities. However, the average breakeven time for the 
activities is six years. Long payback periods and break-even points are typical investment 
barriers that require concessional support.  
46. 
The funding amount requested by the AE is thoroughly justified. One of the main 
strengths of the programme design is a granular analysis of both financing gaps and economic 
and financial consideration of the value chains prioritized. The selection of these value chains is 
well defined and justified. The feasibility study describes in detail (i) the number of businesses 
by sector and size targeted; (ii) the average financing ticket size for each business size and 
sector; and (iii) the total financial demand of businesses by size and sector. It also describes all 
these elements not only in aggregate fashion at programme level, but also for each value chain.  
47. 
The rationale for GCF financing is explained well, as is the rationale for grant financing 
for specific activities. It is understood that each financier is financing the activities that best fit 
its expertise and interest. 
48. 
The co-financing ratio is 1.13 (GCF budget: EUR 32.82 million, and co-financing: EUR 
41.26 million). The finance leveraged by the project is estimated to be USD 42 million. 
49. 
The programme’s term sheet includes the relevant covenants requiring that the AE 
ensures that the GCF concessionally is passed on to the end beneficiaries. These considerations 
are further described in the operations manual (annex 21).  
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards  
50. 
Project Background. The project (Project 2) is the second project under the GCF-funded 
programme entitled “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through 
Improved Governance and Sustainable Forest Landscape Management” (FP117) approved in 
2019. The project will extend the coverage of the programme to more villages within provinces 
covered under Project 1 and new provinces. The project’s co-benefits include improved food 
security through better participatory land use planning (PLUP) and promotion of climate 
resilient and deforestation free agricultural practices, and enhanced biodiversity conservation 
through the integrated PLUP and targeted interventions that reduce deforestation and forest 
degradation in biodiverse areas.  
51. 
Environmental and Social Risk Category. The project is primarily designed to address 
deforestation and ensure environmental and social sustainability. Hence, the anticipated 
adverse impacts are already being considered in the project's approaches and strategies. 
Residual impacts are mostly activity-specific which are minimal due to the small scale of the 
interventions, site-specific, and can be readily addressed through mitigation or compensation 
measures. The project is thus classified by the AE as “Category B” or medium in terms of 
environmental and social (E&S) risk: the Secretariat confirms this risk level and that it is within 
the AE’s E&S risk accreditation level. 
52. 
Safeguard Instruments. The AE has submitted an environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA) report and a separate environmental and social management plan (ESMP). 
The ESIA is based on the original ESIA of FP117, “Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 146 
 
 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management” (Project 1), which was updated to reflect changes in the activities, experiences 
and lessons learned from the implementation of the ongoing Project 1 as well as with new 
information from the field.  
53. 
Compliance with the GCF environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards. The 
discussion below provides a description of how the project will comply with the requirements 
of GCF policies and ESS. 
54. 
ESS1 (assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts). The 
ESIA described the range of activities that are included in the funding proposal and identified 
the key activities that have potential negative E&S risks and impacts. It described the nature, 
types and scales of the activities that it intends to support and provided the identification and 
analysis of the risks and impacts of the activities. A separate environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) is also provided. The ESMP described a set of actions that will 
address the triggered E&S standards and policy requirements of both GCF and the AE. Given 
that the exact locations of the interventions are yet to be identified during implementation, the 
project has a checklist for environmental and social screening to ensure that the various risks 
relevant to the activities/sub-activities are identified and that these are managed, supervised 
and monitored throughout the project duration. The project also adopted the International 
Finance Corporation’s exclusion list in addition to a project-specific exclusion list to ensure that 
those with potential significant adverse E&S risks and/or impacts are not funded under the 
project. 
55. 
ESS2 (labour and working conditions). Given the small scale of its activities, the project 
does not expect to involve large-scale hiring of staff or sub-contractors. The project’s activities 
could however still affect the occupational health and safety of forest workers associated with 
forest management activities such as in cutting operations. Training and capacity-building will 
be conducted and safety operational procedures will be developed for activities that may pose 
risk to health and safety of workers. The capacity development and support that will be 
provided to the micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) are expected to have a 
positive impact on working conditions as adherence to national labour laws and regulations will 
be included in the grant agreement with every MSME that will receive funding through the 
Matching-Grant Fund. The product will likewise not support activities involving harmful or 
exploitative forms of forced labour or harmful child labour. 
56. 
ESS3 (resource efficiency and pollution control). The project is not expected to use 
significant amounts of fuel or power and water. In terms of pollution issues, some project 
activities, such as reforestation and crop production, may involve the use of chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides. Crop processing facilities may also generate solid and liquid wastes depending 
on the scale of operations. However, the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides will not be 
advocated by the project and instead it will promote agrochemical-free agriculture through the 
application of good agricultural practices. The low risk that fertilizers and pesticides may still be 
used by project stakeholders will be further mitigated through training and awareness raising 
measures. Crop processing facilities will not be established at large scale thus the amount of 
solid and liquid wastes generated will be limited. The remaining low risk will be mitigated 
through training in good agricultural practices and the inclusion of proper waste management 
in the development of the respective business plans. 
57. 
ESS4 (community health, safety and security). Potential community health and safety 
issues in the project include potential exposure of local communities to forest fires/wildfires, 
pesticide residues and unexploded ordnance (UXO) hazards. There may also be potential for 
ecologically induced outbreaks of vector-borne diseases from the village forest management 
and forest restoration activities. The risk of outbreaks is however considered low and the 
project’s activities are expected to address this risk through good agricultural practices, 
landscape restoration and forest fire control measures. The ESIA has also discussed the hazards

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 147 
 
 
from UXO and pesticides and included a UXO Protocol and a Pesticide Management Plan in the 
ESMP. 
58. 
ESS5 (land acquisition and involuntary resettlement). The project involves formulation 
and implementation of land use plans, village forest plans, and natural protected area plans as 
well as stricter enforcement of forest laws. However, the project does not require land 
acquisition or promote involuntary resettlement that entails both physical or economic 
displacements. The programme’s exclusion list further prohibits project funding for, among 
others, activities that would entail physical and economic displacement, and those that would 
result in a change in land tenure. The PLUP approach which was tested under Project 1 will be 
employed to ensure that those who may be impacted by the zonation of lands during the PLUP 
process will be informed and consulted to reach an agreed land use plan. An operational 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will also be established and monitored to ensure that no 
beneficiary will lose access to land. Additional measures to minimize the remaining risk of 
unintended negative impacts on livelihood within the land use planning exercise include 
awareness raising and capacity-building in an inclusive, culturally appropriate manner to 
ensure proper inclusion of women and ethnic groups in decisions related to land-use planning 
and other project activities. 
59. 
ESS6 (biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources).  The project is intended to contribute to biodiversity conservation and sustainable 
management of forests. However, implementation of changes in land use plan, protected area 
management plans, and forest landscape restoration, as well as interventions in the agricultural 
value chain may potentially have risks and unintended impacts to biodiversity and the natural 
ecosystem. These risks include inadvertent introduction and spread of invasive species, 
emergence of new pests and diseases, negative impacts on endangered species and negative 
impacts on wildlife in general due to habitat fragmentation, induced expansion of agricultural 
areas and pollution from agrochemicals. However, the project’s design and approaches are 
expected to positively influence these risk factors. For instance, the project will only introduce 
species that have been previously trialled and tested in the region and good agricultural 
practices will be promoted. The ESMP further emphasizes the promotion of awareness on 
biodiversity and ecosystem services, screening and agreements with business partners, proper 
sourcing of seeds and planting materials, including mitigation measures for possible pesticide 
use, monocropping and sourcing of seeds to prevent introduction of invasive species. It also 
discusses measures for wildfire management, watershed protection, establishment of 
biodiversity corridors in the context of forest management activities, and diversification of 
agricultural biodiversity due to the introduction of sustainable practices.  
60. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7. Indigenous Peoples. There is a high 
percentage of ethnic groups in the project area whose cultures and livelihoods are linked to land 
and forest livelihoods. Given the focus of the project, there is a strong possibility of impact on 
livelihoods, including through land-use restrictions. To review the issues, the AE has provided a 
considered analysis of the issue in the ESIA and lifted recommendations into the ESMP. An 
Ethnic Groups Development Plan (EGDP) is also provided to guide the implementation of 
activities in accordance with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. The ESIA notes that “if not 
monitored closely, the project could unknowingly exacerbate externally caused trends toward 
denial of customary land use, including forms of shifting cultivation among ethnic groups.” Both 
the ESIA and the EGDP provide input on shifting cultivation and the differences between 
“rotational cultivation (haimounviang) and pioneering shifting cultivation (i.e. encroachment) 
into (designated) forest land (at village level) (thangpha hed hai)”. The project notes to support 
culturally appropriate rotational shifting cultivation practices while aiming to reduce 
pioneering shifting cultivation. While the project aims to promote sustainable patterns of land 
and forest use, the national legal framework on customary uses of land and forest does not 
accord secure rights and tenure. Given the heterogeneity in the areas, and communication 
barriers that include language and literacy, there is some risk of marginalizing customary forest

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 148 
 
 
use, including those associated with cultural and spiritual use. The analyses also note that 
patterns of resettlement and consolidation over recent decades have led to some villages having 
a mix of ethnic groups. Alongside the above-mentioned barriers related to language and literacy, 
this may have implications for the reliance on traditional structures and village management 
units as means of ensuring participative decision-making. Therefore, there needs to be 
emphasis on free, prior and informed consent, participatory decision-making and the need for 
the different ethnic groups, including the women from the ethnic groups, to be part of design, 
implementation and monitoring. The ESIA, ESMP and EGDP all pay close attention to these 
aspects, and it is imperative that implementation is guided by the concerns and mitigative 
measures raised in the documents. The EGDP provides baseline information and analyses and 
mitigative measures including on free, prior and informed consent and the results of 
consultations, future consultations, efforts to support communal and collective land planning, 
the GRM and how the costs and budgets are mainstreamed across the ESMP, gender action plan 
(GAP)and project budgets. The importance of implementation staff trained in the nuances of 
working in a multi-ethnic environment cannot be over-emphasized. Robust stakeholder 
engagement with the communities will be key, including with community organizations. In 
terms of co-benefits, the EDGP has among its measures the “respect for customary use of lands 
and forests, territories and resources and rights related to cultural and spiritual heritage and 
values, traditional knowledge, resource management systems and practices, occupations and 
livelihoods, and ethnic groups’ institutions”. In this regard, and in line with their roles and 
functions, the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE and 
EEs. 
61. 
ESS8 (cultural heritage). The ESIA has not identified cultural heritage sites, buildings or 
monuments that are at risk of being impacted by the project activities. However, actual sites of 
the activities are still to be determined during implementation. Hence, further investigation of 
cultural practices, and sites of cultural and historical significance will be conducted prior to the 
implementation of each project activity in the field. Such a process will be participatory, closely 
coordinated with communities and local leaders to identify village areas of cultural or religious 
significance, including ancestral and spiritual land use and intangible heritage such as 
indigenous knowledge and practices. The ESIA has identified possible measures to manage risks 
to cultural heritage including close consultation and participation of stakeholders during 
implementation of project activities, conduct of heritage awareness campaigns and trainings, 
the identification of possible cultural heritage in the risk screening process, and in case of 
chance discovery of objects and sites, an inclusion of a “Chance Finds Procedure” as part of the 
ESMP. 
62. 
Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment. The revised GCF 
Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding 
from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The ESMP for 
scaling up implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved 
governance and sustainable forest land management (Project 2) includes key SEAH 
safeguarding (and its equivalent) provisions. The project ESMP includes SEAH under the 
application of social inclusion principles to inform project-affected people about the availability 
of and ways to access the project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism and the GCF Independent 
Redress Mechanism for redressing grievances. The project has also indicated the alignment of 
social inclusion regulatory frameworks including those on SEAH and gender-based violence in 
general. On the safeguard management process, the project will put in place a code of conduct 
(to include SEAH); criteria for eligible grievances and exclusions that will actively include SEAH; 
and criteria for eligible grievances with specific complaints related with SEAH to ensure that 
these are investigated. Additionally, the project has linked the ESMP and the gender action plan 
SEAH risks by proposing activities which will see the development and provision of training in 
gender, gender-based violence and SEAH awareness, establishment of coordination mechanisms 
and referral systems in order to deal with SEAH cases and provide timely services to survivors.

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 149 
 
 
On monitoring and evaluation processes, the process of submitting grievances will be available 
to project stakeholders and will include a hotline operated by the Project Safeguards Team. The 
SEAH safeguarding undertaken by the AE is aligned with SEAH provisions of the revised GCF 
Environmental and Social Policy. 
63. 
Implementation arrangements. The project will be implemented under the existing 
institutional arrangements of Project 1 which consists of a National Project Steering Committee 
and a National Project Management Unit. A similar arrangement is mirrored at the provincial 
levels with Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSCs) and Provincial PMUs (PPMUs), and 
at the district levels with District Project Steering Committees and District PMUs. The District 
PMUs are ultimately responsible for engaging with communities to implement project activities. 
The arrangements for the implementation of the ESMP lie primarily with the Project Safeguards 
Team with a description of their composition, expertise, and roles and responsibilities. 
Provincial, and district focal persons will also assist in coordinating and ensuring the benefits of 
ethnic groups as well as in overseeing other social safeguards concerns. 
64. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The project had extensive multi-
stakeholder engagements and consultations which have informed the preparation and design of 
Project 2 at the national, provincial, district and village levels. The project intends to conduct 
continuous stakeholder participation during project implementation through the actions in the 
ESMP, the Stakeholder Engagement Plan and the EGDP. Given the participatory approaches of 
the project, such as the PLUP process, the project intends to employ an inclusive engagement of 
the poor and marginalized groups through key project indicators and a thorough monitoring 
and evaluation system. 
65. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The project will establish a GRM to enable the 
beneficiaries and other stakeholders to raise any environmental and social grievances they may 
have with the project and the Project Safeguards Team will act upon and monitor any issues. 
The GRM will be introduced in early stages of the project and during the stakeholder 
engagement process and will be available throughout the project cycle. Stakeholders will also be 
able to lodge their grievances with the AE’s institutional whistleblowing system as well as 
through the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, the GCF indigenous peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, 
including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
66. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan (GAP) and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
67. 
The gender assessment is undertaken based on a desk review of available information 
and consultations with communities in villages of the target provinces, Sayabouri, Luang 
Prabang and Oudomxay, civil society organizations and women’s organizations. 
68. 
Laos PDR is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women. As a member of the regional Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations it has made a number of gender mainstreaming declarations such as the Declaration of 
the Advancement of Women of 1988. The country has a legal framework for promoting the 
equality of women and men. A revised 2003 Constitution states that women and men have equal 
rights in all spheres of life – political, social, cultural and in the family. This is further supported 
by individual laws such as the family, land and property, labour, electoral and penal laws. 
However, there is limited implementation of these laws due to lack of capacities, knowledge, 
and budget. Laos PDR established a National Commission for the Advancement of Women and 
Mother-Child which is responsible for formulating and implementing national policy for the 
promotion of women, and mainstreaming gender aspects in all sectors. The Lao Women’s Union

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 150 
 
 
which has an extensive network of representatives, even at the village council level, has a 
constitutional right to protect women’s rights and interests. The Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry also has a division for the advancement of women and focal points.  
69. 
The gender assessment has identified challenges faced by women in the sectors of 
intervention. The main sources of inequalities between female and male headed households in 
rural Laos PDR are access to land, livelihood diversification and cash income. Traditional gender 
norms of many ethnic groups directly influence village structures in the project locations and 
negatively affect women’s participation, their confidence to speak up and voice opposing 
opinions, and willingness and capacity to participate in village management tasks. For example, 
stakeholder engagement undertaken by the AE pointed out women’s roles in collection of non-
timber forest products, and small business workforce in the forest and timber sector is 
significant but without opportunities to participate in decision-making in village forest 
management committees due to failing to meet the minimum education requirement. This 
results in limited consideration of women’s use and protection of forests as well as in decisions 
being made. The land law gives both women and men equal access to agricultural and forest 
land but is overridden by customary practices that limit women’s access. Lack of control of 
resources by women also extends to farming inputs, finance and knowledge of alternative 
agricultural and land-use practices in light of increasing land degradation. These are critical 
issues since 63 per cent of the agricultural workforce are women. Violence against women is a 
problem that 1 in 5 women has experienced. Village-based justice mechanisms are influenced 
by gender norms and may not be easily accessible to women. 
70. 
The GAP contains activities, performance indicators, sex-disaggregated targets, 
responsibilities and budget for implementation. A baseline survey in the three additional 
beneficiary provinces will be undertaken in the first year of implementation. Project 2 seeks to 
build on the progress made by Project 1 to date and the gender assessment includes 
recommendations that are reflected in the GAP which also includes results reported in the latest 
annual performance report of Project 1. Measures included in the action plan to address issues 
raised in the assessment include empowering women by promoting their leadership roles in 
local structures, by setting a quota of at least 30 per cent women in village committees in forest 
management. Both women and men on these committees will also receive training on 
management and administrative skills. Land use plans will be developed in a participatory 
manner that ensures women contribute to the alignment of priorities and interests while 
shifting from practices that result in deforestation and land degradation. Other benefits are 
agricultural extension services through PSAP activities, business skills development targeting 
female entrepreneurs, and support for women-led MSMEs in the agricultural sector to access 
finance through the VFAG funds. The project also seeks to empower women with information 
pertaining to their legal rights, and train project staff on gender-based violence, the grievance 
mechanism and referral services. Perception surveys will be collected on GAP activities. 
71. 
The Lao Women’s Union will provide facilitation support addressing issues of women’s 
time poverty by selecting timing and locations that enable women to participate while not 
imposing additional workloads on them. Implementation arrangements are situated in the 
national project management unit for Project 1 which will also manage the implementation of 
Project 2 and has a gender and safeguards specialist to guide and supervise the GAPs of both 
projects. 
72. 
Three recommendations are made to the AE. First, to assess the distribution of labour 
among men and women to ensure that all actors receive adequate resources to strengthen their 
resilience to climate change. This is particularly important for crops on the whitelist associated 
with PSAP activities where women and men have different roles and responsibilities in the 
value chain of the various crops. Second, as per the baseline survey, the AE is advised to 
rationalise targets. For example, the target of 40 per cent women participating in meetings was 
often not achieved for Project 1 and may therefore be unrealistic for Project 2 or might require

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 151 
 
 
additional interventions to ensure targets are achieved. Third, the AE is also recommended to 
target female-headed households as beneficiaries, since the assessment has identified them to 
be more vulnerable.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk) 
73. 
GCF is providing a grant of EUR 32.8 million to strengthen linkages between REDD+ and 
activities that build resilience and rural livelihoods. This is complementary and additional to 
FP117 and is embedded in the overarching Emission Reductions Programme of Lao PDR. This 
project will build on the strengthened regulatory framework and guidelines developed under 
FP117 and expand the intervention areas under the Emission Reductions Programme. 
74. 
The Lao Government, ADB, IFAD, BMZ and World Bank (via FCPF) are providing co-
financing amounting to EUR 41.26 million by way of in-kind, loan or grant. IFAD, KfW and ADB 
will sign loan agreements with the Government of Lao PDR and this co-financing will not be 
administered by the AE. BMZ will channel funds to the AE.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project 
(medium risk) 
75. 
GIZ will be serving both as an AE and as one of the EEs for this project. GIZ has been 
operating in Lao PDR since 1993. Under this project GIZ will be managing GCF proceeds of EUR 
14.4 million as an EE.  
76. 
In addition to GIZ, the Government of Lao PDR, represented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry, will be another EE. The EPF under the Ministry of Natural Resources 
and Environment is a fund manager of the Climate Change Funding Window, which was already 
established under FP117. The GCF proceeds will flow directly from the AE to the EPF. The EPF 
has a track record of managing funds from international donors with a range from USD 400,000 
to USD 38.6 million.  
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
77. 
Co-financing risk: the timely availability of co-financing is necessary for successful 
implementation of the project activities. The project has co-financing from multiple parties, 
including loans from ADB, IFAD, and KfW. In addition, the co-financing of EUR 15.64 million 
from the World Bank is anticipated as a mid-term payment to be received from the FCPF 
results-based payment. The payment is expected in mid-2023 after submission of the 
monitoring report and independent verification. Therefore, the current amount of EUR 15.64 
million is indicative and the final amount of the payment is subject to the monitoring report and 
verification. Also, in the case of delayed submission of the report or other issues being raised 
during the verification process there may be delays in or reductions of payment. If the co-
financing does not materialize, the project impact may also be reduced. 
78. 
Demand risk: the matching grant scheme in activity 2.2.1 is expected to mobilize at least 
EUR 1.8 million from the private sector () through 50 per cent co-financing from micro, small 
and medium-sized agri-enterprises. This contribution requirement is part of the eligibility 
criteria for activity 2.2.1. However, if the MSMEs are not able or not willing to contribute half of 
the investment cost, the amount allocated for matching grant may not be fully disbursed. The AE 
could mitigate this risk from the lesson learned from past projects using a similar scheme, 
technical assistance support to MSMEs, cooperation with a larger number of companies that

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 152 
 
 
could be served with matching grant (e.g. at least 90 companies while only 60 companies will 
receive the matching grants) and joint preparation of the business plans.  
79. 
Impact risk: According to the Emission Reduction Payment Agreement, there are two 
tranches – tranche A and tranche B. Tranche A will allow 5 per cent of the emission reduction to 
be transferred to the Trustee of the FCPF. This implies that 5 per cent of the reduction cannot be 
counted towards the NDC of the government and this may be re-sold or transferred to other 
countries. Consequently, the GCF mitigation impact of the project will be reduced. Comfort may 
be drawn from the fact that 95 per cent of the emission reductions will be retired and may bring 
a larger impact to the country by further strengthening the mitigation impact of the REDD+ 
implementation and making the sector more sustainable.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
 
80. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (high risk)  
81. 
The beneficiary country, Laos PDR, is not subject to United Nations Security Council 
(UNSC) restrictive measures. The AE has confirmed that project activities and related 
counterparties do not pose major risks with respect to UNSC sanctions.  
82. 
The AE, along with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment and Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry, will act as the EE. The two ministries will act through the 
Environment Protection Fund (EPF), a government-owned entity, which will be responsible, 
inter alia, for financial management matters at a project level. The AE has carried out enhanced 
due diligence on EPF and no major issues were identified, noting that recently EPF has 
significantly improved its internal control system. Considering all fiduciary capacity related 
matters, the AE assessed its exposure to EPF as medium risk.  
83. 
While EPF will not make direct cash payments to project beneficiaries, the Office of Risk 
Management and Compliance (ORMC)/Compliance notes that VFAG committees may disburse 
cash to beneficiary families, provided that activities are in accordance with the established 
White List. As a mitigating measure, the beneficiary families will have to provide cash receipts 
to the committee – in addition, ORMC/Compliance recommends performing enhanced due 
diligence on this portion of the project, which may include on-site visits, as needed. As an 
additional layer of assurance for this high exposure, the AE agreed to submit a written 
confirmation – starting with the second disbursement – that no irregularities have occurred 
with respect to cash-related activities.  
84. 
The AE has assessed money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and 
sanctions related risks to be of low probability and high impact. The management of these risks 
will be shared among the EEs and allegations of wrongdoing can be reported directly to GIZ 
through its online portal.  
85. 
ORMC/Compliance has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘high’ and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps for processing.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
86. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision. 
Summary risk assessment

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 153 
 
 
Overall project 
Medium 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to implement this project 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
High 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
87. 
The GIZ head office will serve as the accredited entity (AE), while the GIZ office in Lao 
PDR, together with the Government of Lao PDR represented by the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment and Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will fulfil the roles of 
executing entities (EE).  
88. 
As the AE, GIZ will assume oversight responsibility as defined in the accreditation 
master agreement between GCF and GIZ (AE). The AE will administer the project funds on 
behalf of GCF and will provide oversight guidance and quality assurance of the Environmental 
Protection Fund (EPF).  
89. 
In its capacity as an EE, GIZ will lead and provide overall management of the technical 
assistance at the national and subnational levels. Among others, it will be responsible for: 
managing the project budget of GIZ (EE); liaising with the GIZ Regional Office based in Vietnam 
regarding budget and finances, monitoring and reporting, staff and appraiser contract; and 
coordinating project implementation with the co-financing development partners and their 
projects and counterparts, as well as other donors and projects operating in the same technical 
and/or geographical area.  
90. 
Project management units will be established at the national, provincial and district 
levels. The National Project Management Unit (NPMU), established within the Department of 
Forestry of MAF, under Project 1 will remain in place to manage Project 2. The Provincial 
Project Management Units and District Project Management Units, under the instruction of the 
NPMU, will assist the NPMU technical team in executing their responsibilities. In addition to 
mirroring national-level responsibilities at the local level, project management units at the 
provincial and district levels will have additional responsibilities.  
91. 
The financial management of the project will follow the internal rules and regulations of 
GIZ. GIZ will not open a specific bank account for the GCF project but will ensure that all funds 
provided are clearly identifiable and distinguishable from GIZ’s other funds by setting up 
separate cost units exclusively for the funds disbursed by GCF for each funded activity (ledger 
accounts). Funds received and expenditures incurred will be booked to the respective cost unit 
according to generally accepted accounting principles and procedures accepted by the 
Government of Germany.  
92. 
Additionally, the EEs are mandated to report on the proper use of funds and define 
progress as a prerequisite for any further disbursement. GIZ will engage independent external 
auditors to perform annual financial audits of the project in line with the International 
Standards on Auditing.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
93. 
As a mitigation project, the forestry and land use interventions of the investment 
expects to benefit 153,700 direct and 332,990 indirect beneficiaries. Through coverage of 
approximately 2,122,000 hectares under improved management, the mitigation interventions 
estimated a GCF cost per tCO2eq removed of EUR 5.7 per tCO2eq.

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 154 
 
 
94. 
The logical framework appropriately aligns with the GCF fund-level integrated results 
management framework/performance measurement framework indicators, and the project has 
built in baselines and data collection (inclusive of REDD+ forest reference emission levels) that 
can inform progress reporting on expected results in addition to integrating qualitative 
measures looking at behavioural changes and policy/enabling environment transformations. 
95. 
Regarding section E.1, overall, the logical framework complies with GCF standards and 
has been cleared through Secretariat review.  
96. 
The funding proposal theory of change appropriately reflects the causal pathways at the 
project level in relation to the climate rationale and demonstrates reasons that the 
interventions selected are the best and most effective options to resolve the barriers and deliver 
paradigm shift. 
97. 
The implementation timetable for the funding proposal has been completed 
appropriately, and is consistent with the logical framework. 
98. 
The budget (annex 4) provides a detailed breakdown of the components covering 
results, gender and safeguards monitoring. The overall allocation for data collection appears 
sufficient. 
4.6 
Legal assessment  
99. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 15 
November 2017 (the “AMA”), and it became effective on 18 January 2019. 
100. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
101. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao 
PDR), a country in which the GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means 
that, amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this 
country, which risks need to be further assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided the NDA of Lao 
PDR with a draft privileges and immunities agreement on 21 February 2019 and again on 23 
March 2022. No response on the draft agreement has yet been received. 
102. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country(ies), or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
103. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions: 
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 155 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP200 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2) 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH 
Country/(ies): 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High  
1. 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) is a landlocked least developed country 
(LDC) with a population of 6.8 million people and an area of 237,955 km2. The country’s 
economy is dependent on natural resources, especially forestry, agriculture, electricity 
generation (especially hydropower) and mining. Agriculture, forestry and fisheries account for 
16 per cent of gross domestic product and employ 64 per cent of the Lao workforce.1 The 
forestry sector is one of the most important economically, providing income and a source of 
nutrition and livelihoods for the rural population, in particular, the rural poor. Approximately 
80 per cent of the population are heavily reliant on forests for timber, food, fuel, shelter, 
medicines and spiritual protection. The forests of Lao PDR are at the heart of the globally 
recognised Indo-Burma Biodiversity Hotspot. 
2. 
In 2019, at the twenty-fourth meeting of the Board (B.24), the GCF Board approved 
FP1172 submitted by GIZ as accredited entity (AE) and representing the LAO PDR programme 
“Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved 
governance and sustainable forest landscape management”. The programme area consists of six 
provinces (Bokeo, Houaphan, Luang Namtha, Luang Prabang, Oudomxay and Sayabouri) being 
among those most vulnerable to climate change in Lao PDR. These six provinces represent 
approximately 35 per cent of the national territory and 32 per cent of the country’s forest cover. 
Around 40 per cent of total national deforestation and degradation (in area terms) takes place 
within these provinces. The remote accessibility of this territory and limited public and 
industrial infrastructure play a role in preserving the cultural heritage, but also entail massive 
constraints in transportation, accessibility of social welfare, promotion of industry and trade, 
among other issues. 
3. 
Initially, the programme submitted as FP117 was conceptualized as a mitigation-
focused single project. Later, due to limited GCF funding available at the time of submission, the 
project was reframed as a programme, with three sub-projects (Project 1, Project 2 and Project 
 
1 World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/country/lao-pdr?view=chart. 
2 For more information refer to: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp117.

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 156 
 
 
3). The funding proposal explicitly outlined a programmatic approach with Project 13 covering 
three out of six provinces included in the programme (Houaphan, Luang Prabang and 
Sayabouri), which have the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the 
programme area and the two subprojects (hereafter Project 2):  
(a) 
former subproject 2 (expected starting date was mid-2024; expected end date was in 
2029) planned scaling-up the number of participating communities in the same 
geographical area covered by Project 1; and 
(b) 
former sub-project 3 (expected starting date was 2022; expected end date was in 2029) 
planned to extend the geographical reach of the programme to the three additional 
provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay.  
(c) 
submitted project 2 (expected starting date -2023; expected end date in mid-2027). 
4. 
Initially planned total programme financing is reduced by 24 per cent, GCF funding 
requested reduced by 30 per cent and co-financing by 18 per cent. 
5. 
The reviewed funding proposal informs that upon request from the GCF Secretariat,4 
adaptation measures were added to Project 2 to enable the transition to sustainable and 
climate-resilient forest and land-use management in the uplands of northern Lao PDR. The 
initial programme – with 100 per cent mitigation components – was requalified as a cross-
cutting programme for which 20 per cent of the GCF contribution and 10 per cent of the co-
financiers’ contribution is allocated for adaptation activities, contributing to the adaptation 
result areas 1 (most vulnerable people and communities) and 4 (ecosystems and ecosystems 
services). The funding proposal further clarifies that although the project area has certain 
climate vulnerabilities reported in section B.1.3 on Climate Risk and Vulnerability in Project 2, 
as well as in the detailed climate related vulnerability assessment in annex 2d, the main issue of 
selected areas in Project 1 and Project 2 is still deforestation.  
6. 
In the last 15 years, Lao PDR has lost approximately 680,000 ha of forests. Recently, 
forest cover accounts for 58 per cent of the country’s surface area, significantly lower than the 
70 per cent forest cover of the mid-1960s.5 Lao PDR is actively seeking to implement an 
ambitious REDD+ emissions reduction programme, for which substantial domestic resources 
have been committed, as well as bilateral and multilateral donor resources in various projects.6 
However, there are still immense challenges, including capacity and funding gaps. Therefore, 
building on, and coordinating with, complementary initiatives, Lao PDR will deploy GCF support 
to remove investment barriers to unlock future results-based payments, domestic taxes and 
fees, and to create a sustainable environment for scaling up the REDD+ programme.  
7. 
The FP and accompanying documentation highlights that for the last 10 years, Lao PDR 
has progressed substantially towards REDD+ readiness, notably through the acceptance of 
Forest Reference Level/Forest Reference Emissions Level (FRL/FREL), the finalised REDD+ 
strategy, the Strategic and Social Environmental Assessment, and the Environmental and Social 
 
3 Project 1 which was approved under FP117 reached effectiveness on 19th May 2020. Since then, the Project has made 
significant progress. More details on the specific progress and implementation barriers identified by the AE can be 
found under the Annual Performance Reports (APR). 
4 This was also recommended by the independent Technical Advisory Panel in assessment of FP114. 
5 Country’s nationally determined contribution committed to recover the forest territory as it was in the 1960s up to 
70 per cent of country’s territory. 
6 Sustainable Rural Infrastructure & Watershed Management Sector project (2020–2027) Asian Development Bank 
(ADB), European Union, International Fund for Agricultural Development, GIZ; Partnerships for Irrigation and 
Commercialization of Smallholder Agriculture (PICSA) (2019–2025) International Fund for Agricultural 
Development; Village Forestry Management Project (2018–2025), BMZ implemented by KfW; FCPF Carbon Fund: 
Lao PDR northern Lao Emission Reductions Payments Project (2021-–2025) World Bank; F-REDD+ 2 (2022–2027), 
JICA; Land Management and Decentralized Planning (LMDP) (2015–2023) BMZ; Scaling-Up Participatory 
Sustainable Forest Management Project (SUPSFM) (2013–2022) WB/IDA; Climate Friendly Agricultural Value Chain 
Project (CFAVCP) (2018–2025) ADB, etc.

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 157 
 
 
Management Framework, as well as the final acceptance of the Emission Reductions Programme 
Document with the Carbon Fund. 
8. 
According to the technical assessment report prepared for the 2005–2015 FRL/FREL 
reference period, proposed by Lao PDR and submitted by the country to the UNFCCC technical 
assessment process in 2018, emissions of 41,013,316 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(tCO2eq) per year and removals of 7,533,558 tCO2eq/year were confirmed, which corresponds 
to net annual emissions of 33.5 million tCO2eq/year. From this amount, according to the funding 
proposal and Emission Reductions Programme, 8.4 tCO2eq is baseline emission (for the same 
period) from the six provinces considered representing 25 per cent of total annual net 
emissions. 
9. 
The overarching programme contributes substantially to the successful implementation 
of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme7 under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
(FCPF) in six provinces of northern Lao PDR. 
10. 
Project 2 aims to further advance and consolidate the programme’s objective of 
supporting the country’s transition to sustainable and climate resilient management of forests 
and landscapes at scale. Similar to Project 1, Project 2 also has three components with some 
changes based on the experience gained from Project 1 implementation: 
(a) 
Component 1 continues creation of an enabling environment for REDD+ 
implementation though the former REDD+ Funding Window under Project 1 which was 
renamed Climate Change Funding Window during the implementation of Project 1 to 
enable the Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) to ensure the consideration of various 
sources of climate finance, including adaptation and not only finance dedicated for the 
forestry sector activities. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) considers 
that this was a positive change. Component 1 (activity 1.1.) in Project 1 has developed 
contingency plans and in case the World Bank due diligence does not authorize the 
Forest Protection Fund (FPF)8 to channel small grants, such as the Village Forest and 
Agriculture Grants (VFAGs), then EPF will continue to channel these grants. In Project 2, 
this sub-activity 1.1. was moved under Component 2, Output 2. Activities 1.2 
(Mainstreaming REDD+ into the NDC and socioeconomic development plans) and 1.3 
(Strengthening the regulatory framework) are completed in Project 1 and are no longer 
considered in Project 2. In former activity 1.5 (Land use planning and improved tenure 
security), now activity 1.3, minor changes have been made, among them monitoring of 
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) 2.0 which will be align with the provincial 
monitoring system, already established in three of the six provinces. 
(b) 
 Component 2 continues identification and implementation of market solutions for 
agricultural drivers of deforestation but makes the agricultural sector its main focus and 
specifies sustainable and deforestation-free agricultural practices as key criteria for 
selection of the field of activity. The target identified in the project document is 17,400 
ha and at least 14,500 families.9 In the original design of Project 1, Output 2 was focused 
 
7 The Emission Reductions Programme of Lao PDR corresponds to its nationally determined contribution (NDC) with 
significant weight on actions to be taken in the forestry sector, it aligns with the draft National REDD+ Strategy 
(NRS) to 2025 and Vision to 2030. The northern landscape of Lao PDR is distinctly unique, owing to the presence of 
over 20 ethnic groups in the six provinces who have called the extensive mountainous regions their home since far 
before the history of the State. 
8 The former “Forest and Forest Resource Development Fund (FFRDF)”. 
9 This was calculated considering the following assumptions: the average landholding of upland dependent families is 
1.2 hectares. The project will be able to support PSAP implementation on an average of 50 upland dependent 
families per village in 290 villages through the VFAG initial payment and the bonus payment (this would come to a 
total of 14,500 families with approximately 17,400 hectares in total). On average the initial VFAG payment will be 
EUR 10,800 and this can reach at least 27 families with EUR 400 for PSAP implementation (under Project 1 between 
29 or 30 families were accessing PSAP funding under VFAGs). It is assumed that villages will receive a performance-

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 158 
 
 
on the promotion of good agricultural practices according to the Food and Agriculture 
Organization approach. Funding for the promotion of activities related to good 
agricultural practices will be provided under the existing Village Development Fund 
system. However, early assessments and reviews of in-country experiences showed that 
this originally intended approach was no longer feasible and required further 
adaptation to achieve the project’s objectives. The initially envisaged approach focusing 
on good agricultural practices, while still relevant for many crops cultivated in Lao PDR, 
needed to be complemented by a specific definition of deforestation-free agricultural 
practices which Project 2 will directly support. Furthermore, the real target groups for 
Output 2 needed to be better defined (upland farmers, mostly practicing rotational 
shifting cultivation which is the greatest single proximate driver of deforestation and 
forest degradation in the project area, responsible for 22 per cent of forest 
disturbances). Consequently, a more specific approach to the promotion of sustainable 
agricultural practices (PSAP), and a “White List”10 defining all technical deforestation-
free models to be promoted by the project were developed under Project 1. The PSAP 
Guidelines were drafted with all six target provinces in mind, and the “White List” 
combines deforestation-free agricultural models applicable throughout northern Lao 
PDR (thus applicable for both Projects 1 and 2). 
(c) 
Component 3 changes the concept from “climate change mitigation through forestry” to 
“climate change mitigation and adaptation action through forestry”. As Project 2 was re-
framed as a cross-cutting project, Output 3 will, in addition to climate change mitigation, 
also consider adaptation actions through forestry. Component 3 builds on the enabling 
environment (introduced by Component 1), and will reduce emissions and strengthen 
the resilience of local livelihoods and forest ecosystems through sustainable forest 
landscape management and the promotion of Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR), with 
a focus on village and conservation forests. The third output on climate change 
mitigation through forestry, focuses on village forests and production and conservation 
forests to allow landscape management and restoration.  
11. 
Baseline net emissions reported for the project area in Project 2 for the 2005–2015 
period is 8.5 million tCO2eq/year (25 per cent of the country’s total emissions) which it is 
expected will be reduced by 6.4 million tCO2eq (by 75 per cent) within 4 years of Project 2 
implementation (1.14 million tCO2eq reduction annually). Expected total reduction by the 
programme equals 11.7 million tCO2eq for the project implementation period. 
12. 
Regarding the project beneficiaries, according to the logical framework, direct 
beneficiaries are expected to be 273,700 (15 per cent of the project area population) and 
indirect beneficiaries 723,382 (41 per cent of total area population). The programme covers a 
minimum of 56 per cent of the programme population. The method for assessment of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries is explained in the logical framework: “It is assumed that all villagers in 
the target villages are direct beneficiaries, as they will benefit from land use planning and other 
project-supported interventions.” It is understood by the independent TAP that this is an 
activity-based approach of monitoring, while the focus of GCF is on results-based monitoring. In 
particular, for the calculation of core indicator 2, supplementary indicator 2.1 should be 
monitored. Beneficiaries for supplementary indicator 2.1 are calculated by the AE based on the 
number of people who access PSAP funds. In the interpretation of the independent TAP, this 
activity does not necessarily lead to expected results and therefore beneficiaries adopting 
improved and/or new climate resilient livelihood options should be monitored. The livelihood 
option(s) should be specified (income in monetary values, productivity per hectare, availability 
of irrigation water m3/per hectare, or any other indicator demonstrating livelihood 
 
based bonus payment averaging EUR 10,000 and that 65 per cent of that bonus payment will be channelled to PSAP 
activities and support an additional 20 upland dependent families. 
10 List of eligible options.

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 159 
 
 
improvement) and beneficiaries should be monitored against this indicator. The same approach 
should be applied for supplementary indicator 4.1 for which ecosystem-specific additional 
indicators characterizing degradation and resilience of the system should be monitored at 
baseline and in the post-project implementation situation. 
13. 
The independent TAP considers that expected mitigation and adaptation impacts of this 
programme could be high in the long-term perspective though in the short-term (during the 
programme implementation) very high impacts should not be anticipated which could also be 
concluded from initial annual performance reports (APRs). Proper monitoring of results will 
help the AE in results-based management of processes and achievement of high mitigation and 
adaptation impacts in long-term perspective.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
14. 
The country is committed to effecting a paradigm shift in the agriculture sector, moving 
from traditional, aggressive practices based on deforestation to a low-emission development 
pathway with sustainably managed agriculture and a reduction of deforestation through 
implementing various innovative financial schemes and programmes.  
15. 
The project has several innovative elements supported by GIZ and the Emission 
Reductions Programme. The jurisdictional approach bridging agriculture, forestry, financial 
sectors and business activities is critical to enable real land use changes and more sustainable 
forest and food systems. The project is also enabling a sustainable agricultural economy 
ensuring markets and value chains and diversifying the commodity options to those that have 
potential demand.  
16. 
The financial cooperation module (CliPAD11) developed by the German Federal Ministry 
for Economic Development Cooperation (BMZ) and implemented through the German 
Development Bank (KfW) and the Emission Reductions Programme, supported by the World 
Bank FCPF programme, are two cornerstones for a successful paradigm shift to deforestation-
free agriculture.  
17. 
CliPAD aims to regulate and promote sustainable management, protection and 
conservation of village forests by establishing a legal basis and framework to link all village 
forest categories with international funding for climate change mitigation, and to channel it to 
the village level through performance-based payments. All four components of the financial 
cooperation module have been successfully initiated in Project 1:  
(a) 
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) which aims to be implemented in selected 
deforestation hotspot villages to improve planning to increase the efficiency and 
productivity of land use, while also promoting the sustainable management of forest 
areas. Implementation of land use plans will also improve land use monitoring. In 
project 1, 193 PULPs have already completed, from which seventy are updated existing 
PLUPs12 and 123 are new PLUPs for new villages. 
(b) 
Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) activities which should help small-scale 
farmers, with a focus on ethnic groups in remote places. It is possible that the 
programme itself may lead to land use restrictions, thus negatively impacting on some 
families’ livelihoods. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance for the programme to 
establish proper safeguard plans, closely monitor programme activities, and involve 
diverse stakeholder groups, including civil society organizations (CSOs), in programme 
implementation and monitoring processes which should be part of the FPIC process. In 
 
11 Climate Protection through Avoided Deforestation (CliPAD) - Financial Cooperation Module (FC). 
12 Existing villages means villages which already, before project 1, have had land use plans supported by international 
development projects, NGOs and took place between 1996 and 2018. These existing land use plans were reviewed, 
updated or redone during PLUP 2.0.

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 160 
 
 
Project 1, FPIC already completed in all 240 villages. FPIC 2 and 3 activities planned for 
project 2 are already completed in 144 villages. 
(c) 
The fund for Village Forest and Agriculture Grants13(VFAG) will be established under 
activity 2.1.2 (investment in sustainable, climate resilient and deforestation-free 
agricultural practices and agroforestry) and provide upfront and performance-based 
payments for implementation of PSAP activities from the “White List” and annual village 
forest management activities. According to the funding proposal a VFAG fund will be 
established in each of the 290 target villages. Currently a VFAG structure is set up in the 
240 villages targeted in Project 1. In particular, committees, bylaws and bank accounts 
have been established and financial management training has been completed. The 
VFAG fund has already requested from EPF cash for work grants for 121 villages, and 
investment grants for 64 villages (35 of these villages invested in “White List” products). 
According to the 2021 APRs, 9 Investment Plans were submitted to the EPF for 
disbursement with a total value of close to EUR 100,000.  
(d) 
Village Forests Management Plans (VFMP) are designed using a combination of spatial 
planning and participatory land-use planning with villagers as a precondition to enable 
the sustainable management of village forests. A total of 172 VFMPs are completed 
within the project 1. 
18. 
The Emission Reductions Programme was accepted into the FCPF Carbon Fund in June 
201814 and an Emission Reductions Payment Agreement was signed in December 2020 for 8.4 
million tCO2eq and up to USD 42 million in results-based payments. Lao PDR has been a partner 
country in the FCPF since 2008. This Emission Reductions Programme covers the programme 
territory (Project 1 and Project 2). 
19. 
 The programme is also demonstrating a paradigm shift in ensuring an effective 
monitoring, reporting and verification system and coordination with relevant projects taking 
place in the same region, making more effective use of resources and a more coherent theory of 
change for the jurisdictions and the country. By doing so, the project is providing new financial 
sources for village forests through downscaling the proceeds of a REDD+ finance model. 
20. 
Slow but continuous progress in transformation of lifestyle in the programme region, 
shifting from unsustainable and hazardous business to sustainable and deforestation-free 
business initiated by the Government of Lao PDR and supported by different donors, should be 
considered as the most effective approach to achieve sustainable transformation of the 
country’s economy and should be further supported to reach a high transformational impact.  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High  
21. 
The underlying principle of the entire programme is that of sustainable development. 
22. 
Project 2 will further generate additional environmental, social and economic benefits 
that contribute to Lao PDR’s national Green Growth Strategy to 2030, and the country’s 
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
23. 
The main principles of Green Growth Strategy are to develop the potential to integrate 
green growth into the formulation and implementation of sectoral and local strategies and plans 
for each period of implementation to ensure the achievement of long-term goals of national 
socioeconomic development set out by the government, such as: graduating from the status of 
least developed country (LDC) by 2020 and moving toward becoming a developing country with 
 
13 Formerly Village Development Fund (VDF) 
14 For more information refer to: https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/carbon-fund-eighteenth-cf18-june-20-
22-2018-paris

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 161 
 
 
an upper middle-income15 in accordance with green and sustainable direction and achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. 
24. 
The programme significantly contributes to three SDG target areas SDG 13, SDG 12 and 
SDG 15:  
(a) 
The entire programme contributes to target area 13.2 to integrate climate change 
measures into national policies, strategies and planning; target area 13.3 to improve 
education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change 
mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction; and target area 13.b to promote mechanisms 
for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in 
least developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on 
women, youth and local and marginalized communities. 
(b) 
The programme particularly contributes to SDG 12 considering the importance of 
sustainable consumption and production patterns. Target areas 12.2 to achieve the 
sustainable management and efficient use of natural resources and 12.8 to ensure that 
people everywhere have the relevant information and awareness for sustainable 
development and lifestyles in harmony with nature, are implemented through the FPIC 
component of the CliPAD cooperation module.  
(c) 
The PLUP component of the CliPAD module contributes to implementation of SDG 15 to 
”protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably 
manage forests, halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss” and to its 
target areas 15.2, “By 2020, promote the implementation of sustainable management of 
all types of forests, halt deforestation, restore degraded forests and substantially 
increase afforestation and reforestation globally”; and 15.4, “By 2030, ensure the 
conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in order to enhance 
their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable development.” 
25. 
While Project 1 was entirely mitigation focused, Project 2 has an adaptation component 
as well which is focused on increasing the livelihood of the local population. Monitoring of the 
adaptation component through supplementary indicator 2.1 is reflected in the monitoring 
logical framework, though the baseline situation regarding population livelihoods is not 
reported. For proper monitoring and reporting of results achieved by project activities, this 
indicator should be specified (in particular, what type of livelihood will be monitored) and the 
baseline value of this indicator should be assessed prior implementation of the activities in 
order to assess the results. 
26. 
Project 2 builds on the lessons learned from Project 1 and identified the need to target 
micro, small and medium agri-enterprises (agri-MSMEs), where there is a notable absence of 
incentives for these enterprises to adopt and invest in more sustainable, climate resilient and 
deforestation-free practices and support value chain development. Component 2 is focused on 
investments in low-emission and climate resilient value chains for agri-MSMEs. By catalysing 
investment in value chains, the project will create economic benefits to micro, small and 
medium enterprises that will in turn generate increased profits and job creation. Project 2 
estimates that 60 agri-MSMEs will access matching grants, mobilizing at least EUR 1.8 million of 
private finance.  
27. 
Project 2 will follow the approach outlined in the Gender Action Plan. It will continue to 
work closely with the Lao Women’s Union (LWU) to ensure the effective engagement of women. 
 
15 In 2016, the government approved a long-term development vision to transform the Lao PDR into an upper-
middle-income country and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, one of which is to develop a 
science and technology bank. The Economic Vulnerability Index, measuring the country’s resilience to shocks and 
instability, is still to be met. See also para 32.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 162 
 
 
All project activities will proactively involve empowerment elements for village women, 
including promoting their leadership roles in local structures, including ensuring a quota of at 
least 30 per cent female presence on village committees and participation rates of women in 
community meetings of at least 40 per cent. The project will include training in business skills 
development for women that will help to address common participation gaps and barriers, 
including financial support. The project will seek economic opportunities for women related to 
agroforestry, forest management and climate resilient agricultural activities. 
28. 
There are at least 23 specific ethnic groups present in the project area. The project aims 
to work with diverse ethnic groups and provide targeted support that is culturally appropriate 
and targeted to their needs. An Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) was prepared, and is 
attached to the funding proposal package of Project 2 as annex 6d. Project 2 aims to continue to 
promote an inclusive approach, ensuring beneficiaries from diverse ethnic groups and 
marginalised villages are included and empowered. Priorities outlined in the EGDP include 
strengthening their voice in the context of village decision-making; access to land, forest and 
natural resources for livelihood purposes; respect for customary use of land (including for 
ancestral and spiritual uses). 
29. 
Potential of the project to significantly contribute to the sustainable development of Lao 
PDR is very high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                               Scale: High   
30. 
Lao PDR is a least developed country with a human development index rating of 0.613, 
ranking it 137th (out of 189 countries) globally. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Lao PDR’s 
growth had been among the fastest in the South-East Asia and Pacific region, averaging more 
than 7.7 per cent per year for most of the last decade. In 2016–2021, the gross national income 
(GNI)16 per capita had increased from USD 2,130 to USD 2,520, and the poverty rate had 
declined from 27.6 per cent in 2008 to about 18.0 per cent in 2019. 
31. 
Economic expansion. Due to such rapid economic expansion and poverty reduction 
achieved through aggressive use of natural resources in a wasteful, inefficient, ineffective and 
unsustainable manner, significant challenges are faced by the country: degradation and 
depletion of natural resources; social disparity; degradation of urban environment; increase of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs); and climate change and natural disasters. 
32. 
Despite the economic growth observed in Lao PDR, the country´s exposure to economic 
vulnerability remains high. According to the report of the Committee for Development Policy, a 
subsidiary body of the United Nations Economic and Social Council based in New York, the 2018 
review found that Lao PDR has passed the thresholds for GNI per capita and for the Human 
Assets Index, a composite index evaluating its human capital. The Economic Vulnerability Index, 
measuring the country’s resilience to shocks and instability, is still to be met.17 
33. 
GHG emissions. According to the country’s Second National Communication to the 
UNFCCC,18 83 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions emitted from Lao PDR territory are from 
change of land use and forest, thus deforestation caused by: timber exploitation; forest 
clearance for expanding agricultural production areas; and infrastructure development projects. 
About 15 per cent of the GHG emissions are from the agriculture sector and about 2 per cent are 
from the energy sector. 
 
16 Lao PDR GNI Per Capita 1986-2022 | MacroTrends 
17 EVI is higher than the standard required for graduating from a least developed country status by about 0.8 point 
(the standard required for graduating from LDC status is: lower than 36) 
18 The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, 2013. Second National Communication on Climate Change of 
Lao PDR. Vientiane Capital, March 2013.

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 163 
 
 
34. 
Climate change and natural disasters. Such unsustainable use of local natural 
resources and changes in the global climate as reflected on local climatic parameters, have 
caused adverse impacts on agricultural production and led to the occurrence of natural 
disasters, such as: droughts, floods, storms, disease outbreak, soil erosion, etc. According to the 
statistics from the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), during the period from 1970 to 
2010, about 33 severe floods had occurred in Lao PDR, affecting the population of about 9 
million people (cumulative number) and causing a total loss amounting to more than USD 400 
million (MPI, 2012). According to the World Bank report (2014), the amount of losses from 
flood each year is between 2.8 per cent and 3.6 per cent of GDP, and the government had spent 
about 2.7 per cent of the budget in flood protection and relief.  
35. 
COVID-19 consequences. Since the development of Project 1, Lao PDR’s economy has 
been greatly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. UNICEF released a series of reports in 2021 
that note the country’s economy could contract by between 1.8 per cent and 3.3 per cent. In 
addition, the pandemic has generated other substantial impacts including loss of life and long-
term health impacts for the population, increased unemployment, poverty, reduced nutrition, 
and an increase in gender-based violence, among others. A rapid assessment of food security 
and agriculture conducted by the World Food Programme (WFP) in May 2020 found producers 
in Bokeo and Luang Namtha (both programme provinces) were among the hardest hit, 
especially cash crop producers (of, for example, cardamom, rubber, tea and coffee) and 
horticulture producers. This was due particularly to restrictions in movement, changes in 
market access and availability, and prices of food. There is a need for additional technical and 
financial support in Lao PDR to contribute to a green recovery, without placing an additional 
debt burden on the country. Seventy per cent of the population of Lao PDR still depends on 
forests and waterways for income and nutrition. The government has recognized the limitations 
of this economic model and is implementing reforms to drive a greener and more inclusive 
model. 
36. 
Two key strategic documents should be considered within the context of the funding 
proposal, covering the country’s needs and planning ways of shifting to low-emission, 
sustainable development. These are the country’s nationally determined contribution (NDC) 
and Green Growth Strategy. 
37. 
NDC. Conditional and unconditional targets are considered in the NDC.  
(a) 
An unconditional target for 2020–2030 is to reduce land-use change and forestry 
emissions by 1,100 ktCO2eq per year on average between 2020 and 2030, which is a 
threefold reduction objective compared to those achieved between 2000 and 2015. 
According to the country’s opinion this can be achieved by ongoing projects including 
the GCF FP117 and the World Bank “Lao Landscapes and Livelihoods Project 
(P170559)”. The country’s position is that in all activities, forest management issues 
shall be addressed including through village-level land-use planning as well as forest 
land data management and accessibility. The national level unconditional target for 
2030 is 60 per cent GHG emission reductions compared to the baseline scenario, or 
around 62,000 ktCO2eq in absolute terms. 
(b) 
The conditional mitigation scenario and targets are the GHG emission reductions efforts 
that Lao PDR could achieve by 2030 contingent upon increased levels of financial 
support from developed country Parties. A conditional target for the land-use change 
and forestry sector between 2020 and 2030 is on average 45,000 ktCO2eq per year. This 
will be achieved through increased forest cover to 70 per cent of land area (to 16.58 
million hectares) through reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, 
fostering conservation, sustainable management of forests, buffer zones of national 
parks and other reserves, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 164 
 
 
(c) 
Ongoing mitigation efforts combined with the new 2030 unconditional and conditional 
targets established above would position the country on a pathway to net zero 
emissions by 2050, and even earlier if the conditional target is achieved in the forest 
sector. To achieving this target, Lao PDR seeks:  
(i) 
Financial support for implementation of mitigation measures; 
(ii) 
Support in the design of innovative financial mechanisms that can blend public 
and private capital as a means of mitigating risks and unlocking private sector 
investment in climate projects;  
(iii) 
Continuous administrative, legal, technical and institutional capacity-building, 
policy design and readiness support for the implementation of its NDC; 
(iv) 
Measurement, reporting and verification, data collection, processing and 
management for GHG emissions inventories, GHG and climate modelling, carbon 
trading, and; 
(v) 
Enhanced mainstreaming of climate change into national and subnational 
policies, including through climate action planning tools such as climate risk 
screening and climate budgeting. 
38. 
The country would welcome legal and technical assistance in adjusting forest lands 
demarcation to match existing forest cover and avoid conversion to other land use of forested 
areas currently designated as outside forest land demarcation.  
39. 
The programme and Project 2 contribute to most of these conditions for fulfilment of the 
determined contribution. 
40. 
In 2020, the estimated national GHG emissions reduction progress assessment showed 
that between 2000 and 2020 Lao PDR achieved reduction of emissions by 34 per cent compared 
to the baseline scenario and growth of emissions was decoupled from economic growth, but this 
trend in sustainability could not be guaranteed at that time, bearing in mind that progress is not 
yet observed in several key sectors.  
41. 
Green Growth Strategy. For mitigation of ongoing economic expansion and 
degradation of natural resources, the Government of Lao PDR developed the National Green 
Growth Strategy (GGS) and established the National Green Growth Promotion Centre. The GGS 
consists of Vision 2030, 10-Year Strategy (2016–2025) and the nineth Five-Year Socio-
Economic Development Plan (SEDP) for 2020–2025. SEDPs and sectoral plans are the basis for 
government budgeting, and thus it is crucial that REDD+ related interventions are integrated in 
these plans. They are outcome-based plans, including clear development outcomes and outputs 
corresponding to the sector. Provincial and district development plans should be able to show 
harmonization with national plans and are closely aligned with available sources of funding 
(including government budget, grants, loans, domestic and foreign private investments, and 
investments in the financial system). 
42. 
The updated NDC highlights the role of the National Green Growth Strategy to 2030 for 
climate change adaptation as a cross-cutting focus area with the objective of reducing 
vulnerability of the country and population, especially disadvantaged groups, to natural 
disasters and global economic uncertainties which have become more serious and 
unpredictable. Transition to a green growth model implies a behavioural change that needs to 
be embedded in the country’s institutions and in the development plans. 
43. 
In its Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, Lao PDR identifies itself as an LDC 
with limited adaptive capacities that is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The 
Economy and Environment Program for Southeast Asia (EEPSEA) ranks Lao PDR as one of the 
most climate-vulnerable countries in the region.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 165 
 
 
44. 
Project 1 addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang Prabang in 
northern Lao PDR, where poverty rates are among the highest in the country, exceeding the 
national average by 23 per cent. Food security is a major challenge for many households in rural 
areas with an estimated 25 per cent of rural households in the region accounted as food-poor.19 
Project 2 primarily addresses the remaining three provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and 
Oudomxay in northern Lao PDR, where poverty rates are also among the highest in the country 
and food security here is also a major challenge.  
45. 
Financial constraints. Public budgets are extremely tight and are further constrained 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic response though the government is able to commit co-finance to 
Project 2 amounting to EUR 7 million. According to the funding proposal, Lao PDR has limited 
ability to take on additional debt, as the “risk of external debt distress remains high”. Beyond 
this, Moody’s20 downgraded Lao PDR’s issue rating in August 2020, stating the country faces 
severe liquidity stress. As such, there is limited ability for Lao PDR to take on additional loans 
for climate change mitigation and adaptation. 
46. 
The country’s needs are very high, taking into consideration that this is a landlocked 
LDC with very high vulnerability to climate change and economic shocks, having a long-term 
development vision to transform Lao PDR into an upper-middle-income country, achieve the 
SDGs by 2030 and ambitious commitments under the Paris Agreement to afforest 70 per cent of 
the country’s territory. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                               Scale: High 
47. 
The funding proposal, “Scaling up the Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management (Project 2)” is part of the Lao PDR GCF Country Programme 2020–2023 under the 
Priority Area ‘Supporting an increase in and maintenance of national forest cover through forest 
restoration, conservation, improved forest governance and private sector investment”. 
48. 
The Country Programme states that the national designated authority (NDA) of Lao PDR, 
nominated21 EPF to become a direct access entity (DAE) to GCF, and that readiness support to 
the EPF was provided by GCF. By continuing to work with EPF, the project will continue to build 
the capacities of the DAE and support it to advance with the accreditation process, and 
eventually develop and implement their own projects to strengthen climate change adaptation 
and mitigation. 
49. 
The project is closely aligned with the Government of Lao PDR´s socioeconomic 
development plans and strategy, as well as priorities for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sector in Lao PDR. Since the 
approval of FP117 by GCF, the design of Project 2 has been adapted to reflect the (draft) Climate 
Change Strategy (2021), updated NDC (2021), and Forestry Strategy to 2035, among others, 
strengthening the focus on adaptation and cross-cutting measures in the AFOLU sector. 
 
19 Pimhidzai, O., Fenton, N. C., Souksavath, P. and Sisoulath, V. (2014), Poverty Profile in Lao PDR: Poverty Report for 
the Lao Consumption and Expenditure Survey 2012–2013. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/868521467998508506/pdf/100120-WP-P146141-PUBLIC-
Box393225B-Poverty-Profile-in-Lao-PDR-publication-version-12-19-14.pdf 
20 About us (moodys.com) 
21 The EPF was established in 2005 to strengthen environmental protection, sustainable natural resources 
management, biodiversity conservation and community development. The EPF is an autonomous national entity, 
both financially and administratively. The EPF is mandated to mobilize funds from national and international 
sources to support effective and sustainable natural resources management and environmental protection and 
channel funds through six windows: policy implementation and capacity enhancement, biodiversity and 
community investment, pollution control, water resources management, sustainable land resources management, 
and climate change (recently opened).

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 166 
 
 
50. 
In recent years, the Government of Lao PDR embarked on several reforms that provide a 
platform for launching the GCF project interventions. In 2012, the government issued a 
suspension on granting of new concessions for mining and rubber investments, which remains 
in effect today. A national moratorium on logging in production forests has also been in effect 
since 2013 in order to protect natural forests from unsustainable exploitation. In 2016, the 
government put in place measures to halt illegal logging and illegal timber exports; this is 
already demonstrating significant impact and underlies the ongoing Forest Law Enforcement 
Governance and Trade22 Voluntary Partnership Agreement negotiations with the European 
Union. The adoption of the Central Party Committee Resolution on Land in 2017, indicating the 
need for reform in land management, has paved the way for a new Land Law in 2019 (entered 
into force in August 2020). The new Forest Law, which has been revised and was adopted by the 
National Assembly in June 2019, provides improved rights to local communities for land use.  
51. 
The integration of the project’s course of action into the country’s highest-level policy 
statements and decisions, including the ninth SEDP, 2021 - 2025, the national GGS 2030, 
updated NDC (2021) of Lao PDR, Decree on Climate Change (2019), the Strategy on Climate 
Change with a vision to the year 2050, the Central Party Resolution on Land (2017), the 
Forestry Strategy 2035, provide some safeguards that impact achieved through this programme 
will be sustainable beyond the end of this project.  
52. 
The government, together with development partners, has put in place an extensive 
institutional framework at national and subnational levels to implement REDD+, including the 
Emissions Reduction Programme. This framework includes the establishment of a National 
REDD+ Task Force, representing diverse economic sectors, including forestry, agriculture, 
mining, energy and land use planning, as well as including representatives from the Ministry of 
Justice, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Lao Front for National 
Development (LFND), the LWU and the Lao Chamber of Commerce.  
53. 
The National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will provide administrative oversight 
of the project, ensuring coordination across ministries and will provide strategic 
implementation guidance to the National Project Management Unit and Provincial Project 
Steering Committees (PPSCs, the Provincial REDD+ Task Forces). At the provincial level, the 
PPSCs will review project implementation progress and provide support to address potential 
bottlenecks related to implementation. 
54. 
The Government of Lao PDR, represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry23 
and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, will also serve as executing entity of 
the programme. The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment is the GCF NDA of Lao PDR 
and is responsible for the Environmental Protection Fund. The Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry serves as the Chair of the REDD+ Task Force and is (together with the Ministry of 
Finance) the contract-signing party with the FCPF Carbon Fund to sell GHG emission reductions 
and receive results-based payments. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is further 
responsible for the FPF, which will have two roles in the project: (a) as a beneficiary receiving 
capacity-building support in fiduciary standards; and (b) once its capacities are satisfactorily 
built, to channel funds to beneficiaries.  
55. 
While the legal agreement with GIZ (as the AE) will be signed with the government, the 
GCF funding will flow from GIZ direct to the EPF, which will be responsible for the financial 
management and disbursement of grants to other beneficiaries. 
 
22 The EU started the Voluntary Partnership Agreement negotiation process in 2017. It is supported by the Forest 
Law Enforcement Governance and Trade (ProFLEGT) component of the ‘Protection and Sustainable Use of Forest 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity in Laos II’ (ProFEB), implemented by GIZ. 
23 Since 2016 all responsibilities for forestry have been returned to one ministry, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry, thereby promoting ‘joined up’ policy development and implementation.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 167 
 
 
56. 
CSOs represent a central beneficiary of project support at the local level and will be 
involved in all village-level activities, including funding for capacity-building and awareness-
raising, knowledge management and communication, gender plan and establishment of public-
private sector dialogue to promote village-based agroforestry project activities. Furthermore, 
CSOs in the target provinces and districts will be trained on the project’s grievance redress 
mechanism and provided with information brochures.  
57. 
Funding proposal demonstrates that all key players of the planned activities: 
government, most vulnerable population, MSMEs, local banking sector, CSOs and others are 
considered and have well defined responsibilities and benefits during the project 
implementation process and beyond. The independent TAP concludes that country ownership 
of the proposal is very high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                         Scale: Medium 
58. 
As a part of the initial programme, potential efficiency and effectiveness of Project 2 is 
assessed by the independent TAP based on the achievements reported through Project 1 APRs 
provided as annexes 18b and 18c to the Project 2 application package. Key findings highlighted 
in the independent TAP assessment are from the latest APR (2021) which provides information 
on the progress of Project 1 components based on progress achieved by the end of the second 
year of implementation (1 January 2021 to 31 December 2021). The 2021 APR demonstrates 
that: 
(a) 
Highest implementation progress was achieved in Component 1 “Enabling environment 
for REDD+ implementation”. Average progress of this component is in the range of 50 to 
70 per cent for seven activities planned under this component. Key activities of this 
component are focused on the establishment of an enabling regulatory, technical and 
financial environment for implementation of REDD+ activities (as detailed above in 
paragraph 10a), support in land-use planning and in improvement of land tenure 
security; 
(b) 
Component 2, “Market solutions for agricultural drivers of deforestation”, has achieved 
20 per cent progress for activity 2.1 (“Local incentives for good agricultural practices 
and agroforestry”) and 10 per cent for activities 2.2 (“Catalyzing private sector 
investment in value chains”) and 2.3 (“Sustainable rural infrastructure watershed 
management”); and 
(c) 
Component 3, “Climate change mitigation action through forestry”, has achieved 20 per 
cent progress in two activities, 3.1(“Village forest management”) and 3.2 (“Sustainable 
management of production forests”), and 30 per cent for activity 3.3 (National Protected 
Area management).  
59. 
It is the understanding of the independent TAP that activities under Component 1 are 
basic activities for preparation of an enabling environment for implementation of Components 2 
and 3 which will produce results in GHG mitigation, in increasing of local populations’ livelihood 
and ecosystem resilience to climate change. In the opinion of the independent TAP, when 
requesting finance for Project 2, some tangible results should already be achieved in the 
implementation of Components 2 and 3 of Project 1, moreover that Project 1 still will be in 
implementation stage minimum by July 2024. 
60. 
During the call, AE clarifies that the main delay in progress of results across components 
(2 and 3) is due to the critical impact of COVID-19 on the progress of field work related to these 
components, which were blocked due to COVID-19 shutdowns. The independent TAP fully 
shares this argument but also expressed concern that the risks reported in the APR still need to 
be mitigated (such as: weak law enforcement due to different barriers; institutional capacity of 
local key players still requires strengthening; operational structures remain low barriers for

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 168 
 
 
engagement of the private sector in smallholder farmers’ agriculture production because it does 
not follow commercialized production methods, etc.).  
61. 
In this regard the independent TAP requested the AE to provide written justification on 
the urgency of starting Project 2 immediately before more tangible progress is achieved in 
implementation of Components 2 and 3 through mitigation of barriers and risks. In its response 
the AE provided the latest information on results already achieved, which is fully integrated in 
the paradigm shift section above. The independent TAP would like to comment on a conceptual 
issue raised by the AE in the justification response regarding results monitoring and 
assessment. One of the arguments in the justification text says that “The success of the 
program/project is not only measured in its climate impact but also in improving and 
strengthening the local governance structures, in increased transparency of land use and 
accountability at village level. In this respect, Subproject 1 can already demonstrate significant 
progress – and success.” The independent TAP’s understanding is that the focus of GCF is on 
climate change related results such as GHG mitigation and/or strengthening of resilience of 
vulnerable populations/systems, at the same time fully recognizing that these results could not 
be achieved and sustained without the activities listed in the AE’s response.  
62. 
The independent TAP’s request to justify the urgency of starting Project 2 prior to 
mitigating the implementation risks within ongoing Project 1, is related to the understanding 
that existing barriers and risks significantly decrease the potential of efficiency and 
effectiveness of Project 2. The independent TAP welcomes the information that some of the 
risks identified so far have already been taken into consideration by the AE when developing 
Project 2. The condition for approval of Project 2 is elaborated based on a preliminary exchange 
of views with the AE and taken into consideration justification provided in written form and is 
reflected in the independent TAP’s overall remarks section. 
63. 
Project 1 requested EUR 15.2 million and Project 2 requests EUR 32.82 million from GCF 
which makes the total contribution equal to EUR 48.02 million. Co -financing planned in project 
1 was EUR 50 million and project 2 plans to mobilize Euro 41.26 million which makes the total 
co-financing equal to EUR 91.26 million. Hence, the mobilization rate for the programme is 1:1.9 
which is less than it was in project 1 (1:3.3) though still higher than it was planned initially for 
entire programme (1:1.6). This difference comparing with project 1 is because support by the 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) is no longer considered in Project 2 as co-
financing but as parallel financing. Regarding the local private sector contribution, clarification 
was given to the independent TAP by the AE that this amount of private sector co-financing was 
calculated as in-kind or own contributions by the private sector companies in Project 1, 
however under Project 2 with reference to the GCF co-financing guidance, the contributions of 
the private sector to the matching grants of EUR 1.8 million is not counted as co-financing but 
considered as mobilized private sector finance (the matching grant system is introduced in 
Project 2 specially for agri-MSMEs). The AE explained further that experiences from Project 1 
have clearly shown that full integration of the local private sector into the development of 
sustainable value chains was underrepresented (or missing) in Project 1. Mobilization of 
finances from the private sector was only foreseen in connection with investments into larger 
agro-forestry schemes by two or three plantation companies already established in Lao PDR. At 
present detailed negotiations with these companies are still ongoing and matching grant 
disbursements per hectare of established communal agro-forestry scheme are planned under 
Project 1 for 2023. 
64. 
According to the APR (2021) some changes in the co-financing of the project took place 
since approval of the funding proposal in May 2019. In particular, BMZ has increased its funding 
by EUR 5,2 million, commissioning the CliPAD IV/I-GFLL (Forest Landscapes and Livelihoods) 
(Project 1) on 22 April 2020. JICA’s contribution and co-financing through its F-REDD II project, 
decreased from EUR 1.6 million to EUR 1.2 million. However, the provincial activities planned 
for JICA will be taken over by GIZ and carried out as planned. The contribution of the

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 169 
 
 
Government of Lao PDR, which is mainly through staff time contributions, has been 
overestimated during the programme design phase. This is due to the current debt crisis, which 
caused a cut in monthly salaries which were used to estimate the contribution amount. The 
commitments of the Asian Development Bank and International Fund for Agricultural 
Development remained unchanged. 
65. 
In general, the independent TAP’s opinion is that the project is well constructed, very 
important for an LDC country that has committed to an ambitious target to increase forest cover 
to 70 per cent of land area but has a lot of barriers to successful implementation. The project 
should be continuously monitored and sustainably managed in accordance with “Enhanced 
risks mitigation plan” (see condition) developed through preliminary risk analysis rather than 
managed by the project with a retroactive risk assessment approach.  
66. 
The revised feasibility study (Annex 2a) informs that “In the concept note it was 
foreseen that a local financial institution would manage the matching grants based on 
preliminary consultations and other parallel processes (for instance the development of a 
NAMA Facility). Financial institutions had been considered as an adequate conduit for 
channelling the matching grants due to their direct links with clients in the agricultural sector as 
well as due to the initial intention of supporting the development of a green credit line under 
the project. Five local banks were consulted during preparation of the feasibility study. Results 
show that local banks in general are not able or interested in managing international grant 
funds. They expressed concerns about the associated monitoring and reporting needs, as well as 
about the overhead costs that managing these funds would carry, and in general their 
operational capacity is insufficient. Hence, EPF was chosen as the fund to channel the matching 
grants for the following reasons: it adheres to international fiduciary and environmental and 
social risk management standards; managing the matching grants for agri-MSMEs will help EPF 
develop capacities to work with the private sector that will be important as it concludes its GCF 
accreditation process and develops its own climate finance projects and programmes; EPF is 
already managing the funds for VFAGs and is managing the matching grant funds under Project 
1; and the World Bank is also exploring the option of working with the EPF for channelling 
grants to private sector companies. 
67. 
The independent TAP recognizes the significance of EPF at national level and very much 
welcomes strengthening its capacity as a potential DAE. However, it is the opinion of the 
independent TAP that exclusion of the local banking sector from the processes, instead of 
strengthening their internal capacities through participation in ongoing processes, greatly 
diminishes the expected efficiency and effectiveness of the funding proposal results. Without 
strengthening the local banking and private sector actors, it is questionable that effective and 
efficient implementation of GGS 2030 and the NDC, as well as the expected outcomes of the 
programme under consideration, will be achieved. 
68. 
  According to the Project 2 funding proposal document, emission reductions expected 
from the project during the four-year implementation period equals 4.6 million tCO2eq (1.14 
million tCO2eq/year) and total mitigation over seven years of implementation equals 11.7 
million tCO2eq. GHG mitigation costs for GCF in Project 2 alone equal24 EUR 5.71 for tCO2eq and 
for the entire programme equals EUR 3.2 for tCO2eq. Regarding the total costs for Project 2 and 
for the entire programme, these are respectively EUR 12.9 for tCO2eq and EUR 10.6 for tCO2eq. 
Costs of mitigation are in acceptable range bearing in mind that the amounts of reduced 
emissions considered are only for the project implementation periods. 
69. 
Bearing in mind the findings highlighted in the assessment report and the fact that Lao 
PDR’s potential to raise substantial, long-term climate finance still remains untapped (activity 
 
24 Considering that 80 per cent of total amount is allocated to mitigation activities, though it is the independent TAP’s 
opinion that for cross-cutting sectors such as forest and agriculture it is not realistic to make such a delineation. The 
independent TAP accepted this approach as it was in the funding proposal because the difference is insignificant.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 170 
 
 
1.1.1), it is the opinion of the independent TAP that efficiency and effectiveness of Project 2 and 
of the entire programme is lower than was expected from Project 1. The independent TAP’s 
assessment of this criteria is medium to low, however, it believes that programme efficiency and 
effectiveness and final results could be improved by proper implementation of the conditions 
recommended for project approval and by taking into consideration the findings reported in the 
independent TAP’s assessment report.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
70. 
The independent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval by the GCF 
subject to:  
(a) 
The following condition being met prior to the execution of the funded activity 
agreement. Delivery by the AE to GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat of: 
(i) 
The latest performance report demonstrating implementation progress for 
Components 2 and 3 of Project 1;  
(ii) 
Updated monitoring logical framework where baseline and target values are 
provided for all indicators (e.g. livelihood options should be specified for 
supplementary indicator 2.1 in monetary or other units; either change in tC/per 
ha or other ecosystem-specific additional indicators for demonstrating 
improvements of the ecosystem resiliency should be provided for 
supplementary indicator 4.1); and  
(iii) 
A plan containing enhanced risk mitigation measures to address risk factors 
related to the implementation of Components 2 and 3 of Projects 1 and 2, 
reported in the APR (2021), to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of 
financial flows to the final beneficiaries, involvement of local private and 
banking sector actors, and the monitoring of mitigation and adaptation results 
(“Enhanced Risk Mitigation Plan”); and 
(b) 
The inclusion of the following covenant in the funded activity agreement: 
(i) 
The Accredited Entity shall maintain and implement, at all times during the 
implementation of the programme, the Enhanced Risk Mitigation Plan.

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 171 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP200) 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission 
Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2) 
Accredited entity: 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH 
Country/(ies): 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome the iTAP’s recommendation. No further 
comments. 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
 
Country ownership 
Thank you for the positive assessment. No further comments. 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Thank you for the positive assessment. We welcome the iTAP’s recommendation. No further 
comments.

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.35/02/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page 172 
 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
GIZ as AE appreciates the overall remarks from iTAP including the proposed conditions. 
• 
The latest performance report demonstrating implementation progress for 
Components 2 and 3 of Project 1 (FP 117) will be made available to the GCF 
Secretariat in due time. 
• 
GIZ adheres to the IRMF guidance and policy approved by the GCF Board with 
respect to section E.3 “GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased 
resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)” (incl. 
supplementary indicators 2.1. and 4.1). In addition, GIZ included two new 
project specific indicators under section E.5 “Project/programme specific 
indicators (project outcomes and outputs)” to measure increased climate 
resilience of project beneficiaries and ecosystems protected and/or restored 
area (ha) change data from the land use change matrix as an expression of the 
ex-ante ERs in tCO2eq. 
• 
GIZ in its Oversight Function has its GCF specific internal Risk Management 
System 2.0 in place. It is mandatory for all GCF projects where GIZ serves as 
AE. In addition, through Risk Dialogues risks reported e.g. through the APRs 
are assessed and specific mitigation measures are developed continuously. 
GIZ will update and submit an enhanced risk mitigation plan containing 
enhanced risk mitigation measures to address risk factors related to the 
implementation of Components 2 and 3 to ensure the efficiency and 
effectiveness of financial flows to the final beneficiaries to the GCF.

=== PAGE 173 ===
1 
GENDER ASSESSMENT
Supporting a Funding Proposal to the Green Climate Fund 
Project Title:  
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Re-
ductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest landscape management (Project 2). 
Commissioned by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusam-
menarbeit (GIZ) GmbH 
Gender documentation for FP200

=== PAGE 174 ===
2 
 
1. 
Introduction 
4 
1.1. 
GCF and GIZ Guidelines for the Promotion of Gender Equality 
6 
1.2. 
Methodology 
6 
2. 
Information on gender dimensions in Lao PDR 
8 
2.1. 
The Meta Level: Norms and Traditional Roles of Women and Men in Laos 
8 
2.2. 
Macro Level: International and Regional Commitments & National Legislation and Policies 
10 
2.3. 
Meso Level: Institutions and Non-Governmental Organizations 
11 
2.4. 
Micro Level: Gender Equality among the Target Group 
13 
3. 
Gender dimensions in the sector 
17 
3.1. 
Meta Level: Gender gaps in the sector 
17 
3.2. 
Macro Level: Policies and strategies in the sector 
22 
3.3. 
Meso Level: Gender dimensions at sectoral institutions and actors 
25 
3.4. 
Micro Level: Consultations with the Target Groups in the Sector 
26 
4. 
Gender responsiveness, expertise, and gender equality in the partner organisation 
35 
5. 
Gender responsiveness and expertise in the project/ among project staff in the country 
36 
6. 
Gender gaps and recommendations to integrate them into the GCF programme 
37 
7. 
Measures for a gender responsive/transformative project design 
49 
8. 
List of References 
52 
9. 
Annex 1: List of consulted stakeholders 
55 
10. 
Annex 2: Transcripts of stakeholder interviews 
56

=== PAGE 175 ===
3 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
ADB 
 
 
 
Asian Development Bank 
ADWLE  
 
 
Association for Development of Women and Legal Education 
ASEAN  
 
 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
CBD 
 
 
 
Convention on Biological Diversity 
CEDAW 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
DAFO 
 
 
 
District Agriculture and Forestry Office 
DLWU  
 
 
District Lao Women´s Union 
DoF 
 
 
 
Department of Forestry 
ER Program 
 
 
Emission Reduction Program 
FAO 
 
 
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FLEG(T)  
 
 
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (and Trade) 
 
FLR 
 
 
 
Forest and Landscape Restoration 
GAP 
 
 
 
Gender Action Plan 
GCF 
 
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
GFP 
 
 
 
Gender Focal Point 
GIZ 
 
 
 
German Development Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft  
 
 
 
 
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH 
 
Lao PDR  
 
 
Lao People´s Democratic Republic 
LDC 
 
 
 
Least Developed Country 
LWU 
 
 
 
Lao Women´s Union 
MAF 
 
 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
MoU 
 
 
 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MRV 
 
 
 
Measurement, Reporting, and Verification 
NCAWMC 
National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Mothers and Chil-
dren 
NPA 
Non-Profit Organization 
NSAW 
National Strategy for the Advancement of Women 
NSEDP  
 
 
National Socio-Economic Development Plan 
NTFPs 
 
 
 
Non-Timber Forest Products 
PAFO 
 
 
 
Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office 
PLWU 
 
 
 
Provincial Lao Women`s Union 
PRAP 
 
 
 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plans 
REDD+ 
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and the role 
of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of 
forest carbon stocks in developing countries 
RECOFTC 
The Center for People and Forests 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SFM 
 
 
 
Sustainable Forest Management 
Sub-CAW 
Ministry-based (sub-)Committee for the Advancement of Women 
VPA 
 
 
 
Voluntary Partnership Agreement

=== PAGE 176 ===
4 
 
1. 
Introduction 
Lao PDR is a landlocked, Least Developed Country (LLDC) with dwindling forest cover, from 70% in the 1960s to 
58% in 2015. Forests are not only an important sector for Laos´ national economy, but are also central to the 
income, nutrition and livelihoods of its people. Especially the poor rural population is strongly dependent on the 
natural resources derived from land and forests. Forest degradation and deforestation therefore pose a signifi-
cant risk to the livelihoods of a majority of the Lao population. Women, the poor, and geographically remote 
communities are typically most vulnerable to these changes due to their limited adaptation capacities and limited 
access to alternative means of securing their livelihoods. 
The core national strategies (9th Socio-Economic Development Plan, Central Party´s Resolution on Land, Forestry 
Strategy 2035, Lao PDR´s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change 2021) acknowledge the importance of Laos´ forest resources and their sustainable man-
agement as an integral component of rural livelihood support and improvement. The latest NDC and draft climate 
strategy (2021) aim to strengthen linkages between climate change mitigation and action within the agriculture 
and forestry sectors. The National REDD+ Strategy and National REDD+ Vision to 2030 build on these national 
policies and emphasize the importance of all stakeholders, including households, communities, Government and 
private sector, to be an active contributor to reducing deforestation and degradation, and to promote forest 
restoration and reforestation. 
Overview of the overarching programme 
This project is embedded in the overarching programme ‘Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions 
Programme through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape management’ (Funding Proposal 
(FP) 117), which was approved by the Green Climate Fun (GCF) Board at its 24th board meeting (B.24) in 2019.1 
The objective of the overarching programme is to support the Government and people of Lao PDR transition to 
sustainable and climate resilient management of forests and landscapes at scale. This will reduce approximately 
11.7 million tCO2eq and directly increase the resilience of more than 273,700 villagers over the 7-year implemen-
tation period of Projects 1 and 2. The programme contributes to the successful implementation of the Lao PDR 
Emissions Reduction Programme (ER-Programme) under the FCPF in the aforementioned six provinces covered 
by the ER-PD.   
Initially, FP117 was conceptualized as a pure mitigation single project which had to be reframed as a programme, 
with 3 Sub-Projects due to a limitation in available GCF funds at the time of board approval. FP1172 explicitly 
outlined a programmatic approach with Project 13 covering 3 out of 6 provinces of the Lao ER-Programme (Houa-
phan, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri), and the subsequent Sub-Projects 2 and 3 (hereafter Project 2) to expand 
the programme intervention area the all 6 provinces covered by the ER-Programme to fully reach the envisioned 
transformational change of forest and land management in the uplands of the Lao PDR.4 
Project 1 (FP117) laid the ground for the transformational change in the project area, including supporting policy 
mainstreaming, strengthening the regulatory framework, and implementing and improving the MRV system, 
among others. It also supported interventions on the ground in 3 provinces, namely: Houaphan, Sayabouri and 
Luang Prabang. However, to fully reach the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate resilient forest and 
land use practices outlined in the programmatic approach within FP 117, additional support is needed.   
of Lao PDR transition to sustainable and climate resilient management of forests and landscapes at scale. Project 
2 is comprised of three components (see Figure 1 below):5  
 
1 “The programme consists of 3 projects: Project 1 (mid-2020 to mid-2024) addresses the three provinces of Houaphan, Sayabouri and Luang 
Prabang, which contain the highest rates of deforestation and forest degradation within the programme area; Project 2 (mid-2024 to end-
2029) scales-up the number of participating communities in the same geographical area; and Project 3 (2022 to end-2029) extends the geo-
graphical reach of the programme to the 3 additional provinces of Luang Namtha, Bokeo and Oudomxay.” (GCF FP 117, page 3). 
2 The full proposal is available on the GCF website: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp117.  
3 Project 1 which was approved under FP 117 reached effectiveness on 19th May 2020. Since then, the Project has made significant progress. 
More details on the specific progress can be found under the Annual Performance Report (APR) in FP Annex 18. 
4 The following excerpt is from FP 117’s Programme-level Executive Summary: “This Funding Proposal presents a stand-alone GCF project 
(Project 1) for Board approval. Two subsequent stand-alone projects, embedded in the same programmatic context and theory of change as 
this project, will be submitted at a future date for Board approval. Board approval for the project presented in this Funding Proposal is wholly 
separate from, and does not pre-judge, Board approval for future related projects.” 
5 Note: Project 1 used the term ‘outputs’ instead of components. In order to ensure alignment with the GCF Integrated Results Manage-
ment Framework (IRMF) and new Funding Proposal Template, the term ‘component’ is applied under Project 2. Outputs under GCF’s IRMF

=== PAGE 177 ===
5 
 
▪ 
Component 1 addresses barriers at the national and sub-national levels, including measures that aim to 
scale-up climate-informed participatory land use planning, strengthen land tenure security, improve forest 
law enforcement and monitoring, and scale-up and ensure access to sustainable financing for the AFOLU 
sector.  
▪ 
Component 2 builds on the enabling environment (Component 1), and addresses key drivers of deforesta-
tion and degradation within the agricultural sector. It delivers emission reductions at scale through reducing 
the expansion of agricultural activities into forested landscapes, and promotes climate resilient agricultural 
practices that increase the resilience of local farmers and agri-ecosystems. 
▪ 
Component 3 builds on the enabling environment (Component 1),6 and will reduce emissions and strengthen 
the resilience of local livelihoods and forest ecosystems through sustainable forest landscape management 
and the promotion of Forest Landscape Restoration (FLR), with a focus on village and conservation forests.7  
 
Figure 1. Overview of project 2 components and activities 
 
Project 2 is complementary and additional to Project 1. Together both projects will facilitate a paradigm shift in 
the forestry and land use sector in Lao PDR that will be sustained by unlocking additional sources of results-based 
payments, as well as public and private finance managed through national funds and institutions with strength-
ened capacities for mobilizing and channelling climate finance. Project 2 has been revised and re-designed as a 
cross-cutting intervention, strengthening synergies between REDD+ and activities that build the resilience of 
ecosystems and local rural livelihoods, in full alignment with Lao PDR’s latest Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2021) and the country’s draft Climate 
Change Strategy (2021). It will scale up investments in climate-resilient and deforestation-free agriculture and 
forestry practices across six provinces, building on the strengthened regulatory framework and utilizing the tools 
and guidelines developed under Project 1.  
 
 
 
are “Changes delivered as a result of project/programme activities that contribute to the achievement of outcomes.” – GCF. 2022. Guidance 
Note to support the completion of the IRMF elements of the revised funding proposal template for PAP and SAP, p. ii. 
6 Specifically, Activities under Output 3 that are subject to Output 1 deliverables are: 
For Activity 3.1: Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAG) must be in place after Village Forest Management (VFM) planning is concluded, 
to provide funds for the implementation of annual plans; Land use planning and improved tenure security – Land Use Plans have to be in 
place as a precondition for VFM, ensuring full compliance with the project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP, in FP Annex 
6b), Ethnic Group Development Plan (FP Annex 6d) and Gender Action Plan (FP Annex 8b). Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is required, 
where the procedures are outlined in detail within Chapter B.3 of the Funding Proposal, and within the ESMP located in FP Annex 6b. 
For Activity 3.2: Identification of existing and/or establishment of new VFAGs to channel climate finance to target villages – VFAGs must be 
in place after National Protected Area (NPA) management planning is concluded, to provide funds for the implementation of annual plans. 
Again full compliance with the ESMP and FPIC procedures are required.  
7 Conservation forests will focus on 5 national protected areas (NPAs) and 1 national park within the project area.

=== PAGE 178 ===
6 
 
 
With approximately 273,700 direct beneficiaries  (136,850 women and 136,850 men) from at least 23 different 
ethnic groups, and an additional 723,372 indirect beneficiaries (361,691 women and 361,691 men), the ER Pro-
gram aims to mainstream gender and ethnic sensitivity throughout all planned measures. 
Project 2 will be overseen by GIZ’s Headquarters in their role as a GCF Accredited Entity, and implemented by 
GIZ Lao PDR and the Lao PDR Environmental Protection Fund (EPF). It includes co-financing from the Government 
of Lao PDR, BMZ, ADB, IFAD, World Bank and KfW. 
Overview of Gender Assessment 
This document comprises the Gender Assessment for Project 2. In order to guarantee a gender-sensitive ap-
proach and implementation of Project 2 and to meet the standard requirements of the GCF and GIZ, this gender 
assessment provides recommendations for the funding proposal for the ”Scaling up the Implementation of the 
Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape manage-
ment” (Project 2), funded by GCF.   
Although by no means exhaustive, this gender analysis attempts to provide both a general and sectoral overview 
on the state of gender equality in Laos, covering direct and indirect factors which can impact the implementation 
of the program.  
1.1. 
GCF and GIZ Guidelines for the Promotion of Gender Equality 
According to the GCF’s Gender Policy, proposed projects or programmes submitted to the Fund are required to 
be aligned with national policies and priorities on gender and with the Fund’s gender policy8. This includes a 
mandatory socio-economic and gender assessment, complementary to the environmental and social safeguards 
(ESS) process. 
The main goal of this assessment is therefore to determine how the project can respond to the needs of women 
and men in view of the addressed forest degradation and deforestation, and the proposed measures.  
 
Gender dynamics and related drivers of change will be identified to achieve the project goals in a sustainable 
manner and will be reflected in the proposed activities. The assessment is required to include stakeholder con-
sultations. 
Additionally, implementation budgets will be provided alongside realistic indicators at output, outcome and im-
pact levels.  
 
In line with the above-mentioned GCF Gender Policy, GIZ’s Safeguards and Gender Management System and 
Gender Strategy9 require that a gender analysis is conducted at an early stage of the preparation phase of a 
project in order to identify potentials for promoting gender equality and risks that need to be avoided, or at least 
mitigated, through specific measures. 
The results and recommendations of this analysis are directly taken into account for the objective, indicators, 
the methodological approach and the results monitoring system of the project.  
 
The assessment will conclude with gender-responsive strategies and measures with tangible benefits to women, 
and a concrete gender action plan (GAP) for addressing gender gaps and maximizing benefits and women’s em-
powerment in the forest and landscapes sector in the accounting area. 
1.2. 
Methodology 
This gender analysis is an update of the gender analysis conducted for the GCF Programme “Implementation of 
the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through improved governance and sustainable forest landscape man-
agement” (FP117), approved by the GCF Board in 2019. It is a fit-for-purpose assessment, which has been revised 
 
8 Green Climate Fund 2019 
9 GIZ 2019

=== PAGE 179 ===
7 
 
to focus on Project 2. It ensures the assessment reflects the revised project components and activities, and the 
extended project area within Project 2. The Gender Assessment has been informed by GCF guidance (including 
the gender analysis/action plan templates and guiding questions) as well as the GCF Gender policy and the avail-
able GIZ guidance for gender analyses.  
The updated Gender Assessment has been elaborated in three phases:  
1. A desk review of the original gender analysis and adjustment to changes in relevant national policies, 
legal and regulatory frameworks, and pre-existing assessments in the sector. 
2. Consultations with relevant local government authorities and villagers in three villages in three of the 
target Provinces (Sayabouri, Luang Prabang and Oudomxay), and consultations with civil society organ-
izations (CSOs), including women’s organizations (see Chapter 8 for more detailed information)   
3. Further research and finalization of the updated gender analysis and GAP.  
 
Overall, the availability of recent data and information on gender in the forest sector is limited in Lao PDR, and 
data collection and analysis usually take place in the framework of larger and more generic country assessments 
of donors and census data collection.  
 
Feedback from the consultations, including comments and recommendations from both consultation rounds 
(Project 1 and 2) have been integrated throughout the document. The findings and observations are crucial to 
the planning, implementation and monitoring of the planned project. In actively integrating gender-sensitive and 
gender-responsive measures throughout the project activities, the project can not only prevent the continuation 
of traditional gender stereotypes, but can also contribute significantly to improving gender equality and equity 
in the target areas. This will largely add to the positive impact the project can have.

=== PAGE 180 ===
8 
 
2. 
Information on gender dimensions in Lao PDR 
Laos currently ranks 113th on the Gender Inequality Index (rank 137 on general Human Development Index; as 
of 2019). Major negative contributors to that ranking are the maternal mortality ratio, the adolescent birth rate 
and the low female proportion of people with at least some secondary education. Positively influencing contrib-
utors are the proportionally high share of female parliamentarians and the high female labor force participation 
rate10. 
2.1. 
The Meta Level: Norms and Traditional Roles of Women and Men in Laos 
Despite a strong legal framework stating and promoting the equality of Lao women and men, the influence of 
gender norms and traditional roles is still seen as one of the major obstacles in achieving factual gender equality 
in Laos. This becomes most visible in decision-making positions throughout all sectors, as well as at the commu-
nity level where women continue to struggle to participate on equal terms and in equal numbers.  
 
Gender equality is additionally influenced by ethnic background in Laos. The Lao-Tai group represents 67% of 
Lao PDR`s population, along with three major non-Lao-Tai ethno-linguistic groups, namely the Mon-Khmer (21%), 
the Hmong-Lu Mien (8%) and the Chinese-Tibetan (3%). These groups further splinter into 49 distinct ethnicities 
and 
200 
ethnic 
sub-groups.   
Many traditional norms within Lao-Tai cultures are favorable with regard to gender equality: women are often 
financial decision-makers, inherit land and property more often, and have gained equal access to education. The 
other three ethno-linguistic groups mostly have stronger patriarchal traditions and norms, limiting women´s ac-
cess to decision-making, property and education11. 
 
Violence against women is, however, a reality for women from all ethnic backgrounds in Laos. Research indicates 
that around 20% of Lao women have been physically and/or sexually abused by a partner or non-partner, and at 
least 35% of women live in circumstances of emotional violence, with both figures estimated to be much higher 
since most cases go unreported. Perhaps more jarringly, the majority of women and almost half of all men in 
Laos believe violence is justified if a woman does not adhere to traditional gender norms and roles, such as 
leaving the house without permission or burning the food12. This indicates that problems are both in enforce-
ment and broader issues of tradition and culture that cannot be fixed in the short-term13. Village Mediation Units 
are the first micro institution to deal with cases of domestic violence and often smooth over cases for the sake 
of village unity and the rewarded status of “case-free village” (no referrals to district courts). Traditional gender 
roles directly influence the village-based justice system, in addition to women´s generally weaker access to jus-
tice outside the village structures due to illiteracy, lack of Lao language skills and legal knowledge, and lack of 
means and permission to travel. 
Lao PDR has one of the highest rates of early marriage in the region as part of traditional practices, including 
“bride kidnappings” and child marriages. One-third of women marry before age 18, while one-tenth marry before 
age 15. Early marriage is often associated with early pregnancy. In 2012, 19.4 percent of reproductive-age 
women had given birth by age 18, while 3.6 percent had done so by age 15. Both early marriage and adolescent 
birth have a negative impact on the education and livelihood opportunities of women14. 
 
The impact of these factors on a programme cannot be underestimated. It affects women´s participation, their 
confidence to speak up and voice opposing opinions, and their willingness and capacity to participate in village 
management tasks. Many rural women themselves also think that women are generally not capable of decision-
making due to lack of education and perceived lack of inherent leadership qualities, a viewpoint that was ex-
pressed in two out of three village interviews during the assessment mission. The third village had higher income 
rates for the women and a culture of women being part of decision-making. The latter is the more decisive factor, 
 
10 Gender Inequality Index 
11 King & van de Walle 2007 
12 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
13 Open Development Laos 2018: SDG 5 Gender Equality 
 
14 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018

=== PAGE 181 ===
9 
 
since another village also claimed that women earn more than men, but there it did not lead to higher participa-
tion rates of women.  
Implications for the planned GCF project 
In addition to avoiding the continuation of existing gender stereotypes and norms which are of disadvantage to 
Lao women, the planned GCF project has a significant potential to contribute positively to gender equality. In-
clusive awareness-raising measures targeting women as carriers of traditional knowledge and change agents 
within their families have great outreach, especially when presented in different ethnic languages, and tailored 
to lower education levels.  
Since one of the GCF project’s central approaches will be to promote more sustainable production methods and 
value chains, and therefore new /alternative and more diversified income structures for communities, it is im-
portant to minimize financial risks for participating families. Research indicates that financial and work-related 
problems increase the likelihood of domestic violence, especially in families where women have lower educa-
tional levels and lower incomes in comparison to their husbands15. Where forestry regulations affect family busi-
nesses, or communities are supported to change traditional ways of living and earning, it can be assumed that 
women are at a higher risk of domestic violence. Economically empowering women at local levels can lead to an 
improvement of their situation but can also bear certain risks that need to be considered. As another instance, 
a study on public work programme in Lao PDR found that “the program was successful in increasing female 
income, but it did not change women’s experience of gender-based violence”.  
The GCF project could therefore contribute to a prevention of violence against women through the formulation 
of gender-sensitive and -responsive prevention strategies, aiming at women´s skill development and empower-
ment, and men´s change of attitudes towards gender equality. The project needs to carefully consider local con-
texts, traditions and gendered roles when designing the interventions. In the context of activities implemented 
under Project 2, coping strategies to address the risk of gender-based violence could include:16 
▪ 
Mainstream gender sensitization throughout all project activities 
▪ 
Provide women with access to information to become aware of their legal rights under national and inter-
national laws in the context of capacity building activities 
▪ 
Engage men and boys to promote non-violence and gender equity. This may include community-based train-
ing on gender equality and how to respond to GBV, particularly for local leaders, men of all ages, including 
gatekeepers. 
▪ 
Promote gender equality and challenge traditional gender norms in the context of participatory activities 
promoted by the project.  
▪ 
Develop and provide training on Gender and countering Gender-based violence (GBV) 
▪ 
Elaboration of Code of Conducts for the implementation of project activities 
▪ 
Integrated GBV indicators in project monitoring and the grievance redress mechanism 
 
Whenever possible, any form of awareness-raising, village consultation, training or dissemination meeting should 
proactively involve components of empowerment for village women. This includes separate meetings between 
men, women and village authorities to create safe spaces for everyone to share, trainings for concerned staff on 
inclusive facilitation, sending staff who speak ethnic languages or providing budget to hire translators, and de-
signing any concrete activities with the specific social conditions of a village in mind.  
 
The project’s Grievance redress Mechanism (GRM) has been designed to enable equal access to men and women. 
The GRM is introduced to the project’s stakeholder during the introduction of FPIC 2,in which approximately half 
of the village population is participating (out of which 44% are female). Further measures have been taken to 
ensure that women and other vulnerable groups have access to the GRM. These include posters to visualize the 
different GRM mechanisms and approaches to address language barriers, as mostly women and ethnic groups 
that do not speak local languages only or are affected by illiteracy. See the description of the project’s GRM in 
the ESIA Chapter 7.5 for more information on the GRM mechanism.  
 
 
15 NCAW 2015 
16 Adapted from National Commission for the Advancement of Women, Lao PDR (2015): Summary report. A study on violence against 
women in Lao PDR. Lao National survey on Women’s health and life experiences 2014. Available online: https://data.opendevelopmentme-
kong.net/dataset/9572bc34-8279-4070-b532-a529c6a3fe22/resource/1dceb372-4607-4b33-be81-764b0742e1d9/download/a-study-on-
violence-against-women-in-lao-pdr.pdf

=== PAGE 182 ===
10 
 
2.2. 
Macro Level: International and Regional Commitments & National 
Legislation and Policies 
At the international level, Laos is a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women (CEDAW). A Capacity Assessment on CEDAW implementation in Laos conducted by the Associa-
tion for Development of Women and Legal Education (ADWLE) concluded that, despite having a very advanced 
legal framework for gender equality, there is only very limited implementation of these laws due to lack of ca-
pacities, knowledge and budget17 - basically, the exact same situation as in the forestry sector, with strategic 
frameworks but a lack of capacities to implement them properly.  
 
Besides that, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are having a strong overall influence on Lao strategies 
and policies, including SDG 5 which is aiming to achieve gender equality and empower women and girls. The 
elevated relevance of the SDGs for the Lao PDR is connected to the country´s efforts to graduate from Least-
Developed Country status. Even though the original goal to graduate in 2020 cannot be reached anymore, the 
Government is determined to further push towards it. Efforts to promote women´s economic integration and 
opportunities will directly contribute to graduating from LDC status18.  
 
At the regional level, several ASEAN declarations lay the foundations for gender mainstreaming in the region. 
The Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the ASEAN Region19 was signed in 1988 and focuses mainly 
on the promotion and implementation of equitable and effective participation in all fields and at all levels. Even 
though the declaration mentions the political, social and cultural sphere, the emphasis is on women´s economic 
participation. 
The social dimension was added consecutively in later declarations, namely with the ASEAN Declaration Against 
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (2004); the Ha Noi Declaration on the Enhancement of 
Welfare and Development of ASEAN Women and Children (2010); the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration; the 
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women and Elimination of Violence against Children in ASEAN 
(2013); and other relevant declarations, especially on social protection.  
A further important step towards integration of gender aspects was the ASEAN Declaration on Gender-Respon-
sive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and Sustainable Development Goals in 2017. The 
Declaration provides unusually detailed guidance on the improvement of gender-responsive data collection and 
analysis, and policy review, emphasizes the necessity to end violence against women (including making men and 
boys engaged agents of change efforts), and encourages cooperation with women´s groups and organizations 
for improved gender-responsive implementation20. 
  
Lao PDR has a strong legal framework for promoting gender equality. The revised Constitution of 2003 and other 
laws explicitly state that women and men have equal rights in all spheres - political, social, cultural and in the 
family. Women’s equal rights are also stipulated in the Family, Land and Property Laws; the Labor Law; the Elec-
toral Law; and the Penal Law. The Law on the Development and Protection of Women (2004) is the most specific 
Lao legislation with regard to equal rights and access for women, and provided the framework for several later 
laws defining women´s rights, and served also as a basis to form the National Commission for the Advancement 
of Women and Mother-Child. 
 
Some sources claim that women’s land tenure rights have been weakened by the revised Land Law (2019) as a 
paragraph on dual names (wife and husband) on land titles has been removed from the law.21 Yet, by law women 
and men enjoy equal access to agricultural and forest land but customary practices tend to override these. Com-
munal or village ownership of land is recognized by the Land Law (2019) and is a common form of land ownership 
in Laos. How a village manages its communal ownership strongly depends on the ethnic group’s customs. In the 
matrilineal Lao-Tai (Tai-Kadai language group) villages, inheritance customs follow the female lineage. Daughters 
and sons are allowed to inherit their agricultural lands, with the decision being left up to the parents. Among 
most ethnic minority groups, such as the Hmong-Mien and the Khmou (Mon-Khmer), the pattern of agricultural 
 
17 Compare ADWLE 2016 
18 UNDP 2017 
19 ASEAN 1988 
20 ASEAN Declaration on Gender-Responsive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and Sustainable Development Goals in 
2017 
21 LIWG 2020, Women and Land Rights in Lao PDR: Rural Transformation and a dream of secure tenure. Available online: 
https://data.opendevelopmentmekong.net/en/dataset/550ba9aa-79aa-4f80-ba41-8af35d322e6f/resource/22030fa3-66b7-4e9b-8f4e-
fd44dd16aca4/download/women-and-land-right_29jan_eng.pdf

=== PAGE 183 ===
11 
 
land ownership is patrilineal. The family name and property are transmitted from father to son.22  However, 
irrespective of matrilineal or patrilineal heritage systems, women generally have experienced a loss of access to 
land due to economic developments in the country. This includes policies promoting monoculture farming and 
transfer of land to investors, reducing traditional subsistence agriculture and leading to food insecurity and a de-
feminization of agriculture.23   
Implications for the planned GCF programme 
The legal foundation for the promotion of gender mainstreaming into policies and regulations is strong, and has 
been further facilitated through targeted activities under Project 1. Laos has an elevated interest in adhering to 
international agreements relevant to gender mainstreaming. The ASEAN Declarations relevant to gender provide 
regional entry points, and the national framework to integrate gender into policies and strategies at all levels is 
broad and strong. Unfortunately, this strength might at the same time constitute a barrier for effective integra-
tion of gender into sector-specific legislation, including in the forestry sector: as mentioned also by interviewed 
Government staff, integration is not perceived as relevant because overarching legislation is seen as sufficient to 
inform the interpretation of sector-specific laws such as the Forestry Law. 
 
Project 2 can promote gender equality in its efforts on law enforcement and capacity development. Guidelines 
developed by the project for adaptation mainstreaming, land use planning, agricultural investment planning and 
village forest management should also be formulated in a gender-responsive manner, and include targeted 
measures to empower and benefit women, in addition to ensuring gender-responsive monitoring.  In adherence 
with the ASEAN declaration to engage with women´s organizations to improve policy analysis24, a Lao-based CSO 
such as ADWLE can assist with gender-proofing any planned intervention in this area. To develop capacity of the 
relevant Government agency, the Gender Focal Points/Sub-CAW within the MAF (national and Provincial level) 
should also be involved in these processes as much as possible (more under 5.3). 
2.3. 
Meso Level: Institutions and Non-Governmental Organizations 
The National Commission for the Advancement of Women and Mother-Child (NCAWMC) is responsible for for-
mulating and implementing the national policy for the advancement of women, as well as for mainstreaming 
gender aspects in all sectors. NCAWMC’s capacity and institutional support remains limited despite donor sup-
port for capacity development.  
 
The NCAWMC is also responsible for formulating the National Strategy for the Advancement of Women (NSAW), 
which is renewed every five years and seeks to promote and enhance equality between men and women in Laos 
in all spheres. The inclusion of the strategy’s goals in other strategies and plans, including the National Socio-
Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), is advancing well, but it often lacks implementation power and funded 
mandates25.  
 
The lead Government agency in the forest sector, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), was the first 
ministry to create a Division for the Advancement of Women (“Sub-CAW”), and a ministry-internal Gender Net-
work with focal points in each department.  
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) supported this development significantly between 2006-2008. The final re-
port of this programme (“Capacity Building for Gender Mainstreaming in Agriculture and Forestry in Lao PDR”) 
concludes that while MAF´s commitment to gender mainstreaming and to the established structures is very high, 
the gender division remains understaffed and therefore with low absorption capacity26. Interviews with two Pro-
vincial and District Agriculture and Forestry Offices mirrored these capacity gaps. If there was a Gender Focal 
Point (GFP) appointed in the office, the concerned staff member was not invited to the interviews because the 
 
22 Lao Women’s Union, 2018. Gender Profile, Lao PDR 
23 LIWG 2020, Women and Land Rights in Lao PDR: Rural Transformation and a dream of secure tenure. Available online: 
https://data.opendevelopmentmekong.net/en/dataset/550ba9aa-79aa-4f80-ba41-8af35d322e6f/resource/22030fa3-66b7-4e9b-8f4e-
fd44dd16aca4/download/women-and-land-right_29jan_eng.pdf 
24 Ibid, page 3 of the Declaration 
25 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
26 Asian Development Bank 2008

=== PAGE 184 ===
12 
 
senior staff did not consider her knowledgeable enough to be of value for the meeting, which they considered 
to be of a rather technical nature.  
 
On the strategic side, the MAF developed a Strategy for Gender Equality in the Agriculture and the Forestry 
Sector (2016–2025) and Vision 203027 that aim for men and women of all ethnic groups to have equal access to 
natural resources, agricultural land, shelter, development funds and technical support. Vision 2030 additionally 
states that women should hold at least 30% of leadership positions.  
 
The constitutional mandate to protect women’s rights and interests is traditionally with the Lao Women’s Union 
(LWU; Article 7 of Constitution). The LWU has representation in every village, with one member of the LWU 
representing women in each village council. Through its extensive networks, the LWU has been able to bring 
women’s voices into public administration at all levels — often providing the only female voice at the table28. 
The LWU also has its own policy research center (Gender Resource Information and Development Center, Vien-
tiane), which has undertaken research tasks on issues such as violence against women and gender budgeting on 
behalf of donors29. Development partners will almost automatically work with members of the LWU and should 
capitalize on its vast access to, and understanding of, Lao women as much as possible.  
 
The Lao Front for National Construction oversees and coordinates all Lao mass organizations and is responsible 
for overall social mobilization and the inclusion of ethnic groups in national development. At the local level, the 
interviewed villages shared the view that the Lao Front is a key player in organizing activities related to forest 
protection and resource management. 
 
There is a diverse range of civil society organizations (CSOs) in Laos active in areas of particular relevance to 
gender equality, including women’s rights and development, child protection, support of people with disabilities, 
environment, education and health. CSOs in Laos are, however, usually not actively invited by the Lao Govern-
ment to participate in policy dialogue at any stage. Most CSOs are therefore implementers at the local level but 
have limited opportunities to feed their implementation experiences into policy processes30.  
Organizations, Non-Profit Associations and NGOs which are active in the nexus of forestry and gender in Laos 
are31: 
 
- 
RECOFTC - The Center for People and Forests 
- 
Green Community Alliance (GCA) 
- 
Green Community Development Association (GCDA) 
- 
Love Natural Resources Association (LNRA) 
- 
Maeying Huamjai Phattana (MHP) 
 
Organizations which are not directly active in the forestry sector but are valuable partners with in-depth gender 
expertise are: 
 
- 
Gender Development Association (GDA; gender, law, community development, education) 
- 
Participatory Development Training Center (PADETC; participatory community development) 
Association for Development of Women and Legal Education (ADWLE; law, gender) 
RECOFTC appears to have the strongest ties to the Department of Forestry (DoF/MAF). A joint national consul-
tation workshop in October 2018 with the DoF, other Government partners, CSOs and private sector represent-
atives focused solely on the identification of potential inputs to promote gender equality in the Lao forestry 
sector32. Another workshop was held in 2021 on building gender inclusion in forestry together with DoF, which 
war part of a series of workshops that RECOFTC organized through the Weaving Leadership for Gender Equality 
initiative, known as WAVES.33 MAF´s Strategic Plan to restore forest cover to 70% of the country´s terrain until 
2020 includes the goal of having at least 30% of all Government positions in conservation work held by women34 
- a goal strongly promoted by RECOFTC. The close collaboration leads to the assumption that RECOFTC has valu-
able and valued cooperation experience with the DoF which can be utilized by other programs.  
 
27  Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 2015 
28 World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012 
29 ADB 2011 
30 ADB 2011 
31 Compare Lao CSO Directory 2017 
32 RECOFTC November 2018 
33 RECOFT October 2021 
34 RECOFTC October 2018

=== PAGE 185 ===
13 
 
Implications for the planned GCF project 
Based on the existing institutional structures and strategies, the planned GCF project has strong leverage to link 
up with MAF – particularly the DoF – for institutional support to promote female leadership and participation in 
stakeholder processes from the national to the local level. The political commitment seems currently particularly 
high and should be capitalized on. The approach should be two-fold: utilizing the existing gender structures 
(GFPs, MAF´s Sub-CAW, LWU on all levels) while at the same time actively involving senior and technical staff to 
foster a Government culture where gender is increasingly mainstreamed.  
Capacity development is necessary for all stakeholders, since only very few Government staff possess in-depth 
knowledge on gender and REDD+ at the same time. The efforts which have already been put into mainstreaming 
gender into forestry activities also need to become more prominent and shared as best practice35. The planned 
GCF project can support the REDD desk to compile these practices and to disseminate them to other line agen-
cies, departments, Provincial and District agencies, and LWU. The interviewed Provincial and District LWU offices 
demonstrated high commitment towards supporting the planned GCF project but admitted that they need more 
technical expertise to be of meaningful assistance, and budget to contribute responsibly and by their own means. 
A technical training for all concerned Provincial and District LWU, P/DAFO, P/DOFI (Forest Inspection) on gender 
and social inclusion in climate-resilient and deforestation agriculture and forest management is recommended 
to mainstream efforts and align the local implementers and decision-makers. 
 
Project 1 involved the LWU as a key actor in its FPIC process and other participatory activities at village levels. 
The cooperation will be continued under Project 2. Moreover, District Agriculture and Forestry Office (DAFO) 
staff was trained on participatory approaches such as the establishment of Village Forest and Agriculture Grant 
(VFAG) committees and village forest management.  
 
Project 2 will need to ensure that the acquired knowledge from Project 1 and other initiatives is utilized. Under 
project 1 implementation, gender aspects have been integrated into Standard Operating Procedures, guidelines, 
manuals and work plans, and monitored the status of implementation. The activities will be continued under 
Project 2. Trainings and gender-sensitive guidelines alone will likely not be sufficient to ensure effective imple-
mentation. High-level, regular meetings, such as programme steering committee meetings, should make it a 
requirement to report on gender aspects and related implementation efforts.  
2.4. 
Micro Level: Gender Equality among the Target Group 
This section briefly examines the gender equality situation in the areas of political participation, decision-making 
and leadership, education and economic participation.  
Political participation: Decision-making and leadership 
With 27.5% female Members of Parliament, Laos is well above global average (22.5%). However, women in de-
cision-making positions in the district, provincial and national Government agencies constitute only 5% (as of 
2012). The highest proportion of women in the Government can be found in the legislative branches at the na-
tional level (more than a quarter)36; the lowest proportion of women beyond administrative support roles can 
be found at the Provincial and District level. This is likely tied to the factors explained in the sections on education 
and health.  
 
Within the potential partners of the planned GCF project, representation seems to vary between different min-
istries and departments, but generally the project also faces a lower representation of female leadership 
throughout its activities. Forestry at the community level is highly “female” on the user side, with women col-
lecting non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and making up a significant proportion of the small business work-
force in the forest and timber sector.  
The interviewed village women and men stated that women spend usually more time in the forests and have a 
more detailed knowledge of the status of the forest resources. The interviewed Government partners added that 
 
35 RECOFTC November 2018 
36 The United Nations in Lao PDR 2015

=== PAGE 186 ===
14 
 
village women additionally also showed more intrinsic interest in protecting the surrounding forests. At the same 
time, none of the interviewed villages included women in the village forest management committee or any other 
existing form of decision-making over forest resources.  
Accordingly, the lack of women´s representation at any decision-making level often results in a lack of consider-
ation of women´s needs and potentials in in the forestry sector.  
 
The land sector shows similar dynamics: whereas women and men have the same legal rights to land, women´s 
factual land tenure is still less secure than men´s. Women are also often not actively included in decision-making 
steps of land use planning (LUP). The subsequent forest management plan (if developed) is then seen as an even 
further specialized step which women perceive having even less access to. The provided reasons in the village 
interviews were lack of education, lack of technical knowledge and lack of confidence to participate in manage-
ment decisions. Traditional gender norms of many ethnic groups further contribute to these dynamics.  
Education 
The gender equality gap has narrowed at all three levels of education enrolment in Laos, but challenges persist 
in completing education.  
Two key determinants drive the patterns of gender inequity in education: First, girls are more likely to be kept at 
home due to safety concerns and household responsibilities, especially if the secondary school is far from home. 
Second, parents do not place the same value on education for girls as they do for boys, especially if this view is 
part of their cultural tradition, or if the parents are poor, or have little or no education, especially the mother37. 
 
The widest gap in gender equality is found among children from rural areas without road access, children from 
the non Lao-Tai groups, children of uneducated mothers and children of families in the poorest quintiles. This 
gap is much larger in secondary education: for example, in the appropriate age group of the poorest quintiles, 
66 girls attend secondary school for every 100 boys.38 
 
The majority of interviewed village women had no or very low education. This lack of education was named - by 
men and women alike - as the main reason for the absence of women in village decision-making committees and 
groups in general, and particularly with regard to the villages´ forestry.  
Economic participation 
An equal share of men and women make up the working population (77% each, as of 201539), but women gen-
erally occupy the lower rungs of the labor market. Women are relatively more excluded from formal sectors and 
the social protection that this entails. Some 64 percent of workers in the elementary occupations and 63 percent 
of those classified as service, shop and market sales workers are women. On the other hand, men account for 
the majority of civil servants, professionals, technicians and other sectors.  
The partners of the planned GCF project reflect these proportions. As mentioned above, the Government has 
already set a 30% goal of having women hold positions in the conservations sector, but implementation lags 
behind.  
 
Although women have significant roles in agriculture and forestry, they have less access to, and control of, farm-
ing and forestry-based inputs and outputs.40 The village interviews showed the same tendency: the village 
women all stated that the key decisions on land and forest are usually taken by their husbands and the village 
authorities.  
Experience from other sectors, such as fisheries, shows that women’s multiple roles in traditional, complex and 
lengthy value chains tend to diminish when value chains are modernised. This may also be true for the forestry 
sector, but the lack of data does not allow us a clearer picture.  
Women’s rights to forest and tree products tend to be restricted to products that are not profitable or have little 
commercial benefits41.  
 
37 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018 
38 Ibid. 
39 Human Development Index 2018 
40 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018 
41 Climate Investment Funds 2017

=== PAGE 187 ===
15 
 
Gender, wages and financial resources 
The share of women in wage employment is low in all sectors, at 35 percent. Instead, among the unpaid workers 
for the family, about 70% percent were women in 2015, but only 32% are identified as “own account workers” – 
which suggests that women are less likely engaged in productive work with income they control . This reality was 
mirrored in the interviewed villages: women and men agreed that women work longer hours in a day while men 
do less and/or focus more on physically-demanding tasks. Accordingly, men produce more tangible results and 
have more time available for management-related tasks. In the visited Akha village in Luang Namtha, the village 
authorities noted that the village women earned more money than their men but had no role in the village deci-
sion-making. Several women stated that they would strongly like to be involved in the management of forest 
resources. 
 
Gender wage gaps are present, and women work longer work hours than men, as they spend 7 hours per day on 
productive 
and 
reproductive 
tasks 
(men: 
5.7 
hours).42 
Women’s 
GESI 
 and physical safety concerns limit their wider access to, and use of, forest resources. In the case of the inter-
viewed villages, it mainly hindered women from participating in forest management tasks, including decision-
making.  
Women can face discrimination in the market when marketing their produce directly, and also can be stymied 
by lack of language skills, access to information or training43.  
 
Especially in the rural areas, women´s lower income often also directly translates into a lower decision-making 
power in the family: the lower their income, the lesser their voice. Women with higher own-income possess 
higher decision-making power, but the final say is usually with the man as head of the household. Disadvantages 
from income disparities are therefore particularly relevant in combination with certain cultural gender norms.  
This needs to be taken into account in all project activities where behavior change and new income activities are 
promoted, or where regulations affect family businesses or access to forest resources. 
  
Microfinance access has been shown to empower communities if the villagers are not amongst the poorest. In 
that case, microfinance is often seen as too risky. Women are often more hesitant to take on debts to protect 
their families, and use micro credits most often for health emergencies and children´s education.  
Village Development Funds are often managed by women, and many ethnic groups´ women are responsible for 
the families´ financial management. The interviewed villagers and local authorities agreed that access to micro 
grants as planned by the GCF project would create more opportunities for the local communities to improve 
their income situation, including complementary micro investments into alternative, deforestation-free agricul-
tural practices. Semi-formal and informal microfinance, such as provided by the Lao Women’s Union, is an im-
portant source for women in the rural areas of Lao PDR. 
Implications for the planned GCF project 
The planned GCF programme will have great leverage to advocate for improving women´s representation in 
forest management positions from the national to the local level: 
• 
At the national level, the political willingness to increase the number of female Government staff in 
conservation work exists. A consultation with DoF and RECOTFC could help to shed light on the known 
reasons for the lack of women in this sector. A gender-proofing of Human Resources procedures and 
internal career advancement processes could be advised. The programme could furthermore initiate a 
sector-based mentoring system to motivate superiors to promote younger colleagues, and to build the 
capacities of junior staff using internal resources.  
• 
At the Provincial and District level, the same principles apply, but one additional barrier hinders field 
teams to be more gender-balanced: it is more difficult to find female staff willing to travel to remote 
villages. This is even more relevant knowing that women living in remoter villages are often the ones 
who would open up most to female staff for reasons of culture and lack of confidence. Female staff 
barriers to traveling are usually safety concerns and family considerations. The GCF programme could 
investigate possible support measures in addition to building female staff confidence in technical areas 
through trainings. At the same time, the LWU should be supported both with technical trainings (REDD+, 
 
42 Compare United Nations in Lao PDR 2018 
43 Compare Climate Investment Funds 2017

=== PAGE 188 ===
16 
 
forest management, climate-resilient and deforestation free agriculture and agricultural value chains ) 
and budget to travel and accompany planned community measures.  
 
The influence of the education gender gap is also very relevant for the scope of work of the planned GCF pro-
gramme: global experience shows that education has considerable power to help individuals reconsider environ-
mentally harmful lifestyles and behavior44. Women´s lower education levels can therefore influence the capaci-
ties of target communities to fully understand and support environmental protection measures and change of 
behaviors. Since the interviewed men and women agreed that women traditionally possess deeper understand-
ing about the forest resources, spend considerable time in them as users, and – according to the interviewed 
Government staff – are more likely to show interest in forest protection, educational measures should particu-
larly target women. Younger men and women can also play a key role in protection measures, since the inter-
viewed villages revealed that the Lao Youth Union at community level is already assigned with forest protection 
tasks.  
 
A lower education status is also often mentioned as the key reason for Lao women´s low levels of confidence, 
which strongly effects their willingness to aim for leading positions in their communities and to be active change-
makers in their families and villages. This was absolutely reinforced in the village interviews: all women groups 
showed high interest and willingness to participate in forest management and decision-making much more than 
they currently do but felt insecure about their lack of education. The planned GCF programme therefore needs 
to install mechanisms to give men and women with lower education levels access to management positions. This 
can be achieved with the development and promotion of alternative requirement catalogues to qualify for man-
agement tasks, and targeted skills development activities. In this context a specific focus should be on women-
headed households as they tend to be most likely to be excluded from decision making processes and need to 
be given targeted opportunities to participate and benefit from project activities.  
 
The planned GCF programme can consider accessing information about the impact of regulations on women in 
family businesses, and what measures could mitigate this impact, or create pathways for new income opportu-
nities which consider cultural limitations and current change behavior. The interviewed women and men were 
keen to find alternative income paths, but also showed high risk-avoidance attitudes based on their currently 
vulnerable economic status and previous negative experiences with new crops and investors. Women are also 
interested in micro-finance, but targeted support is needed to enable them to build confidence to take on more 
prominent management positions in village management committees, and to strengthen their capacities on fi-
nancial and business literacy. Such courses could build off of successful initiatives, such as the courses imple-
mented by ILO together with LWU and other government departments to strengthen women’s engagement in 
village banking called “Get Ahead for Women in Enterprise“, a course designed for poor women who want to 
start or expand a micro business.45  
 
It is further recommended to support gender sensitization for men and women, raising awareness about gender 
equality as well as the national legal and regulatory framework. In addition, LWU should serve as an important 
resource for rural women providing information on key services.   
 
 
44 World Education Blog 2015 
45 For more information refer to: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/documents/publica-
tion/wcms_099876.pdf

=== PAGE 189 ===
17 
 
3. 
Gender dimensions in the sector 
The following chapter provides an overview of relevant gender strategies in the forestry sector at international, 
regional and national level. 
3.1. 
Meta Level: Gender gaps in the sector 
Gender and Agriculture 
Traditional gender roles and expectations of ethnic women and girls make their lives difficult with long working 
hours in both home and fields. Women do most of the farm work (planting, weeding and harvesting crops), tend 
small livestock and collect NTFPs (men occasionally hunt wild animals in some villages). Hard work is associated 
with women’s virtue, reinforced by the cultural norms that good women are strong, dutiful and do not complain. 
Women spend around four times more time than men on household and caring work leading to significant time 
constraints of women for other activities such as training opportunities, participation in community meetings or 
other local decision-making bodies and long-term economic planning46. Gender inequality between male and 
female-headed households in the agricultural sector is evidenced by the agricultural land they used, both by the 
size of the land plots and the number of plots.47  In many cases, female-headed households have less labour and 
productive assets available to them while having a less diversified crop base than men.48  
 
Due to traditional expectations, women are often less mobile than men. The social expectation is that women 
move within the boundaries of the village while men are more likely to be expected to travel larger distances for 
work or trade. In addition, women’s mobility is limited by household and family responsibilities which does not 
allow them to leave the house long periods of time.  Yet, this situation has changed during the last two decades 
as economic development and regional trade increased cross-border exchange and industrial development in 
urban centres.  These factors led to an increase in cross-border trade and migration to larger cities, majorly for 
men but also for women. Yet, especially in remote rural areas, traditional norms concerning the role of women 
can be expected to persist and need to be considered in project implementation. For instance, limited mobility 
of women has impacts on their involvement in economic activities and training activities which needs to be con-
sidered in value chain development. 
 
Current trends in agriculture have seen rotational periods shorten, while promoting more intensive production 
systems or cash crops that accelerate soil degradation. When shifting agriculture is reduced to only a three-year 
rotation, women’s work greatly increases because of heavy weed pressure (women and girls are generally tasked 
with weeding). If female labor is not enough to keep up with weed pressure, the next step is often herbicide use. 
The use of pesticides and fertilizer in Lao rural communities is increasing. The 2011 Agricultural Census indicated 
that women have a slightly higher use than men have. One reason for this might be that pesticides and chemical 
fertilizer reduces the workload of women by decreasing the time needed for tasks traditionally performed by 
women, such as weeding. FAO concludes that “women and children are particularly vulnerable to the health 
effects of pesticides and chemicals, as women are frequently the ones spreading them in fields, often with their 
children on their backs”.49 
While several projects and initiatives aim to provide support to local villagers, often approaches applied are not 
gender-sensitive. For example, agriculture extension advice is most often provided to the “farmer”, often target-
ing male farmers who are considered the main decision-makers. Generally, women are less reached by extension 
and training services due to various reasons. Women are less likely to participate in decision making, are busy 
with household and family chores, receive information through their husbands and have in many cases lower 
levels of education and literacy. Depending on the ethnicity, Lao women might lack Lao language skills. Women’s 
involvement in agriculture is often undervalued by agricultural investments and public services. Women are not 
 
46 Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project (2018): Project Administration Document.  
47 Care international and European Union, 2016. Gender Profile of Natural Resources Sector in Lao PDR 
48 FAO: Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 2018. Available online: 
https://www.fao.org/3/ca0154en/CA0154EN.pdf 
49 FAO: Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 2018

=== PAGE 190 ===
18 
 
perceived as leaders and do themselves often not feel confident enough to attend and speak in meetings and 
training.50  
Nevertheless, women’s involvement in agricultural activities is significant and they are key actors to specific value 
chains. At household level, many decisions are taken jointly, and rural women share equal access to markets, 
even though it is mainly men accessing marketing information. In the project area, based on former project ex-
perience, the work distribution in selected value chains is assumed to be as follows: 
 
Table 1: Work distribution along selected value chains 
Commodity51 
Work sharing along the value chain 
Coffee                                              Equal men/women; planting more by men, weeding by both, harvesting by 
both, but more women and marketing by both 
Tea                                                   Equal men/women; planting more by men, weeding by both, harvesting by 
both, but more women and marketing by both 
Eucalyptus and Acacia trees        Mostly by men (planting, weeding, felling of trees) 
Bong Bark                                       Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of bark) 
Tung Oil                                           Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of seeds) 
Benzoin                                           Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of resin) 
Rubber                                            Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of latex) 
Paper mulberry                             Mostly by women; planting by men, weeding by women, harvesting of bark 
by women and especially processing by women 
Fruits                                               Mostly by women; planting by men, weeding by women, harvesting of fruits 
by women and especially processing by women 
Bamboo                                          Depends on the product. Planting, maintenance, harvesting of poles and pro-
cessing of dried bamboo by men; harvesting, processing and marketing of 
bamboo shoots by women 
Cardamom                                     Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Rattan                                              Depends on the product. Planting, maintenance, harvesting of vines and pro-
cessing of dried vine by men; harvesting, processing and marketing of edible 
shoots by women. 
Sichuan Pepper                              Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of seeds) 
Broom Grass                                  Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Pineapple                                        Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Sacha Inchi                                     Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of seeds; processing by women, 
marketing together 
Cotton                                             Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Jatropha                                          Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Rosella                                             Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Sugar cane                                      Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of canes); processing by 
women 
Maize                                               Equal men/women 
Soy bean/Mung bean                   Equal men/women 
Peanuts                                           Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Cassava                                           Equal men/women 
Job's tears                                       Equal men/women 
Sesame                                            Equal men/women 
Vegetables                                      Mostly by women (planting, maintenance, harvesting, processing, marketing) 
Forage plants                                 Mostly by men (planting, weeding, harvesting of forages) 
Fish                                                  Equal men/women 
Honey                                              Mostly by men 
 
 
50 FAO: Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 2018. 
51 The project selected 35 commodities included in a “white list” which shall be promoted.

=== PAGE 191 ===
19 
 
The Project will need to ensure that value chains are targeted which involve the participation 
of women and empowers their roles and responsibilities in the respective value chain. Gender 
and Forestry 
Often the poorer a family is, the more likely they are dependent on forest resources. Therefore, it can be assumed 
that women-headed households tend to have a larger dependency on forest resources than male-headed house-
holds. Rice shortages are highest during the dry season from March to October. In order to survive, men, women, 
and children collect non-timber products from the surrounding forests for food and some income. The forest is 
an important source for local livelihoods, especially for NTFPs. In 2001, the consumption of NTFPs was at an 
equivalent of 40% of the average rural household cash income. Overharvesting and lack of knowledge on sus-
tainable harvesting methods resulted in declining forest productivity and greater demands for labor, and time 
spent gathering NTFPs (e.g. requiring, often women, to walk farther distances or spend more time collecting 
NTFPs to maintain their livelihoods). 52   
 
NTFPs play an important role in promoting the livelihood of the rural population and the national economy. 
About 70% of the total population lives in rural areas, are dependent on upland farming and forest products for 
their food, cash income, and livelihood. They use NTFPs for their daily subsistence. They also play an important 
role in food security and are perceived by the Lao government as an important strategy in poverty eradication53.  
Women’s active roles in harvesting and use, but they often do not have direct control of the income derived from 
commercial NTFPs, and therefore may not directly benefit from increased commercialization. The general pat-
tern is that women are being displaced by men when new labour-saving technologies for NTFP processing are 
introduced.  
 
Approximately 10% of Lao households are led by women with a strong concentration in urban areas. It is approx-
imated that less than 5% of households in rural areas are headed by women.54 In the project area the share of 
women-led households is 3%. According to FAO55, the main inequalities between female and male headed house-
holds in rural Laos lie in respect of land, livelihood diversification and cash income. Households headed by women 
tend to have smaller land plots (if at all), fewer options for income generation and lower crop marketing rates. 
Moreover, female headed households spend a higher ratio of their income on food. Women in rural areas suffer 
from time constraints, induced by an overburdening of work on farmlands and at household level combined with 
cultural expectations concerning their role in the family. These time constraints are even more severe for 
women-led households, turning them into the most vulnerable households at village level. Their voices are often 
not heard as they are excluded from decision making processes, their mobility is limited and therefore their 
ability to access external opportunities such as markets beyond the village boundary and trainings in nearby 
hubs.  
Women as entrepreneurs in agriculture and forestry 
The private sector is creating new opportunities for entrepreneurs in Lao PDR, and at least 40 percent of all 
enterprises are at least partially owned by women, especially in the urban areas. For newly registered enter-
prises, the majority are women-owned56. However, women-owned enterprises are usually smaller (mostly at 
micro-scale) and employ fewer workers than those owned by men and tend to be less mobile, as females in their 
role as primary caregiver locate their businesses close to their homes.57 Among the 19 interviewed entrepre-
neurships in preparation of Project 2, five had female owners (some of which co-owned with the husband). Those 
 
52 Lao Women’s Union (2018): Lao PDR Gender Profile 
53 Care international and European Union, 2016. Gender Profile of Natural Resources Sector in Lao PDR. 
54 FAO (2013): he Gender and Equity Implications of Land-related Investments on Land Access and Labour and Income-Generating Opportu-
nities. Available online: https://repub.eur.nl/pub/51499/Metis_197510.pdf 
55 FAO (2013) 
56 There is no universal definition of “woman-owned or women-led enterprise”. Multiple definitions exist for businesses owned or led by 
women. In this is case, we apply the definition formulated by ISO which is as follows: Business that is more than 50 % owned by one or 
more women, whose management and control lie with one or more women, where a woman is a signatory of the business’s legal docu-
ments and financial accounts, and which is operated independently from businesses that are not owned by women. Source: IWA 
34:2021(en): Women's entrepreneurship — Key definitions and general criteria. Available online: 
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:iwa:34:ed-1:v1:en  
57 USAID, 2016. The Ecosystem for Women’s Entrepreneurship in Lao PDR. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/301498066_The_Ecosystem_for_Women%27s_Entrepreneurship_in_Lao_PDR

=== PAGE 192 ===
20 
 
five firms focused on NTFPs and agricultural products, including Cardamon, Mung Beans, Pumpkin, Maize and 
Broom Grass.  
 
About 74% of small and medium enterprises in Laos are family-owned, including the wood-processing sector 
which is influenced by the regulations and negotiations around the Lao FLEGT-VPA process, and potentially other 
regulations which will be supported by the planned GCF project. Even though men are often the more visible 
ones in these small family businesses, it is usually the whole family which is engaged and therefore equally im-
pacted by regulations to their business.58 
An assessment commissioned by the World Bank in 2011 identified the following main barriers for female entre-
preneurship59: 
• 
Limited exposure to innovative practices, resulting in little product differentiation 
• 
Lack of formal business training and limited opportunities for acquiring additional technical, financial, and 
management skills for managers and staff 
• 
Extremely limited access to networking opportunities, with a particular lack of successful role models for 
businesswomen 
• 
Poor access to capital for expansion 
• 
Mindset limitations, such as low confidence, poor tolerance for risk, and inflexibility/low propensity to per-
ceive and adapt to market demands 
 
The change and volatility of market demand, increase of entrepreneurship and off-farm work opportunities leave 
many rural women rather intimidated, since they perceive their lack of education and skills, including their lack 
of knowledge how to reach and understand a non-visible market, as barriers to their potential for increasing their 
productivity or starting a business. Most women seemed afraid of starting something entirely new and tend to 
stick to familiar work such as agriculture and NTFPs, animal husbandry and weaving.   
 
The interviewed local Government agencies and local villagers welcome private sector investment as long as it 
does benefit the communities in terms of higher income and less workload, as well as enhanced skills. All parties 
expressed the wish to have the Government strongly controlling such potential investments to limit risks for the 
communities. The interviewed women stated that they do not feel confident to participate in decisions over 
investments. 
Gender and Climate Change Adaptation 
Disaster management has worked as a critical entry-point for challenges related to environmental sustainability 
with a high degree of acceptance.  The environmental burden of disease due to climate change already consti-
tutes 26 percent of the disease burden of Lao PDR. Women and men experience the impacts of floods and 
droughts differently. Given women’s roles in the home, their responsibility for family care and the nature of their 
employment, they are more likely to bear the brunt of the impacts of floods and droughts.60  
 
Different studies show that women are disproportionally impacted by climate-induced natural disasters, which 
in many cases come along with increasing rates of violence against women and girls. Mortality rates of women 
are often higher than those of men. According to Thurston et al, this is often rooted in “biological differences, 
gender discriminatory practices in relief efforts, lower access to information and resources, care responsibilities 
and gendered poverty”61. Natural disasters at different scale create risk factors that, in turn, increase the risk of 
gender-based violence. These factors are, for instance, trauma and mental health issues or substance abuse, but 
also social impacts such as the breakdown of family structure or loss of housing and livelihoods. Moreover, col-
lapsing or lacking law enforcement might worsen the situation. Natural disasters increase the risk of women and 
girls to become a victim of Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH). Cases of violence 
against women and girls after natural disasters include rape/sexual assault by a non-partner or intimate partner, 
but also female genital mutilation, honour killings and the trafficking of women.62 
 
58 USAID, 2016. The Ecosystem for Women’s Entrepreneurship in Lao PDR. 
59 As cited in USAID, 2016. The Ecosystem for Women’s Entrepreneurship in Lao PDR. 
60 Thurston, et al (2020): Natural hazards, disasters and violence against women and girls: a global mixed-methods systematic review. Avail-
able online: https://gh.bmj.com/content/6/4/e004377 
61 Thurston, et al (2020): Natural hazards, disasters and violence against women and girls: a global mixed-methods systematic review. 
62 Virginie Le Masson (2022): Disasters, Climate Change, and Violence Against Women and Girls. Available online: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.013.393

=== PAGE 193 ===
21 
 
 
Women are often more affected by the negative impact of climate change. For instance, families may decide to 
take girls out of school to increase the household’s resources, while boy are more likely to be kept in school 
during crisis periods. Another coping strategy might be the early marriage of daughter placing them in a more 
secure home. In rural areas, ecosystems degrade from climate change, which may increase household burdens 
on women, forcing them to search for resources such as NTFPs or firewood in unsecured areas, increasing their 
exposure to violence and sexual assault. Such threats are even higher if families are displaced by disaster.  
 
Lao women play key roles in both climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies, but these are often in-
sufficiently recognized or supported. Project’s focusing on adaptation to climate change can also negatively im-
pact women, or benefit men and women unequally if gender considerations are not fully considered and main-
streamed. For example, projects might just be adding adaptation activities to the already long list of women’s 
responsibilities in their everyday life, leaving women with less time and resources.63 Adaptation to climate 
change is dependent on issues such as wealth, technological power, access to information, all of which are me-
diated by gender dynamics in the household, economy and society. Lao women's traditional responsibilities in 
the household and as stewards of natural resources, also position them well to develop strategies for adapting 
to changing environmental realities. For example, women can have an important impact on the transition to 
using of clean fuels for household consumption (benefiting both family health and the environment) and in main-
taining their traditional roles in the protection of biodiversity – particularly in fragile upland areas and in national 
protected areas64.   
Implications for the planned GCF project 
As the analysis showed, women are often the key knowledge carriers regarding the status of community forests 
and its resources. Since the programme plans to support the development of a National Forest Inventory and 
Monitoring system, it would make sense to explore the utilization of local women for community monitoring 
support. The interviewed women and men, and local Government partners, all agreed that such measure would 
be suitable to the local realities, and the local women were very supportive of this suggestion.  
 
Further, research could be commissioned by the planned GCF programme to identify and highlight what oppor-
tunities exist to strengthen women’s roles as producers and processors in Agriculture and Forestry, including 
support for financial services, financial management and business development services. The results of this re-
search should influence any further analysis on new potential value chains promoting deforestation-free agricul-
ture. The value chains to be promoted under the project will be assessed concerning the distribution of work 
among men and women. As women farmers face significant constraints, the project will ensure that women 
received targeted training opportunities (e.g., business capacities, financial literacy) and extension services as 
well as access to information on climate change impacts and sustainable agricultural practices.  
 
Project 1 initiated a number of processes to improve access to finance for rural women, increase the involvement 
of women in land use planning and village-level decision making processes. Women are given the opportunity to 
participate in all Project 1 activities. The Annual Progress Report65 showed that there is strong participation of 
women in all village meetings and in all key areas of intervention (e.g. FPIC 54%, PLUP66 46%, PSAP67 47%, VFAG68 
47%).  
Furthermore, female headed households are given priority in the selection of PSAP participants. 7% of PSAP 
beneficiary households are led by women, which is approximately double the ratio of female headed households 
in rural Laos. This proves that the prioritization was implemented in practice. In 80% of villages women are rep-
resented in VFAG Committees, thereby attaining financial management capacities and promoting women’s in-
clusion in economic activities promoted by Project 1.  
These processes are planned to be upscaled in the three Provinces of Project 1 and extended to the three new 
Provinces covered under Project 2. The strengthened focus on climate resilience will further raise awareness of 
 
63 SEI, 2019. Why gender matters in climate adaptation. Available online : https://www.sei.org/perspectives/why-gender-matters-in-cli-
mate-adaptation/ 
64 Lao Women’s Union,2018. Lao PDR Gender Profile  
65 GCF Programme Annual Progress Report, December 2021. 
66 Participatory Pland Use Planning 
67 Promotion of Sustainable and Deforestation-free Agricultural Practice and Value Chains 
68 Village Forest and Agriculture Grant

=== PAGE 194 ===
22 
 
the importance of conserving forests for strengthening climate resilience, and will include information on gender 
benefits associated with ecosystem-based adaptation approaches.  
In addition, the project’s strengthened focus on adaptation will ensure a gender-sensitive approach is main-
streamed, where the differentiated needs and priorities of men and women are considered throughout all activ-
ities, especially implementation-oriented activities such as PLUP PSAP, VFAG, VMP and Village Forest Conserva-
tion Agreements, among others. Further support will be provided to agricultural extension under Project 2 Com-
ponent 2, and PSAP investment plans will consider the differentiated needs and how selected PSAP measures 
could benefit or potentially adversely impact women (e.g. adding additional time burden, etc.) to identify alter-
natives or suitable mitigation measures.  
3.2. 
Macro Level: Policies and strategies in the sector 
Agenda 2030, FAO´s Criteria and Indicators 
The Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, including its seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
represents the overarching framework for sustainable global development throughout different sectors, includ-
ing gender and forest protection. Gender equality is addressed as a stand-alone development goal under SDG 5, 
but is also integrated into all other SDGs. With regards to forest governance and protection, three SDGs provide 
guidance for the planned programme: 
- 
Sustainable production and consumption (SDG 12): development of production and consumption that 
takes into account the limitation of natural resources and empower local populations, including women, 
to keep the ownership of their lands and means of production. 
- 
Climate action (SDG 13): women, indigenous peoples and local communities, and other groups have the 
right to be represented in climate summits as climate change affects them in different ways and they 
are the holders of knowledge and experiences that can help finding adapted solutions to climate change. 
- 
Conserving forests and biodiversity (SDG 15): limiting the industrialization of agriculture and forestry in 
order to protect forests, biodiversity and preserve local communities’ ways of subsistence.69 
 
The Women 2030 Program is a coalition of gender network organizations supporting the implementation of the 
2030 Agenda. It is implemented in 50 countries all over the world, including Lao PDR, aiming at the realization of 
the SDGs in a gender-equitable and climate-just manner. The Program works mainly through capacity building of 
women´s civil society organizations and enables them to participate in relevant policy dialogues and monitoring, 
as well as citizens´ engagement.70  
 
Amongst the agencies of the United Nations, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) leads the way regard-
ing an integrated approach of gender and forestry. FAO´s Criteria and Indicators for sustainable forest manage-
ment (SFM) were recently updated with a gender-responsive toolbox providing a general framework for practical 
integration of gender aspects for the forest development sector71. FAO recognizes that, even though women play 
a very important role in forest-related work and the generation of income from forest resources, this is rarely 
reflected in forestry-related planning and programming72.  
 
Another important international framework is provided through the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 
which Laos ratified in 1996. A Gender Plan of Action (currently until 2020) is aligned with the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity and provides concrete tools and action steps to integrate gender into related national policies and 
implementation efforts. Parties to the Convention are requested to report on actions undertaken to implement 
the Gender Plan of Action under the CBD73.  
The four strategic objectives of the CBD Gender Plan of Action are: 
 
1. Integration of gender perspectives 
2. Promoting gender equality 
 
69 Women2030 Project: About the Sustainable Development Goals 
70 Women2030 Project: About Women2030 
71 FAO 2018 
72 FAO 16/07/2018: Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox increases gender considerations in its modules. 
7373 Convention on Biological Diversity: 2015-2020 Gender Plan of Action

=== PAGE 195 ===
23 
 
3. Demonstrate the benefits of integrating gender 
4. Increase the effectiveness of implementation efforts 
 
Actions based on these objectives are organized around four spheres of work: policy, organizational, delivery, 
and constituency. The Plan further provides concrete actions to integrate gender aspects into all mentioned 
spheres relevant to successful implementation of the Convention. 
Regional Agreements on Forestry in the ASEAN region 
The only regional agreement in the forestry and biodiversity sector is a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products Promotion Scheme. The MoU has been renewed three 
times since 1994, with the current one being in force since 2014. As an MoU, it does not require further ratifica-
tion or detailed integration processes, and it focuses on economic promotion rather than resource protection. 
None of the related documents considers gender aspects of the addressed schemes and production chains74. 
 
The year 2007 was seen as a political landmark in ASEAN cooperation with regard to forestry and related forest 
law enforcement and improved forest governance. The ASEAN Statement on Strengthening Forest Law Enforce-
ment and Governance (FLEG) was issued in 2007 and paved the way to take action addressing illegal logging and 
its associated trade issues as a joint effort with regional partners and international stakeholders. The FLEG work 
plan 2016-2025 does not provide specific recommendations for gendered aspects of transboundary trafficking 
of wildlife and timber or illegal logging, but it recognizes the social and cultural aspects in general, and poverty 
as a driver for related illegal practices in particular.  
Gender considerations are notably absent in the actions set for improved market access, capacity building for 
law enforcement-related authorities and community stakeholders, awareness-raising activities and training on 
forest governance for business actors, civil society organizations and local communities75. 
Forestry, Agriculture and Biodiversity in Lao PDR 
The current Lao National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025 mentions the Lao Women´s Union as 
a potential civil society stakeholder to reach out to women, but it does not take gender issues into account 
beyond that. The proposed way forward for the current strategy, however, recognizes that future training efforts 
supported under the National Strategy should also consider women, youth and ethnic groups beyond the internal 
Government system. Furthermore, the Strategy also proposes to consider women and youth leaders as special-
ists and training resources in their function as keepers of Traditional Knowledge76.  
 
With regard to the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Prod-
ucts Promotion Scheme, Laos assigned the Director of the Division of Planning under the Department of Forestry 
at the MAF to be the national coordinator and focal point for the other ASEAN member countries. The overall 
coordination of all ASEAN members under this MoU is facilitated through the ASEAN Forest Products Industry 
Club – led by the Malaysian Timber Industry Board and therefore the private sector. Given the variety of stake-
holders involved in the concerned promotion schemes, gender considerations would have broad potential to be 
taken up, but do not form part of any guiding principles of the Club or the agreement itself.  
It is not likely that the MAF´s focal point will proactively add a gender dimension to the cooperation. The MAF 
has its own gender focal point who could be consulted for such matters, but that is usually only utilized when 
projects/partners set specific requirements towards gender mainstreaming.   
 
The Lao FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreement (VPA) process is still in the negotiation phase, which was to be 
concluded in March 2021 but has been delayed due to COVID.77 Despite the relevance for gender- and ethnicity-
sensitive inclusion in areas concerning production and village forests, and the implications of the VPA on forest 
governance structures, the FLEG VPA negotiations completely lack a respective gender lens78. In a 2018 gender 
analysis, the GIZ-FLEGT programme in Laos pointed out that most FLEGT-VPA meetings were predominantly led 
 
74 Memorandum of Understanding on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products Promotion Scheme 2014 
75 Compare Work Plan for Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) in ASEAN, 2016-2025 
76 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2025 
77 https://flegtlaos.com/flegt/flegt-vpa/ 
78 Compare: FLEGT VPA process in Lao PDR 2018

=== PAGE 196 ===
24 
 
by senior men. If social issues were raised, it was mostly initiated by the represented CSOs, and had a rather 
general focus on people´s benefit-sharing79. A gender imbalance at decision-maker levels, combined with gener-
ally low gender knowledge, is a significant barrier to successful integration of gender aspects into Laos´ forestry 
sector as a whole. 
 
The 9th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), as Laos´ guiding strategic document, refers to en-
vironmental protection and disaster risk reduction under Outcome 4, but its content is not specifically gender-
differentiated. The cross-cutting section on Women´s Development, however, offers several targets which di-
rectly or indirectly influence the forestry sector and therefore can be used for strategic decisions/communication 
of such decisions towards donors and partners of the GCF programme, such as to “expand the membership of 
the Lao Women’s Union to cover all areas of work, and strengthen the capacity of female leadership and man-
agement staff and successor staff; to “encourage women and children to receive vocational and technical train-
ing such as: agricultural production, farming, animal husbandry, handicrafts, financial services, business manage-
ment, banking, taxation, laws and business regulations, as well as research and formulate policies on access to 
finance and women’s entrepreneurship to contribute to socioeconomic development; and the goal to “promote 
and create conditions for women to take up leadership and management positions at various levels, reach an 
average of 20%”80.  
 
Lao PDRs’ updated NDC (2021) puts significant weight on the forestry sector, for both mitigation and adaptation. 
It states that nature-based solutions shall be prioritized to counter climate-induced disasters such as floods, 
landslides and droughts. It further highlights that “mitigation co-benefits will be strongly considered in sectoral 
adaptation strategies and adaptation plans”, showing the potential to strengthen the promotion of cross-cutting 
measures. The main legal document in the forestry sector is the 2021 Forestry Law. It does not mention gender 
or women in any of its articles. The interviewed Government partners at Provincial and District level all agreed 
that the Forestry Law itself does not need to mention gender dimensions explicitly since other relevant legislation 
– the Constitution, the Labor Law, the Family Law, the Law on Women´s Union, and the Law on the Development 
and Protection of Women – already provide the legal basis for gender equality throughout all sectors.  
 
The (draft) Climate Change Strategy (2021) provides a comprehensive strategy for climate change adaptation 
and mitigation in Lao PDR, and strongly highlights the role of nature-based solutions. For instance, it highlights 
the need to “enhance deployment of ecosystem-based adaptation such as crop cover, wetland protection, forest 
and landscape for flood water storage, retention and regulation” to strengthen the resilience against an increas-
ing risk of droughts and floods.81 The Climate Change Decree (2019) focuses on technical aspects of vulnerability, 
such as hazards, and the impacts of climate change on defined vulnerable groups. This provides an avenue for 
addressing differential social dimensions of climate change, such as risks and coping capacities of men and 
women. It also promotes a participatory model of action on climate change, including the participation of 
women’s organizations in risk assessments and adaptation planning and implementation. Northern Lao PDR is 
particularly at risk of climate change due to its high exposure, low capacities, and high sensitivity. This region is 
among the poorest in the country, and villagers in the region are largely dependent on rainfed upland agriculture 
to maintain their livelihoods. 
 
The Lao National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA)82 does not explicitly address gender challenges or oppor-
tunities in relation to climate change. In 2009, NAPA was released and includes a list of 45 adaptation priority 
projects in the areas of water resources, forestry, agriculture and public health, but it does not include any anal-
ysis, strategy or interventions for addressing gender issues. Lao PDR is in the process of developing a National 
Adaptation Plan, although it is not clear when the plan will be finalized and approved.  
 
The National REDD+ Strategy to 2025 and Vision to 2030 guides REDD+ implementation in Lao PDR, and together 
they aim to improve the quality and extent of forests nationwide to provide economic, social and environmental 
benefits for women and men. This is further aligned with the country’s Forestry Strategy 2035, which includes 
three core elements: i) ensuring the sustainable management and use of forest resources ii) conserving forest 
resources in order to protect forests, forestland, flora and fauna, aquatic animals and wildlife, including through 
 
79 GIZ/Bode 2018 
80 Lao PDR´s 9th National Socio-Economic Development Plan 2021 - 2025 
81 Government of Lao PDR [2020]. Draft Climate Change Strategy. p.30. 
82 National Adaptation Programme of Action to Climate Change (2009). Available online: https://www.adaptation-undp.org/sites/de-
fault/files/downloads/laos_pdr_napa.pdf

=== PAGE 197 ===
25 
 
preventing and combatting wildfires, supporting forest restoration, and reducing deforestation and forest deg-
radation, among others, and iii) developing the forestry and timber industry in a sustainable manner. In 2017, 
Provincial REDD+ Action Plans have been developed for the six programme provinces. Consultations during PRAP 
development included the Lao Women’s Union ensuring that gender aspects are considered. Proposed interven-
tions of the PRAPs included the improved access to extension services for women and youth and a gender-sen-
sitive monitoring system ensuring sustained participation of both women and men during the PRAP process.83  
Implications for the GCF project 
Regional structures and existing legal frameworks do not provide sufficient guidance for all concerned stakehold-
ers for a gender-sensitive implementation of the project. The planned project can draw valuable recommenda-
tions for the practical integration of gender into forest governance from international frameworks and action 
plans, as mentioned above.  
A valuable contribution of the project can lie in supporting the development of guidelines and regulations for 
forest governance and protection which are sensitive to the diverse needs of the communities with regard to 
gender, ethnicity and economic status. Furthermore, the project might be able to significantly promote gender 
balance in stakeholder meetings and other platforms relevant to decision-making.  
So far, Project 1 has promoted the development of a number of guidelines in a gender-sensitive process. Guide-
lines for the Promotion of Sustainable and Deforestation-free Agricultural Practices and Value Chains (PSAP), 
have been developed drawing on participatory processes including women and vulnerable groups. In a similar 
way, the development of guidelines for Village Forest and Agriculture Grants (VFAG) has been supported by Pro-
ject 1. The guidelines ensure that fund allocation from the VFAG prioritizes support to women-headed house-
holds and young farming families. Project 2 will draw in these guidelines and scale up their application.  
3.3. 
Meso Level: Gender dimensions at sectoral institutions and actors 
The interviews showed that the Provincial and District Forestry agencies might possess only limited awareness 
on the relevance of gender-responsive measures in their sector. This was signaled by their responses, which 
lacked concrete understanding of gender mainstreaming, as well as the fact that most interview partners in the 
forestry offices were men. One office mentioned that they have a gender focal point but did not consider inviting 
her to the interview. This is rather symbolic of the under-utilization of gender resources within the partner struc-
tures. 
 
The key message from the interview partners was coherent with other programme findings: the key challenge 
to effective gender mainstreaming in the forestry sector is only partly in the legal provisions but mainly at the 
implementation level. This includes knowledge and awareness, as well as personnel and financial resources, and 
lack of designated and committed responsibilities beyond the Lao Women´s Union.  
 
The institutional structures for improved gender-responsive forest governance exist (ministries´ gender focal 
points, Lao Women´s Union), but currently lack in-depth technical knowledge, budgets and the internal man-
dates to be taken seriously enough. 
Implications for the GCF project 
The project should actively pursue the cooperation with the LWU during implementation. One the one hand to 
make use of the LWU’s resources, experience and local networks to promote gender equality in the land use 
sector. On the other hand, to further capacitate the organization to promote gender equality in the context of 
deforestation-free agriculture, value chain development, climate change adaptation and community forest man-
agement. During implementation of Project 1, the Lao Women’s Union (LWU) became a key partner in the con-
text of gender-related project activities. LWU participated in key village-level activities to ensure the integration 
of gender perspectives. As per Annual Progress Report, monitoring data shows that LWU has participated in 87% 
of all village level activities.84 The intense cooperation with the LWU will be continued under Project 2. 
 
83 Provincial REDD+ Action Plans (PRAP) for Houaphan, Bokeo, Lung Namtha, Luang Prabang, Oudomxay, and Sayabouri. 2017. 
84 GCF Programme Annual Progress Report, December 2021.

=== PAGE 198 ===
26 
 
 
Further, the project should aim to improve capacities of implementation partners on GESI, gender equality and 
inclusive processes through adequate training. Further, GESI needs to be integrated as cross-cutting issue into 
all technical training materials.   
3.4. 
Micro Level: Consultations with the Target Groups in the Sector 
Summary of stakeholder consultations on gender for the Programme (Project 1) 
The field consultations took place between 15-24th January 2019: one mission to Houaphan Province from 15-
18th January, and one mission to Luang Namtha Province from 22-24th January 2019. In both Provinces, interviews 
were conducted with the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office (PAFO) and the Provincial Lao Women´s Un-
ion (PLWU).  
At the District level, interviews were conducted with the District Agriculture and Forestry Offices (DAFO) and 
District Lao Women´s Union (DLWU) in Xam Neua (Houaphan) and Luang Namtha District. In total, four village 
consultations took place: Ban Yard Village in Xam Neua District; Ban Nam Mad Mai village and Ban Nam Dee 
village in Luang Namtha District. In total, 148 people were interviewed and consulted (79 men and 69 women).  
 
The selected villages are of different ethnic and economic backgrounds, and showed different levels of women´s 
participation: 
 
- 
Ban Yard village/Houaphan: Khmu and Hmong ethnicity, with two villages merged into one. High pov-
erty and unemployment rates, low education standard. Strong weaving tradition, livestock as central 
income activity, shifting cultivation and paddy rice production. Women were highly active during the 
consultations, and the organization of two separate meetings for women and men was supported. 
 
- 
Ban Nam Mad Mai village/Luang Namtha: Akha ethnicity. Village was moved several times in the past 
20 years and has experienced improving income levels since they now live close to Luang Namtha town. 
Education levels are still very low. Rubber provides the main income, in addition to income from forest 
resources and rattan production. Shifting cultivation is still practiced. The villagers refused separate 
meetings. The women needed continuous translation between Akha and Lao, and appeared overall very 
shy to speak up in front of the village authorities and other men. 
 
- 
Ban Nam Dee village/Luang Namtha:  Lanten/Yao ethnicity. The village is an eco-tourism site. Income 
levels are proportionally higher, but with high dependence on funds for the tourism site which will end 
soon, and on their income from rubber with strong price fluctuation (monopoly of one Chinese com-
pany). Very low education levels amongst the women; the few women who attend school tend to leave 
the village. Villagers did not organize separate meetings, and the village head continuously overpowered 
the attending villagers. Women´s participation could only be encouraged through the attending national 
Lao Women´s Union representative. 
 
In general, the programme was well received by all consulted stakeholders. At the district and village level, many 
participants noticed that resources are becoming increasingly scarce and in poorer quality. Women, as the main 
collectors of forest products, know forests well and have seen the impact of deforestation and forest degradation 
on their livelihoods. As forests become increasingly degraded, women must either travel longer distances, or use 
less NTFPs for domestic consumption. Also, some stakeholders noted forest biodiversity has declined. In terms 
of agriculture, consulted women also noted that soil quality has been in decline. Some villages noted that initially 
they tried to use dung fertilizers, but then switched to some chemical fertilizers. While they can see the impact 
of some land use practices (e.g. shifting cultivation), they noted a major barrier for them to address this is the 
lack of available finances and knowledge of alternative “good” agriculture and land use practices. They further 
noted the need for support in marketing and identifying suitable opportunities (based on land use planning).  
A summary of comments from the gender-specific stakeholder consultations and a brief description of how they 
have been incorporated into the programme and/or GAP is provided in the following Table.

=== PAGE 199 ===
27 
 
Implications for the GCF project 
Table 2. Summary of comments (Project 1) 
# 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related pro-
gramme 
component/ 
activity 
No. of corre-
sponding meas-
ure in GAP 
1 
LWU is an important institution in supporting gender equality and 
gender-sensitive development in Lao PDR. Nonetheless, their capaci-
ties can be further strengthened to better enable them to support 
gender equality within both the context of the program, and in gen-
eral.  
The program will develop the capacities of line implementing 
Government agencies and the Lao Women´s Union to provide 
gender-sensitive facilitation of programme activities in village 
communities. Implement targeted trainings on REDD+ and 
gender. Technical staff from DAFO, DOFI and DLWU will be 
trained in “REDD+ and Gender”, as well as social inclusion.  
It will further support the capacity of female staff within gov-
ernment agencies to improve the gender balance within the 
forest and agriculture sector, and will aim to increase the num-
ber of women supporting the implementation of program ac-
tivities.  
Cross-cut-
ting/ all 
(3) 
(3) 
(7) 
(6) 
(13) 
 
2 
Implementing government agencies have weak capacities on gender. 
3 
Women’s participation in meetings, trainings and committees is often 
limited. This is due to various factors (e.g. cultural norms, timing and 
location of trainings, education of women, among others). Targeted 
technical support is needed to strengthen women´s participation in 
program meetings. 
 
Encourage the active and effective participation of women in 
community meetings, through the following practices: 
• 
Building the capacities of LWU and government agencies 
on gender and social inclusion (see recommendations 
above) 
• 
Setting a quota of 40% participation of women in commu-
nity meetings 
• 
Conducting a survey to determine if women felt actively 
included in REDD+ related meetings 
• 
Time and locate trainings taking into account women’s 
work schedules and accessibility to ensure maximum par-
ticipation and outreach, coordinate with LWU, LNFC, and  
local women’s organizations to build on existing networks 
and best practices for outreach. 
• 
Ensure that village consultations regarding potential pri-
vate sector investments in community-based agroforestry 
Cross-cut-
ting/ all 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(13) 
(14) 
(16) 
(30)

=== PAGE 200 ===
28 
 
# 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related pro-
gramme 
component/ 
activity 
No. of corre-
sponding meas-
ure in GAP 
enable all villagers equally to participate in the investment 
decisions. 
4 
Women and men are interested in stopping shifting cultivation, as it 
is labour intensive and difficult work, however they need suitable al-
ternatives. Women’s capacities are low, and they often have less ac-
cess to extension services, trainings and information than men.  
Activity 1.4 will support villagers with LUP, which will 
help identify suitable land use activities. Components 2 
and 3 will provide technical and financial support to com-
munities to adopt sustainable land use practices on agri-
cultural and forested land. Participation in the program 
is voluntary, and based on participatory processes where 
villagers are able to identify practices that are suitable 
and of interest based on their local context. 
The program will support the development of women’s 
capacities to adopt sustainable land use practices, and 
venture into the production, processing and marketing 
of new value chains. All training modules and extension 
materials will be reviewed by a gender specialist, all ex-
tension agents and trainers will be trained on gender 
equality and social inclusion (e.g. promotion of time-sav-
ing practices). In addition, the program will ensure close 
cooperation with LWU to reach the most women possi-
ble, and encourage their participation.  
Trainings for only women on “business skill develop-
ment” will be implemented, to help women to improve 
their business literacy, build confidence and develop 
leadership skills.  
Assessments on targeted value chains will include gen-
der assessments, to understand the key opportunities 
and challenges for women.  
Activity 
1.2.2, all Ac-
tivities 
within Com-
ponents 
2 
and 3 
(1-14) 
 
(16-19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24-16) 
(27-30)

=== PAGE 201 ===
29 
 
# 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related pro-
gramme 
component/ 
activity 
No. of corre-
sponding meas-
ure in GAP 
Ensure that village consultations regarding potential pri-
vate sector investments in community-based agrofor-
estry enable all villagers equally to participate in the in-
vestment decisions. 
As for women´s access to such services, see the addi-
tional recommendations in the row above.  
5 
Women often have less access to decision making and planning 
processes, despite being the main users of forest lands.  
 
The program will help empower women to become 
members of village forest management committees and 
other village decision-making bodies at the local level. 
The program will support the development of guidelines 
local village forest management committees to 
strengthen gender and social inclusion. 
It will further ensure gender is cross-cutting throughout 
all training modules and materials, and will encourage 
gender sensitization for men and women. 
All activities 
within Com-
ponent 2 and 
Component 
3 
 1-14) 
 
(16-19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24-16) 
(27-30) 
 
6 
Women often know the forest better than men, but are often 
not involved in monitoring or law enforcement/ patrolling due 
to various reasons (cultural norms, unpaid labour/ household 
responsibilities, lower education). Nonetheless, women should 
be increasingly involved in these activities (if activities are safe, 
and close to villages). Women should be fully consulted on pa-
trolling activities. 
Safety must be closely considered for forest patrols, as they are 
often dangerous activities, and may be far away from villages.  
Review the potential for community-based women-led85 
patrolling groups, and support their creation with capac-
ity development and awareness raising. 
 
Activity 1.2.1 
and 3.1.1 
1-14) 
 
(16-19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
 
(27-30) 
 
7 
As with monitoring and law enforcement, despite women´s in-depth 
knowledge of the forest, they are often not involved in monitoring 
Capitalize on local women´s extensive knowledge about com-
munity forests in making them an integral part of community 
contributions to the National Forest Monitoring System. This 
Activity 1.2.1 
 (6) 
(7) 
(27-28) 
 
85 Women-led implies that the groups are organized and led by women, however it does not mean that the participation is only women. These groups can be mixed patrolling groups, however, majority of the leaders and 
organizers of the group should be women.

=== PAGE 202 ===
30 
 
# 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the programme´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related pro-
gramme 
component/ 
activity 
No. of corre-
sponding meas-
ure in GAP 
activities. Women should be actively engaged and consulted on forest 
monitoring.  
includes gender-responsive mechanisms for community mon-
itoring within the National Forest Monitoring system. 
 
(29-30) 
 
8 
It was mentioned in the consultations that women often know more 
about marketing than men, whereas men are often involved in more 
activities requiring ´heavier´ labor. Thus, it is important for the value 
chain assessments conducted within the framework of the program 
that gender-related issues are considered within value chain assess-
ments, including key opportunities for women to strengthen their 
roles and capacities.  
The program will ensure that a gender assessment is inte-
grated in every analysis for potential new agricultural practices 
and value chains utilized by the program. All feasibility studies 
for the development of new value chains or agricultural prac-
tices should review the estimated gendered impact of the de-
sired change (access, needs, barriers, potentials, work load, 
benefits). 
 
Activity 2.1.1 
and 2.1.2 
 
(2) 
(7) 
(9) 
(8) 
(20-26)

=== PAGE 203 ===
31 
 
Summary of stakeholder consultations on gender for Project 2 
With updating the safeguard documentation during preparations for Project 2, field consultations have been 
conducted in Oudomxay, Luang Prabang and Sayabouri from March 13 till 26. The stakeholder consultations at 
local level included male and female villagers from diverse ethnic backgrounds. At district level, governmental 
institutions, the Lao Women’s Union and the Lao Front for National Development have been consulted. Moreo-
ver, private sector interviews have been conducted, including consultations with 39 stakeholders from agri-
MSMEs, collectors of NTFPs and agriculture products and processing factories. In addition, several civil society 
organizations (CSOs) have been interviewed, and national and provincial level kick off meetings (all six provinces) 
have been conducted. The consultations with CSOs included organizations focusing on gender topics and women 
rights (Gender Development Association (GDA) and the Association for Development of Women and Legal Edu-
cation (ADWLE)).  In total, 543 persons (30% women) have been consulted. The following section provides an 
overview of the comments and recommendation collected during the field work conducted for Project 2. 
The consultations showed that women participated in activities implemented under Project 1. It was generally 
reported that women had equal opportunities to participate and gain benefits from the project. In some villages, 
it was emphasized that women have a wealthy knowledge of the local forest which should be considered by the 
project implementors. With Project 1, women became specifically involved in law enforcement and participate 
in land and forest management committees and forest patrolling groups at village level. The project was found 
to strengthen forest management operations at the local level, especially for women, who have a better under-
standing of gender roles.

=== PAGE 204 ===
32 
 
Implications for the GCF Project  
Table 3. Summary of comments (Project 2) 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the project´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related project 
component/ ac-
tivity 
Corresponding 
measure in GAP 
Women know the forest well. Women frequently go to the forest in search 
of forest products for consumption and sale in marketplaces, and they are 
well knowledgeable about the condition of various resources. Further-
more, women have also demonstrated a wide range of interest in forest 
preservation. 
Most of the women went to the forest to find bamboo shoots, vegetables, 
rattan shoots, Boun shoots, cardamoms, and herbs to consume and sell. 
Women are more likely to go to the forest to find forest products than 
men. 
The GAP required that new guidelines developed under 
the project consider gender as a crucial factor in forest 
protection, monitoring, equal user rights, and benefit 
sharing, as well as resource management. 
Activity 
1.2.2, 
3.1.1 and 3.1.2 
(3) 
(7) 
(8) 
(27-30) 
In general, women are more likely to be involved in forest and land use 
than men due to the fact that they are more likely to seek forest resources 
for consumption and sale in markets and will get to know many details 
about the condition of the resources. In addition, women have shown a 
wide range of interest in protecting forests. 
See item 5 in Table 2 
- 
- 
Women have the same rights as men to participate in meetings for discus-
sions, decisions, and express their concerns about work. Despite the fact 
that women have the same rights as men and mainly use forest areas for 
living, they are less likely to involve in decision-making or other planning. 
(Yet, this does not seem to be the same in every village as in come villages, 
women form an important component of the main decision-making in 
farming and other businesses, with the majority of women serving as man-
agers.) 
See item 3 in Table 2 
- 
- 
Family obligations does sometimes keep women away from doing similar 
work as men in forest management or agriculture. 
Extension workers and trainers are trained on gen-
der-sensitive extension, and social inclusion in order 
to sensitize them for challenges faced by women. 
Gender expert reviews all training modules (materi-
als, coursework, etc.) in order to ensure accessibility 
for women. It is a cross-cutting goal of the GAP that 
Cross-cutting 
(3) 
(10) 
(11) 
(22)

=== PAGE 205 ===
33 
 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the project´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related project 
component/ ac-
tivity 
Corresponding 
measure in GAP 
Gender sensitivity and women’s interest are guar-
anteed in the project. The project will consider 
women-specific challenges when promoting agricul-
tural practices and technologies. 
There are some challenges faced by women and women-owned or-led 
businesses, including the absence of the primary laborer in their house-
holds. 
The project will promote women-owned businesses by 
promoting their participation in PSAP agricultural exten-
sion activities. At least 7% or more of the households join-
ing PSAP agricultural extension activities and receiving 
support are women-led. 
All, 
especially 
Component 2 
(21) 
(22) 
Clear communication should be ensured by the project. It was recom-
mended that it is important to build the capacity of the government coor-
dinator on communication and facilitate women's participation, because 
the government coordinator has the responsibility of announcement to 
women to participate in the activities. 
The project should promote women’s self-empowerment and more trust 
in themselves. The project should closely work with the village chief and a 
representative of women at village level to ensure women's engagement 
in the project. 
Gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) is considered 
a cross-cutting element and will be mainstreamed 
through project-related products/ materials, and train-
ings. 
Technical staff from District Agriculture and Forestry Of-
fice (DAFO), (Department of Forest Inspection) DOFI, and 
(District Lao Women’s Union  (DLWU) will be trained in 
gender issues.  
Cross-cutting 
(1) 
(3) 
(6) 
(10) 
(16) 
Cross-cutting 
The project implementation committee at all levels should have women as 
members, including at district and village levels. 
The LWU is part of the Steering Committees on all levels 
and also participates in implementation. For the village-
level, the project emphasizes the participation of women 
for all different committees. For instance, for village for-
est management committees there is a quota of 30% 
Activity 
2.1.2 
and 3.1.1 
(3) 
(13) 
(17-19) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
 (28) 
The project should ensure that trainings are conducted in local languages 
and provide interpreters, if needed. Most challenges to ethnic women's 
participation are communication and access to information because of lan-
guage barriers, especially for Hmong and Lahoo ethnics. 
The project is aware of this challenge and will ensure that 
interpreters are present if needed. The Ethnic group de-
velopment plan emphasized that translation support will 
be available, and key materials will be provided in local 
languages, where suitable. Project 1 gathered experience 
and the use of local languages was monitored. This con-
firmed that local languages have been used in village 
Cross-cutting 
Cross-cutting

=== PAGE 206 ===
34 
 
Stakeholder comment and/or recommendation 
How it has been integrated in the project´s gender ac-
tion plan: 
Related project 
component/ ac-
tivity 
Corresponding 
measure in GAP 
meet-ings concerning all activities (including FPIC) in rel-
evant villages. Project 2 will build on this experience and 
ensure accessibility to all activities. 
Local and traditional knowledge should be mapped, shared, and scaled up 
based on proper location. Women do well know how to use NTFPs, so in-
clude them on village forest committees. Each ethnic minority has their 
own traditional knowledge and capacity. This knowledge and capacity 
should be listed and mobilized to support project implementation. 
NTFP management and development will be promoted 
under Activity 3.1.1 on village forest management. The 
project will ensure fair participation and access to these 
activities for women and ethnic minorities. 
Component 3 3 
(27)  
(28) 
There is limited in access to information on laws and regulations on forest 
conservation and management and sustainable land use available to villag-
ers, including ethnic minority groups. Appropriate information and educa-
tion material for ethnic women and ethnic minority groups should be de-
veloped and distributed with frequency, such as including forest or land 
law content in the ma-terials. 
Under Component 3 Village Communities will be trained 
by capacitated government staff to implement sustaina-
ble (village) forest management plans. This activity will 
include the development of appropriate information and 
education material.  
Component 3 
(16) 
(19)

=== PAGE 207 ===
35 
 
4. 
Gender responsiveness, expertise, and gender equality 
in the partner organisation 
The main implementing partner of the planned GCF programme will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
(MAF) and the EPF (host of the National REDD+ Funding Window).  
The majority of staff – especially at senior level – within the responsible departments and divisions, including the 
REDD+ desk, are men. Hence, there is a general gender imbalance at partner level. This imbalance becomes 
worse at the Provincial and District level. As mentioned above, the DoF is striving to hire and promote more 
women into its divisions to increase the number of women in conservation work to at least 30%. A current figure 
could not be obtained.  
 
Representation in terms of numbers is one issue; the factual participation of female staff who are already work-
ing in the departments is another, as particularly female junior staff are often not actively participating in meet-
ings. This was also observed in the Provincial DAFO/DOFI interviews. 
Implications for the planned GCF project 
Besides supporting the partners in proactive and improved recruitment and promotion processes of female staff, 
the current gender capacities of all staff seem to be rather low. The GCF programme should emphasize the im-
portance of gender mainstreaming clearly and from the design stage all the way through to evaluation of activi-
ties. Knowing that partners do particularly well in response to quantified analysis of the costs of gender inequal-
ity, the GCF programme could benefit substantially from a commissioned study used for partner communication 
and capacity development measures. 
A gender training for all involved partners – including the LWU – should be supported, focussing on the gender 
dimensions of the forestry sector, REDD+ and climate-resilient and deforestation free agriculture and agricultural 
value chains. 
 
The Lao Women´s Union is not seen as a direct implementation partner but should be utilized by the programme 
as much as possible to compensate for the current lack of gender capacities and to ensure a continuous commit-
ment to gender equality (see also Chapter 3.3).

=== PAGE 208 ===
36 
 
5. 
Gender responsiveness and expertise in the project/ 
among project staff in the country 
As Project 2 has not started yet, nothing can be said about the gender responsiveness of the not yet assigned 
project staff. However, the performance of Project 1 as the successor of the Project 2, can be assessed.  
For Project 1, a consulting team was hired to ensure that environmental and social safeguards are enforced and 
also to mainstream gender. The Gender and Safeguards Team has focused on mainstreaming gender and the 
Gender Action Plan into the actual processes, a broad set of activities and all systems of the project. 
One of the team’s initial tasks has been to review all major approaches of (village level) guidelines and to confirm 
their integration of gender. Also, the Master Budget was thoroughly checked for risks associated with gender, 
ethnic minority status, disability status, literacy, and other axes of vulnerability, and action proposed. During 
each quarterly planning, all POs review and assess the risks and mitigation measures related to the planned 
action inputs. 
When developing the system, the ESMP and the Gender Action Plan were analysed in detail by the Safeguards 
team, and their key elements were integrated into the project’s activities and operational systems. 
Consideration of gender is fundamentally embedded into the approaches of all village level activities, mainly 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC), Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP), and Village Forest Management 
and the Promotion of Sustainable Agricultural Practices (PSAP). 
Implications for the planned GCF project 
The planned Project 2 should build on the experience of Project 1 and established a Safeguards Team to imple-
ment and monitor the project’s safeguards and gender management system. It should employ at least one advi-
sor with in-depth knowledge and implementation experience in gender equality and mainstreaming in the con-
servation sector. The vacancy should explicitly require such expertise.  
To ensure sound integration into all activities, this position would ideally be with a senior technical advisor rather 
than with a junior position. This person would be most appropriate to also become the general Gender Focal 
Point of the project to oversee gender mainstreaming efforts, including gender sensitization for both men and 
women.  
It is important, however, to equally empower all team members to be able to mainstream gender into their work 
areas, especially the senior staff and the staff responsible for monitoring and evaluation.  
If not all staff possess sufficient gender expertise, the project should invest in a technical gender training aiming 
to enable the team to proactively and effectively integrate gender into all workstreams.  
All standard procedures of the programme should be streamlined to review gender aspects throughout the 
course of the project.  
The GIZ Gender Strategy, GIZ Guidelines on Designing a Gender-Sensitive Results-Based Monitoring System, the 
Practical Guide to Gender-Responsive Programme Management and the Guidelines on Gender in Reporting pro-
vide useful guidance for the whole team.  
Additional technical expertise to integrate gender into forestry projects is provided by FAO´s Practical Field 
Guide, “How to mainstream gender in forestry”86. 
 
 
 
 
86 FAO 2016

=== PAGE 209 ===
37 
 
6. 
Gender gaps and recommendations to integrate them 
into the GCF programme 
The following table connects the identified gaps (i.e. in addition to those identified in the stakeholder consulta-
tions), with regard to gender with proposed recommendations to act upon these drivers. The third column shows 
the integration into the existing outline for components and activities of the planned GCF programme, and the 
fourth column where they have been integrated into the Gender Action Plan.  
 
They are not listed according to priority. They should be integrated as much as possible throughout the course 
of the programme, starting with the funding proposal, the Log-frame, the operational planning, and monitoring 
and evaluation systems. 
 
Furthermore, it is strongly recommended to review this analysis and the effectiveness of the suggested activities 
on a regular basis, and to include it in the required on-boarding documents for new programme staff.

=== PAGE 210 ===
38 
 
 
Table 4: Identified Gender Gaps 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
The current capacities of Government 
staff at all levels to actively integrate gen-
der and ethnic considerations into their 
management and implementation ap-
proaches are very limited, and the major-
ity of staff are male. Ethnic languages are 
often a barrier of communication which is 
not actively addressed. This strongly af-
fects inclusiveness at the ground level, 
where women are often left out of plan-
ning and decision-making activities if not 
actively encouraged to participate. 
• 
Project 1 conducted various 
trainings and trainings of train-
ers for Lao Women Union and 
Agriculture and Forestry Office 
staff. At village level it was 
made sure to include both gen-
ders in all trainings related to 
participatory land use planning 
and agricultural development. 
This approach will be continued 
under Project 2.  
• 
All guidelines on FPIC, PSAP, 
PLUP, VFM and VFAG devel-
oped or updated under the pro-
ject’s scope have been thor-
oughly reviewed by the Safe-
guards team and in can be con-
firmed, that each of these ap-
proaches 
explicitly 
includes 
gender. 
 
The program will train all concerned Gov-
ernment staff, including Lao Women´s Un-
ion (LWU) and the REDD+ Funding Win-
dow management, on gender equality, cli-
mate change risks and best practices to 
strengthen resilience, climate-resilient 
and deforestation-free AFOLU measures 
and social inclusion. 
 
The project will mainstream gender across 
all guidelines, manuals and training mate-
rials. 
 
It will further implement targeted train-
ings to support the capacity development 
of female staff for all implementing Gov-
ernment agencies at all levels to improve 
the gender balance within the land use 
sector. 
Communication materials on forest pro-
tection, climate-resilient and deforesta-
tion-free agriculture and other project-re-
lated awareness raising and capacity 
building activities should be gender-sensi-
tive, user-friendly and in different ethnic 
languages whenever possible. All commu-
nication and information materials will be 
revised by a gender specialist.  
Cross-cutting/ 
all 
(3) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8)

=== PAGE 211 ===
39 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
The consultations showed that women 
are considered the main users of forest re-
sources and possess vast knowledge of 
their surrounding natural habitats and 
their status of degradation, but rarely par-
ticipate in forest management and moni-
toring due to lack of education and tradi-
tional norms. 
▪ 
The Village Forest Management 
Plan (VFMP) guidelines describe 
the process for the creation of 
VFM committees (VFMC) and 
integrate the quota of at least 
30% female committee mem-
bers. 
▪ 
To date (April 2021) 40% of 
VFMCs consist of at least 30% 
women with 40 villages as-
sessed. The low share of female 
members in initial villages had 
been reported to GIZ advisors 
and implementers by Safe-
guards Team and since then fe-
male participation has gradually 
increased.  
The program will support the develop-
ment of guidelines local village forest 
management committees, and set stand-
ards of to ensure such committees are ac-
cessible for women, members of diverse 
ethnic groups and the poor, including a 
quota of at least 30% of female members 
per committee. The by-laws should also 
provide alternative pathways for people 
to fulfill the necessary requirements to be-
come committee members (e.g. minimum 
education standard OR passing of a stand-
ard oral test).  
LWU will support consultation processes 
to help strengthen gender equality in pro-
gram implementation.  
VFMs will be designed in a gender-sensi-
tive manner, considering the differenti-
ated priorities and needs of women (facil-
itated by gender-sensitive guidelines, and 
staff trained on gender equality and social 
inclusion). The specific needs of women-
headed households will be discussed at 
village level to enable their participation in 
forest management committees.  
3.1.1 
 
(1) 
(5)  
(13) 
 
The consultations at village level showed 
that environmental awareness is still very 
limited. The greatest motivation for villag-
ers to engage in protection measures is 
found when they see immediate effects 
▪ 
The project 1 used gender-sen-
sitive communication materials 
throughout 
implementation. 
The LWU was actively engaged 
in exchanges and meetings at 
The program will promote awareness-rais-
ing campaigns through the use of interac-
tive tools and gender-/ethnic-sensitive 
communication materials which consider 
existing motivation factors, and differenti-
1.2.2 
2.1.1 
3.1.1 
3.2.1 
 
(1) 
GAP 
budget 
considers 
DSAs 
for 
villagers,

=== PAGE 212 ===
40 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
on their livelihood through diminishing re-
sources (less income, less food). Exchange 
with other villages is commonly seen as a 
very effective tool to initiate change, but 
women are often prevented from travel-
ing due to traditional norms and lack of 
transport. 
village level to enable women 
to participate.  
ated needs and priorities. All major com-
munication materials and awareness rais-
ing campaigns will be reviewed and ap-
proved by the program´s safeguard, gen-
der and M&E specialist.  
A specific focus will be on raising aware-
ness on climate change impacts and main-
streaming adaptation across project activ-
ities to strengthen the resilience of men 
and women. As men and women are im-
pacted differently by climate change im-
pacts, these activities need to be gender 
responsive.  
The program will further enable female 
villagers to participate in exchanges and 
meetings outside the village through di-
rect campaigning through LWU and Gov-
ernment staff, and provide allowances 
and means to travel if necessary. 
and 
will 
provide 
support to 
access 
trainings. 
There are currently no specific women 
groups active in forest management. The 
Lao Women´s Union (LWU) is usually the 
only active organization which can influ-
ence decision-making at all levels.  
• 
The LWU participated in key vil-
lage-level activities to make 
sure, that the gender perspec-
tive is put into practice. Moni-
toring data shows, that in 87% 
of all village level activities, the 
LWU has actually participated 
(total of 1,415 working days). 
The project will to continue to utilize the 
LWU as much as possible to represent and 
reach women, and it is recommended to 
allocate budget directly to the local LWU 
offices to enable them to responsibly co-
facilitate project activities. 
Cross-cutting/ 
all 
(3) 
(13) 
(17)-(20) 
(25) 
(27) 
The current Law Enforcement Actions 
Plans do not consider gender aspects and 
• 
The project promoted the par-
ticipation of women in law en-
forcement measures such as 
patrolling. According to the APR 
The project will continue to support inclu-
sion of women in law enforcement 
measures (e.g. patrolling) and ensure con-
sistent monitoring. Early experiences with 
1.2.1 
(29) 
(33)

=== PAGE 213 ===
41 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
are therefore not considerate of the po-
tentials of women´s role in forest use and 
protection. 
2022, an assessment of the ac-
ceptance by villagers of local 
women-led forest patrolling 
groups has been done. It shows 
that in the 8 villages assessed, 
63% of the respondents would 
accept a woman-led forest pa-
trolling group. (If including the 
not-yet validated data, 57% 
over 18 villages expressed a 
positive interest). Even though 
their training has not yet 
started, current data shows 
that 5 village patrolling groups 
have a woman leader, out of 7 
villages with validated data 
available. 
“good practices” of female-led patrolling 
groups should be used for scaling up activ-
ities in the three new provinces.  
Legally, women and men have the same 
rights to land. Reality shows, however, 
that women´s land tenure is still less se-
cure than men´s. Women are also often 
not actively included in decision-making 
steps of land use planning (LUP). The sub-
sequent forest management plan and ag-
ricultural activities are then seen by local 
men and women as a specialized step 
which women are even less part of. Rea-
sons provided are lack of education to as-
sume responsibility for “technical” tasks, 
time constraints, lack of confidence to 
• 
More than 14,000 villagers en-
gaged in the consultation pro-
cess of PLUP with 46% of total 
participants female. 
• 
As noted above, to date (2021) 
19% of VFMCs consist of at least 
30% women with over 21 vil-
lages assessed. 
• 
Generally, the share of women 
implementing actions is 46% 
over 544 events. (if including 
not-yet validated data, the 
LUP processes supported by the project 
will be vigilant in actively including all 
women and men in the target villages 
(separate meetings; women meetings led 
by female staff). 
Quotas will to be set and monitored to en-
courage women´s inclusion in village man-
agement committees (at least 30%). 
Quotas will be set to encourage the partic-
ipation of women in meetings, and tar-
geted support (e.g. business skill training, 
training of program staff on gender equal-
ity and social inclusion) will be provided to 
strengthen the effective engagement of 
Cross-cutting/ 
all 
Cross-cut-
ting, 
all 
measures

=== PAGE 214 ===
42 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
participate in management decisions, and 
traditional norms of many ethnic groups. 
numbers are 45% women im-
plementing actions over 743 
events). 
• 
It should be noted that the se-
lection of (female vs. male) im-
plementers (usually govern-
ment staff, who implement ac-
tivities in the field) is largely out 
of reach of the Safeguards 
team, as staffing decisions are 
taken by the partner organiza-
tions (LWU, LFND and mostly 
District Agricultural and For-
estry Offices). As in early stages 
FPIC implementation strongly 
relies on the LWU and future 
activities will more strongly pro-
nounce technical agricultural 
and forestry activities, the 
share of male implementors is 
expected to rise significantly. 
Thereby, the project’s ability to 
“increase” the ratio of female 
implementers is limited to a 
certain extent.  
women. Adequate timing and location will 
be chosen to enable the participation of 
women. 
Again, LWU can function as a facilitator 
and skills developer for village women, if 
budget is allocated accordingly. 
In the context of agricultural and forestry 
activities, the project will consider gender 
inequalities and ensure that women are 
involved in the development of deforesta-
tion-free agricultural supply chains (e.g. 
include the promotion of female domi-
nated or gender neutral supply chains and 
agricultural practices, or enable women to 
gain access to formerly male-dominated 
agricultural domains, as appropriate). The 
focus will be on empowering women in 
the respective value chains by providing 
them with better means, knowledge and 
networks to do their work instead of load-
ing them with more work on top of their 
already full daily schedule.  
Implementers and project partners need 
to be capacitated to mainstream gender 
aspects in their work for the project and 
motivated to choose female implement-
ers 
whenever 
possible.

=== PAGE 215 ===
43 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
Women and men in the villages are willing 
to make the shift away from shifting culti-
vation and other land use systems contrib-
uting to deforestation, towards deforesta-
tion-free agriculture as long as the shift 
provides more income and considers the 
high work loads of villagers. Women tradi-
tionally work longer hours per day, 
whereas men´s work is physically of higher 
intensity. 
A market study is being carried out 
on 9 of the major PSAP whitelisted 
commodities, and the gender as-
pect will be integrated into it.  
 
35 products and agricultural prac-
tices have been “white listed” and 
private sector analysis is ongoing to 
identify all potential partners. All 
potential partners will go through 
the “business partners screening” 
before any agreement is made with 
them. 
The project will focus on the Promotion of 
Sustainable and Deforestation-free agri-
cultural Practices and Value Chains (PSAP) 
approach, which has been tested and re-
fined in Project 1. Sustainable, climate-re-
silient, and deforestation-free practices 
are promoted among target beneficiaries 
through the use of the “White List”, Com-
munity-based learning and consultation 
activities need to ensure that women and 
men can openly express their concerns 
(separate meetings, grievance mecha-
nisms considerate of gendered barriers). 
The distribution of labor among men and 
women will need to be assessed so that all 
actors receive adequate training accord-
ing to their roles and responsibilities. 
Women will have to be provided with the 
means to empower their roles along the 
selected value chains. 
 
There will be a quota of 40% participation 
of women in “PSAP”  awareness meetings. 
Gender aspect will be considered within 
the Business Partner Screening processes.  
2.1.1 
2.2.1 
 
(21)-(28) 
Women´s and men´s access to local mar-
kets strongly depends on road access. 
Women´s access is further limited by 
safety concerns, traditional norms and 
time constraints due to higher workload in 
Training of Trainers approach has 
been developed and knowledge 
transmission will be cascading from 
“main” trainers/implementers” to 
the other levels. ToT trainings are 
based on guidelines, all of which 
Extension and training for agriculture and 
forestry interventions have been and will 
be continued to be closely monitored by 
the project´s safeguard, gender and M&E 
specialist. All training modules and mate-
rials will be reviewed and approved by the 
Component 
2, 
cross-cutting 
(3) 
(9)-(12)

=== PAGE 216 ===
44 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
the families which prevent them from 
venturing out.  
 
Regarding general market access, women 
feel less confident and knowledgeable to 
venture beyond women´s traditional 
products (handicraft, weaving, NTFPs). 
 
Women also tend to have lower access to 
financial resources (see also the row be-
low) 
have been reviewed by the Safe-
guards Team. 
 
Gender aspects (such as access to 
markets, safety concerns, gendered 
workloads) are integrated into 
these ToT trainings through the 
“Promoting Social and  Environmen-
tal aspects into field work” section, 
mainstreamed into a broad variety 
of technical trainings.  
So far, 67 implementers have been 
trained. 
 
Moreover, workshops and trainings 
were organized covering REDD+ 
and gender topics in each province, 
to which a total of 151 participants 
attended (with on average ~38% 
women). 
 
specialist prior to approval to ensure that 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
(GESI) and women’s related issues and 
challenges are adequately considered. 
The issue of time poverty will be given at-
tention during planning and implementa-
tion of all training activities by choosing 
adequate timing and location of trainings 
to enable participation of women.  
All extension agents and trainers will be 
trained by the safeguards, gender and 
M&E specialist on gender equality and so-
cial inclusion within the framework of the 
program.  
Women-only business skills courses to be 
conducted for kumbans to support 
women-owned or led businesses and fe-
male 
entrepreneurship 
within 
agri-
MSMEs. This will also support business-
plan development to improve women-led 
agri-MSMEs access finance.  
Gender-responsive monitoring will be 
conducted, that permits active manage-
ment and learning throughout program 
implementation. Participation of women 
will be actively monitored, and measures 
will be taken to mitigate lack of participa-
tion in a timely manner. 
Budget will be provided for the provision 
of translators and the translation of mate-
rials into local languages, as necessary.

=== PAGE 217 ===
45 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
How to ensure women can access fi-
nance? Women are often less able to ac-
cess loans from larger financial intuitions 
(e.g. may not have land titles), and may be 
more reluctant to take loans.  
Female headed households and dis-
abled people, young households are 
given priority in the selection of 
PSAP participants. Monitoring data 
shows, that there are approxi-
mately 10 female participants in 
PSAP per village (27% of partici-
pants). 7% of PSAP beneficiary 
households are led by women, 
which is approximately double the 
ratio of female headed households 
in rural Laos. 
 
In 80% of villages women are repre-
sented 
in 
VFAG 
Committees, 
thereby attaining financial manage-
ment capacities and promoting 
women’s inclusion in economic ac-
tivities promoted by Project 1. 
Village banking in Lao PDR has been suc-
cessful in strengthening access to finance 
for rural women in Lao PDR. Over 1,650 
Lao Village Credit Associations exist, hav-
ing been strongly promoted by interna-
tional donor agencies as well as the LWU. 
LWU has as one of its main objectives in-
creasing access to credit and finance for 
women.   
VFAG committees must consist of both 
men and women, and have stringent re-
quirements for representation. LWU also 
plays an important role in supporting vil-
lage banking across the country.  
The project will support the channeling of 
small grants to Agri-MSMEs through the 
Climate Change funding window.  This 
process will be closely aligned with the 
VFAG approach and  follow guidelines and 
best practices for integrating women and 
ethnic peoples in management commit-
tees. Training will be provided for village 
committee members on managing fi-
nance, and ensuring socially inclusive and 
gender-equitable best practices are ap-
plied.The participation of women will be 
monitored by the gender-responsive pro-
ject monitoring and included in the annual 
progress reports. Guidelines for the crea-
tion of local village forest management 
1.1.1 
2.1.1 
2.2.1 
2.1.2 
 
Cross cut-
ting, 
all 
measures

=== PAGE 218 ===
46 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
committees set standards of require-
ments accessible for women and the poor, 
and a quota of at least 30% of female 
members per committee. 
In addition, additional trainings will be 
conducted for women on financial literacy 
and business development (within Activity 
1.7, as described in the GAP).87 These 
trainings build on best practices, and fur-
ther address comments raised in the con-
sultations that women may have more 
fears about lending risks and lower educa-
tion and require targeted trainings and ed-
ucation on financial literacy and business 
planning. Nonetheless, women in Lao PDR 
are often responsible for household fi-
nances, often considered ´family bankers´ 
and thus many villages have had positive 
examples in developing village banks and 
having women directly benefit from such 
micro-finance instituions.88    
Improved access to financial resources 
could lead to a risk in the escalation of do-
mestic violence.  
In 80% of villages women are repre-
sented 
in 
VFAG 
Committees, 
thereby attaining financial manage-
ment capacities and promoting 
women’s inclusion in economic ac-
tivities promoted by Project 1. The 
Women play an important role as family 
bankers, and while finances are often 
managed by women – decisions are often 
made jointly in many communities. It is 
not expected for the programme to lead 
to an escalation of domestic violence. 
Gender sensiti-
zation 
and 
equality 
cross-
cutting in all Ac-
tivities; 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
 
87 Builds off of positive experiences, such as those conducted in the ILO training courses “Get Ahead for Women in Enterprise”, which were designed for poor women who want to start or expand a micro-business. For 
more information refer to: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/documents/publication/wcms_099876.pdf  
88 E.g. see studies by Siebel and Kunkel (1999) – Microfinance in Laos: A Case for Women´s Banking; GIZ (2012) – Microfinance in Rural Areas – Access to finance for the poor; ILO (no date) – Banking as a solution: How 
microfinance can help reduce the need for young people to migrate for employment and thus diminish their vulnerability to human traffickers.

=== PAGE 219 ===
47 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
project monitoring did not indicate 
signs of increasing domestic vio-
lence due to project activities.  
Early experiences with micro-finance and 
village banks in Lao PDR have demon-
strated that it has led to mostly positive 
impacts for women, with main concerns 
voiced by women to include:89 
- 
Dominant role and decision mak-
ing of men 
- 
Limited capacities of women (fi-
nancial literacy and business plan-
ning), and 
Gender equality and social inclusion will 
be cross-cutting throughout all consulta-
tions, and trainings, as well as program ac-
tivities in general. Gender sensitization 
should be conducted for both men and 
women, including different age groups 
(e.g. youth, adults, elderly). 
Training will be held for men and women 
to understand their rights and relevant 
laws, while also discussing the importance 
of men and women to have access to fi-
nance and trainings, as well as other issues 
related to gender-equality. In trainings 
and consultations, representatives from 
LWU will be present, and can support 
awareness raising on women’s rights and 
available resources. 
For instance, at trainings for women on fi-
nancial literacy, information will also be 
provided on women´s rights, and available 
Activity 
1.1.1, 
2.1.2 and 2.1.4 
 
 
 
(12) 
(13) 
(16) 
 
 
89 GIZ (2012) – Microfinance in Rural Areas – Access to finance for the poor

=== PAGE 220 ===
48 
 
Identified gender gap 
Progress under Project 1 
Recommendation 
Related Project 
Activity 
No. of GAP 
measure 
resources in the instance of gender-vio-
lence. LWU will be an important institu-
tion to support such trainings, and provide 
key information – including disseminating 
the number for the Lao Women’s Union 
Counselling and Protection Centre for 
Women and Children, and discussing 
other services provided by LWU. There are 
often limited CSOs and resources in rural 
communities working on topics related to 
gendered-violence, and thus LWU remains 
one of the main focal points for dissemi-
nating information and providing support 
to rural women.  
Both local Government agencies and local 
villagers welcome private sector invest-
ment as long as it benefits the communi-
ties in terms of higher income and less 
workload, as well as enhanced skills. All 
parties expressed the wish to have the 
Government strongly controlling such po-
tential investments to limit risks for the 
communities. The interviewed women 
stated that they do not feel confident to 
participate in decisions over investments.  
Consultation have been conducted 
in a manner which ensured that all 
villagers feel safe to express their 
views and ask questions. 
Village consultations about potential pri-
vate sector engagement need to separate 
villagers from village authorities and men 
from women to ensure that all villagers 
feel safe to express their views and ask 
questions.  
2.1.2 
 
(25)  
(28)

=== PAGE 221 ===
49 
 
7. 
Measures for a gender responsive/transformative project design 
Table 5: Overview of measures for a gender-responsive/ transformative proejct design 
1. 
Summary of the results of the analysis, observed risks 
and conclusions for the project 
2. 
Measures to promote gender equality 
3. 
Measures to prevent or reduce gender-related risks and 
possible unintended negative impacts 
Gender aspects and risks which are particularly relevant for 
the implementation of the project and must be taken into ac-
count (external gender mainstreaming)  
• 
Violence against women is a reality for women from all ethnic 
backgrounds in Laos, combined with traditional norms, low 
levels of education and lacking mobility. This affects women´s 
participation, their confidence to speak up and voice opposing 
opinions, and their willingness and capacity to participate in 
village management tasks. 
• 
Economically empowering women at local levels can lead to 
an improvement of their situation but can also bear certain 
risks that need to be considered (e.g. risks associated to in-
creased mobility and GBV). 
• 
Capacity development on GESI is necessary for all stakehold-
ers and implementation partners, since only very few Govern-
ment staff in the sector possesses in-depth knowledge on gen-
der and gender-related stereotypes prevail. 
• 
Through its extensive networks, the LWU has been able to 
bring women’s voices into public administration at all levels — 
often providing the only female voice at the table 
• 
Women spend around four times more time than men on 
household and caring work leading to significant time con-
straints of women for other activities such as training opportu-
nities, participation in community meetings or other local deci-
sion-making bodies and long-term economic planning 
• 
Depending on the ethnicity, Lao women might lack Lao lan-
guage skills. 
• 
Women are often more affected by the negative impact of cli-
mate change. 
 
Conclusions relevant to Component 1: 
• 
Women and men have the same rights to land from a legal 
perspective, yet this is often overridden by local traditions and 
norms.  
• 
As with monitoring and law enforcement, despite women´s in-
depth knowledge of the forest, they are often not involved in 
monitoring activities.  
 
Overarching project measures 
1. 
Mainstream gender sensitization throughout all project activi-
ties 
2. 
Provide women with access to information to become aware 
of their legal rights under national and international laws in the 
context of capacity building activities 
3. 
Develop and provide training on Gender and countering Gen-
der-based violence (GBV) 
4. 
Utilizing the existing gender structures, especially the LWU, 
for project implementation. Project 1 involved the LWU as a 
key actor in its FPIC process and other participatory activities 
at village levels. The cooperation should be continued under 
Project 2. 
5. 
Technical training for all concerned Provincial and District 
LWU, P/DAFO, P/DOFI (Forest Inspection) on gender and so-
cial inclusion in climate-resilient and deforestation agriculture 
and forest management is recommended to mainstream ef-
forts and align the local implementers and decision-makers. 
6. 
Introduce quotas for the participation of women in relevant 
project activities 
7. 
Gender expert to review all training modules (materials, 
coursework, etc.) in order to ensure accessibility for women. 
8. 
Ensure that interpreters for local languages are present if 
needed to ensure accessibility for women of ethnic minority 
groups 
 
1. 
Engage men and boys to promote non-violence and gender 
equity. This may include community-based training on gender 
equality and how to respond to GBV, particularly for local lead-
ers, men of all ages, including gatekeepers. 
2. 
Actively involving senior and technical staff to foster a govern-
ment culture where gender is increasingly mainstreamed 
3. 
Project 2 will need to ensure that the acquired knowledge from 
Project 1 and other initiatives is utilized. Under project 1 im-
plementation, gender aspects have been integrated into 
Standard Operating Procedures, guidelines, manuals, and 
work plans, and monitored the status of implementation. 
4. 
New or revised guidelines developed under the project to 
mainstream climate change adaptation should consider gen-
der as a crucial factor in land use planning, deforestation free 
value chains, forest protection, monitoring, equal user rights, 
and benefit sharing, as well as resource management to avoid 
cases of maladaptation  
 
Measures for component 1 – Enabling environment for REDD+ implementation 
1. 
Ensure equal participation of men and women in participatory 
land use planning activities by setting meeting quotas (e.g. 40% 
participation of women in “PLUP” consultation meeting and 40% 
participation of women in FPIC meetings) 
2. 
Making them an integral part of community that contributes to 
the Provincial Deforestation Monitoring System and law enforce-
ment. This includes gender-responsive mechanisms for com-
munity monitoring. 
1. 
Facilitation support by LWU to ensure that women feel safe to 
express their views and options during FPIC and PLUP meet-
ings

=== PAGE 222 ===
50 
 
Conclusions relevant to Component 2: 
• 
Main inequalities between female and male headed house-
holds in rural Laos lie in respect of land, livelihood diversifica-
tion and cash income. Households headed by women tend to 
have smaller land plots (if at all), fewer options for income gen-
eration and lower crop marketing rates. Depending on the ag-
ricultural product and value chain, the role of women and men 
can differ significantly. Some are male-dominated, some are 
female-dominated, others are equally shared.  
• 
Women-owned enterprises are usually smaller (mostly at mi-
cro-scale) and employ fewer workers than those owned by 
men and tend to be less mobile. This poses a risk to achieve 
gender equal participation in project activities. 
• 
Main barriers for female entrepreneurship include limited ex-
posure to innovative practices, lack of formal business train-
ing, limited access to networking opportunities, poor access to 
capital and mindset limitations, such as low confidence.  
 
 
Conclusions relevant to Component 3: 
• 
Women traditionally possess deeper understanding about the 
forest resources, spend considerable time in them as users, 
and – according to the interviewed Government staff – are 
more likely to show interest in forest protection, educational 
measures should particularly target women. 
• 
Local and traditional knowledge about the collection of forest 
products and NTFPs is often with women and ethnic minori-
ties.  
• 
Lao women play key roles in both climate change mitigation 
and adaptation strategies, but these are often insufficiently 
recognized or supported. 
• 
Women often have less access to decision making and plan-
ning processes, despite being the main users of forest lands. 
Therefore, there is a risk of unequal participation of women in 
project activities 
 
Measures for component 2 – Market solutions for agricultural drives of deforestation 
1. 
Assessment of value chains to be promoted under the project 
concerning the distribution of work among men and women. 
Thereby ensure that a gender assessment is integrated in every 
analysis for potential new agricultural practices and value chains 
supported by the program. 
2. 
Ensuring that women receive targeted training opportunities 
(e.g., business capacities, financial literacy) and extension ser-
vices as well as access to information on climate change im-
pacts and sustainable agricultural practices.   
3. 
Introduce quotas for the participation of women-led agri-MSMEs 
in relevant project activities.   
4. 
Integration of gender aspects within the agri-MSME screening 
processes and monitoring to ensure accessibility of funds to 
women-led agre-MSMEs 
1. 
Provision of training exclusively targeting women to enable 
their active participation to create a trustful and save meeting 
environment so that they feel safe to express their views and 
ask questions 
2. 
Careful selection of location and timing of meetings, therefore 
addressing the challenge of time constraints to enable the par-
ticipation of women in meetings and trainings. Inadequate tim-
ing and location could result in an unintended preselection of 
participants by gender 
3. 
Selection of value chains traditionally controlled by women for 
promotion to prevent male dominance 
4. 
All assessments for the promotion of value chains or agricul-
tural practices should review the estimated gendered impact 
of the desired change (access, needs, barriers, potentials, 
workload, benefits) to not only increase the participation of 
women, but to also mitigate risks of additional time and work-
load on women.  
5. 
Train extension workers and trainers on gender-sensitive ex-
tension, and social inclusion in order to sensitize them for 
challenges faced by women. 
6. 
Ensure that no additional burdens are put one woman by in-
creasing their workload. Instead, the project should provide 
women with better means, knowledge, and networks to im-
prove their agri-MSMEs.  
Measures for component 3 – Climate change mitigation and adaptation through forestry 
1. 
Introduce quotas for the participation of women and women-
headed households in relevant project activities.    
2. 
Setting a quota of 40% participation of women in community 
meeting 
3. 
Setting a quota of 30% female members in forest management 
committees 
4. 
Conducting a survey to determine if women felt actively included 
in REDD+ related meetings 
5. 
Empower women to become members of village forest manage-
ment committees and other village decision-making bodies at 
the local level 
6. 
Promote community-based women-led patrolling groups and 
support their creation with capacity development and awareness 
raising. 
7. 
Enable participation of women-headed households in forest 
management committees by meeting their specific needs (con-
sidering time poverty, lack of resources, limited mobility, and 
network) 
 
1. 
Ensure that gender is a cross-cutting topic throughout all training 
modules and materials and will encourage gender sensitization 
for men and women. 
2. 
Closely consider safety aspects for female forest patrols, as they 
are often dangerous activities, and may be far away from vil-
lages.

=== PAGE 223 ===
51 
 
Key findings on gender expertise, gender responsiveness, 
and equal opportunities in the partner organizations (chapter 
4) (external gender mainstreaming) 
1. 
While MAF´s commitment to gender mainstreaming and to the 
established structures is very high, the gender division re-
mains understaffed and therefore with low absorption capac-
ity. Implementing government agencies have weak capacities 
on gender, potentially posing a risk to achieve gender equality 
within the project.  
2. 
Most staff – especially at senior level – within the responsible 
departments and divisions, including the REDD+ desk, are 
men. Hence, there is a general gender imbalance at partner 
level. This imbalance becomes worse at the Provincial and 
District level. 
3. 
Lao Women´s Union is not seen as a direct implementation 
partner but should be utilized by the pro-gramme as much as 
possible to compensate for the current lack of gender capaci-
ties. 
1. 
A gender training for all involved partners – including the LWU 
– should be supported, focussing on the gender dimensions of 
the forestry sector, REDD+ and climate-resilient and deforesta-
tion free agriculture and agricultural value chains. This would 
strengthen gender responsiveness of partner organizations. 
2. 
Proactive involvement of LWU in all project activities as local 
implementation partner 
1. 
Emphasize the importance of gender mainstreaming clearly 
and from the design stage all the way through to evaluation of 
activities to change processes that could reinforce gender in-
equalities. 
2. 
 Support DOF in its ambition to for striving to hire and promote 
more women into its divisions to increase the number of 
women in conservation work to at least 30%. This could be 
done by emphasizing the need to collaborate with female im-
plementers and setting quotas for female participation in staff 
training for partner institutions, this could prevent reinforcing 
existing gender imbalances by training male public staff only. 
Key findings on gender expertise and responsiveness, in the 
project team (chapter 5) (internal gender mainstreaming) 
1. 
As Project 2 has not started yet, nothing can be said about 
the gender responsiveness of the not yet as-signed project 
staff. 
2. 
For Project 1, a consulting team was hired to ensure that 
environmental and social safeguards are enforced and to 
mainstream gender. 
3. 
The Gender and Safeguards Team has focused on main-
streaming gender and the Gender Action Plan into the ac-
tual processes, a broad set of activities and all systems of 
the project. 
4. 
The ESMP and the Gender Action Plan were integrated into 
the project’s activities and operational systems. 
 
 
1. 
The planned Project 2 should build on the experience of Project 
1 and established a Safeguards Team to implement and monitor 
the project’s safeguards and gender management system. 
 
 
 
1. 
It is important to equally empower all team members to be able 
to mainstream gender into their work areas, especially the sen-
ior staff and the staff responsible for monitoring and evaluation, 
to work against gender-based inequalities at implementation 
level. 
2. 
All standard procedures of the programme should be stream-
lined to review gender aspects throughout the course of the pro-
ject.

=== PAGE 224 ===
52 
 
8. 
List of References 
 
ADWLE 2016 (Association for Development of Women and Legal Education), accessed 29.01.2019: 
http://adwlelaos.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/SRP001_Cedaw-Assessment_EF-14-07-2016-
ENG.pdf 
 
ASEAN 1988: Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the ASEAN Region. Accessed 
https://asean.org/?static_post=declaration-of-the-advancement-of-women-in-the-asean-region-
bangkok-thailand-5-july-1988 
 
ASEAN Declaration on Gender-Responsive Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 
and Sustainable Development Goals in 2017. Accessed 01.02.2019. https://asean.org/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2017/11/7.-ADOPTION_ASEAN-Declaration-on-the-GR-Implementation_CLEAN_Sept.8-
2017_for-31st-Summit_CLEAN.pdf 
 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 2008: Final report on “Capacity-building for Gender Mainstreaming in 
Agriculture and Forestry in Lao PDR” 2008. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-docu-
ment/67491/35309-lao-tacr.pdf 
 
ADB 2011. Civil Society Briefs: Lao PDR. Accessed 28.01.2019. https://www.adb.org/sites/de-
fault/files/publication/28968/csb-lao.pdf 
 
Climate Investment Funds 2017: Gender and Sustainable Forest Management: Entry Points for Design 
and 
Implementation. 
Accessed 
01.02.2019: 
https://www.climateinvest-
mentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge-documents/gender_and_sustainable_forest_manage-
ment.pdf 
 
Convention on Biological Diversity: 2015-2020 Gender Plan of Action. Accessed 20.01.2019. 
https://www.cbd.int/gender/action-plan/default.shtml 
 
FAO 2016/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: How to mainstream gender in 
forestry: A practical field guide. Accessed 14.01.2019. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6610e.pdf 
 
FAO 16/07/2018: Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox increases gender considerations in its 
modules. Accessed 21.01.2019. http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/sfm-
home/detail-events/en/c/1145493/ 
 
FLEGT VPA process in Lao PDR 2018. Accessed 19.01.2019. http://www.euflegt.efi.int/docu-
ments/10180/451571/Lao+PDR+at+Chiang+Mai.pdf/927b65b0-24fa-705d-8d69-9df73c7a9f5f 
 
GCF Programme Annual Progress Report, December 2021. Internal Programme Document. 
 
Gender Inequality Index. http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII 
 
Green Climate Fund 2019, Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan 2020-2023, November 2019, 
GCF/B.24/15 
 
GIZ 2019, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), „GIZ Gender Strategy“, Ja-
nuary 2019.

=== PAGE 225 ===
53 
 
GIZ/Bode 2018: Gender Analysis of the programme “Protection and Sustainable Use of Forest Ecosys-
tems and Biodiversity”. Analysis can be requested by the ProFEB project. 
 
King & van de Walle 2007: Girls in Lao PDR: Ethnic affiliation, poverty, and location. Pp 31-70 in Lewis 
& Lockheed (eds): Exclusion, gender and education. Case studies from the developing world. Washing-
ton DC, Center for Global Development  
 
Lao CSO Directory 2017. Accessed 05.02.2019. https://laocs-kis.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/e-
Directory_LAO-CSO_eng.pdf 
 
Lao PDR´s 9th National Socio-Economic Development Plan 2021 - 2025. Accessed 24.03.2022. 
https://data.laos.opendevelopmentmekong.net/lo/dataset/594f94b8-1b77-4225-b779-
8c16512bf073/resource/34208f7e-ba9e-4a50-90e3-3632581658be/download/_eng_9th_nsedp_fi-
nal_print_12.1.22.pdf  
 
Memorandum of Understanding on ASEAN Cooperation in Agriculture and Forest Products Promo-
tion 
Scheme 
2014. 
Accessed 
22.01.2019. 
http://agreement.asean.org/media/down-
load/20141003172848.pdf 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 2015: Agricultural Development Strategy to 2025 and vision to 
the year 2030. Accessed 20.01.2019.  http://www.maf.gov.la/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/MDS-
2025-and-Vision-to-2030-Eng.pdf 
 
National 
Biodiversity 
Strategy 
and 
Action 
Plan 
2016-2025. 
Accessed 
22.01.2019. 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/la/la-nbsap-v2-en.pdf 
 
NCAW 2015 (National Commission for the Advancement of Women): Summary Report. A Study on 
Violence Against Women in Lao PDR. Accessed 25.01.2019. http://www.la.one.un.org/images/publi-
cations/Lao_PDR_Violence_Against_Women_Summary_Report.pdf 
 
 
Open Development Laos 2018: SDG 5 Gender Equality. Accessed 24.01.2019. https://laos.opendevel-
opmentmekong.net/topics/sdg-5-gender-equality/ 
 
RECOFT 
October 
2021. 
Lao 
uplifts 
strategy 
to 
build 
gender 
inclusion 
in 
forestry. 
https://www.recoftc.org/en/lao-pdr/stories/lao-uplifts-strategy-build-gender-inclusion-forestry 
 
RECOFTC October 2018. More Women in Conservation a Forestry Department Goal. 
https://www.recoftc.org/en/lao-pdr/news/more-women-conservation-forestry-department-goal 
 
RECOFTC November 2018. Solutions for Change: Changing Gender Narratives in Lao PDR. 
https://www.recoftc.org/en/lao-pdr/stories/solutions-change-changing-gender-narratives-lao-pdr 
 
Southiseng & Welsh 2010: “Competition and Management Issues of SME entrepreneurs in Laos: Evi-
dence from Empirical Studies in Vientiane Municipality, Savannakhet and Luang Prabang”, accessed 
01.02.2019: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0ecf/65aa1985eb04f17330e721daadc785a0a1d5.pdf 
 
The United Nations in Lao PDR 2015. The Millennium Development Goals and lessons learnt for the 
post-2015 
period: 
A 
Summary 
Review. 
http://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Reports%20and%20publications/2015/Govern-
ment_LaoPDR_MDG_%20Review_September2015_FINAL.pdf 
 
The United Nations in Lao PDR 2018, accessed 24.01.2019: http://www.la.one.un.org/sdgs/sdg-5-
gender

=== PAGE 226 ===
54 
 
 
UNDP 2017 (United Nations Development Programme): Graduation from Least Developed Country 
Status: Lao PDR. Accessed 25.01.2019. http://www.la.undp.org/content/dam/laopdr/docs/Re-
ports%20and%20publications/2017/5th%20NHDR%20-%20Lao%20PDR.pdf 
 
Women2030 Project: About the Sustainable Development Goals. Accessed 21.01.2019. 
https://www.women2030.org/about-the-sdgs/ 
 
Women2030 Project: About Women2030. Accessed 21.01.2019. https://www.women2030.org/the-
women-2030-programme/ 
 
Work Plan for Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) in ASEAN, 2016-2025. Accessed 
24.01.2019. 
https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Work-Plan-for-FLEG-in-ASEAN-2016-
2025.pdf 
 
World Bank and Asian Development Bank 2012: Country Gender Assessment for Lao PDR, accessed 
15.01.2019: 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/33755/files/cag-lao-pdr.pdf 
 
World Education Blog 2015: Education increases awareness and concern for the environment. Ac-
cessed 
02.02.2019. 
https://gemreportunesco.wordpress.com/2015/12/08/education-increases-
awareness-and-concern-for-the-environment/

=== PAGE 227 ===
55 
 
9. 
Annex 1: List of consulted stakeholders 
 
Names 
Government office/village 
Mr. Kim Thoummala  
Deputy Director General of PAFO Houaphan 
Ms. Phengvanh Sermkhamlar 
Deputy Director General of LWU Houaphan 
Mr. Lar Khamvongsa 
Technical Coordinator PAFO Houaphan 
Mr. Singthong Phanthavongkham 
Deputy Head of DAFO Sam Neua 
Ms. Kongkhammany Lorlakhang 
Deputy Head of LWU Sam Neua 
Ms. Phoungseng Oudommyxai 
Deputy Head of LWU Sam Neua 
PAFO & POFI team 
PAFO/POFI Luang Namtha 
PLWU team 
PLWU Luang Namtha 
DAFO team 
DAFO Luang Namtha 
DLWU team 
DLWU Luang Namtha 
15 female villagers 
Ban Yard, Houaphan, Sam Neua 
13 male villagers 
Ban Yard, Houaphan, Sam Neua 
27 female & 8 male villagers 
Ban Nam Mad, Luang Namtha 
4 female, 10 male villagers 
Ban Nam Dy, Luang Namtha

=== PAGE 228 ===
56 
 
10. 
Annex 2: Transcripts of stakeholder interviews 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PAFO & PLWU Houaphan 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Supporting the CLIPAD activities 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
Collection of NTFPs. 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
PAFO: Women should be part of REDD+ activities but in fact are not yet, except of women´s participa-
tion in village meetings (PRAP etc.). Awareness-raising campaigns on forest laws and regulations also 
targeted women. Capacity-building activities on District level also focus on gender in REDD+ activities 
(trainer from PAFO, participants LWU, DAFO, DoNRE, police, DIndCommOffice). More trainings will 
follow in every District (supported by FCPF).  
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
Higher levels (Provincial and national) need to be trained further so that they can support building the 
capacities of the Districts. Also, activities in the villages need continuous effort to reach out to women.  
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
80% remoter, mountainous communities, so change of livelihood will take time and a multi-sector ap-
proach. If women are not understanding the activities and goals, change will not happen. Challenges in 
having women truly participating: lack of understanding and education esp. amongst remoter living 
ethnic groups; changes to their lifestyle need lots of awareness raising first; if women are not con-
vinced of the suggested change (lifestyle, livestock & agriculture changes etc.), it usually does not hap-
pen in the communities. 
 
Note: Village Development Funds (VDF) are mainly used by women (livestock projects mainly). 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
NTFPs & firewood are usually collected and sold by women (often to Chinese marketers), so the bene-
fits include them.  
Forest Management Plans help to determine roles and responsibilities in villagers´ forest use.  
 
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
Women groups are usually less active in forest management activities, but the LWU is part of the Live-
lihood Improvement Group, and women are mainly responsible for the VDF management.

=== PAGE 229 ===
57 
 
8. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
PAFO: Our knowledge and experience to support gender equality are not sufficient, despite the many 
projects we have implemented. We need trainings in management, procurement, accounting, and fi-
nance, and other technical trainings including livelihood improvement and gender, implementation 
and agriculture-related technical trainings. Study tours to other countries are useful to understand 
practical implementation, even between villagers (peer-to-peer learning between different villages 
from different Provinces).  
 
9. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Clipad implementation has improved our understanding about gender issues and women´s participa-
tion. (Note: Interviewees did not understand the question.) 
 
10. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
Decree PM, LWU law, SEDP all suggest the equal participation of women. This must be mentioned in 
the regulations as well, and integrate these existing laws into the new regulations, even if only in the 
programme area first as a pilot. The laws for equal participation are in existence – but it´s upon regula-
tions to make sure it is happening. 
 
11. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
We have a Law Enforcement Action Plan until 2020 (responsible: Dep. Of Forestry Inspection, POFI), 
but it is very generic, no mentioning of women´s participation. We should think of ways to include 
women in law enforcement measures. If they would like to go on patrolling, they should be supported 
in that. 
 
12. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
LUP before forest management plan, so it paves the path to equal participation. The plans should be 
very specific (giving %, at least 20% suggested) how many women have to participate in which land & 
forest use & management.  
So far, LUPs have only been done for areas, not for individual HH, so it´s hard to draw conclusions on 
the factual land tenure security from that. Having both names of husband and wife on land titles will 
guarantee women´s and men´s equal and tenure. 
 
13. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Note: Question was not understood correctly. 
 
14. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Agricultural Strategy leads the way. Cash crops promoted for Houaphan: coffee, Chinese cardamom, 
pilot projects are already running (too early to draw conclusions). One main difficulty is the lack of 
markets.  
 
15. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now?

=== PAGE 230 ===
58 
 
Key problem is the general lack of markets, not the production. PSEDP tries to address the market 
gaps and production needs. Rice is not identified as a commercial crop in Houaphan, only for domestic 
consumption.  
 
16. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
LWU: Micro finance is a very essential mechanism to promote women´s economic activity. However, 
MFI are hard to access for people, only a few Village Banks exist /through VDF). PAFO & PLWU think it 
would be essential to increase access to microfinance/village banks in Houaphan to promote people´s 
confidence in new production methods etc. 
 
17. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers? 
 
Investment are a huge potential but need to be tailored to the different potentials of the Districts, e.g. 
Livestock in Houameuang and Sam Neua, Viengxay for fruit trees, etc. Ecotourism as huge potential 
for the NPA areas. The potentials are already assessed and written into their strategy.  
GoL has to support with careful study of the impacts on local communities – f the investment is not 
beneficial and does not create increased income for people, we cannot allow such investment.  
 
18. Any other remarks?   
 
LWU: national laws & strategies, as well as leadership position quotas are in place – the gap is on the 
implementation level, where we need very concrete guidelines, with details on gender equality, par-
ticipation figures.  
 
Women lack knowledge because of lower education levels, young marriage an issue, lower roles in 
society despite laws stating equality. Just setting quotas does not help if it is not combined with 
awareness raising on all levels (incl. villages); needs trainings for GoL officers dealing with villagers; 
LWU is present in all villages but needs stronger utilization in village management 
 
Women can play a huge role in deforestation-free agriculture, e.g. silk worm farms & silk production, 
cotton could be female-driven productions. Now too much import from Vietnam, but we could sup-
port the development of these value chains in Houaphan. Textile industry is very inclusive, since it 
does not require high education and also disabled women can work in it.

=== PAGE 231 ===
59 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: DAFO Houaphan Sam Neua 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Districts/DAFO are key implementers of REDD+ mechanisms. Roles: planning process, hotspot and po-
tential analysis,  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
Women are main users of forests, so they need to get involved in all activities and facilitated by all sec-
tor agencies incl. LWU 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
Involvement of women in the planning processes very limited, since mostly only the head of HH partic-
ipate.  
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
We have to have more women participating already from the planning process in villages onwards. 
That starts with awareness raising for the women (DLWU key responsibility, in collaboration with 
DAFO and other line agencies).  
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language barriers; kumban level meetings usually include travel which women cannot do, so only men 
attend.  
Solutions: hire more ethnic staff in District teams. Keep either meetings to the village level only, or 
allocate resources and organize pick-ups for women to be able to travel. 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
Women have little access to decision-making and planning processes on forest resources, but are the 
main users of the same (NTFPs collecting & marketing/selling). In regards to benefitting from that 
work in the form of shared decision-making, families definitely discuss purchases and investments 
jointly, but the final decision is with the husband as the traditional head of the HH. 
 
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
No women groups except of LWU. 
 
8. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
Still need CB; new technology which needs more training and staff fluctuation are challenges; need 
more training on gender issues, plus regular opportunities to discuss and exchange on implementation 
experiences. 
 
9. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?

=== PAGE 232 ===
60 
 
 
Insufficient integration on implementation level. Suggestion of study tours between villagers (learning 
exchanges), and integrate a gender perspective into these exchanges 
 
10. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The Forest Law is too general, so regulations need to be based on the reality of Districts and Provinces. 
For the creation of the regulations, it would be best to include both District authorities and villages in 
the consultations. Bottom-up approach. 
 
11. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Villagers incl. women first need to understand why the laws are relevant, so enforcement starts with 
encouraging villagers´ support to adhere to the laws. 
 
12. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women could be part of NTFP monitoring, but needs a lot of initial support and follow-up. 
 
13. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
LUP did only allocate land on a village level so far, but most of the times, no land titles have been is-
sued yet. That put women in disadvantage because the key decisions in LUP were and are taken by the 
(mostly male) village authorities and heads of HH. Future LUPs need to be more specific in regards to 
land use, and half-completed LUP processes need to be completed. No land tenure security on the 
current basis. 
 
14. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Needs in-depth village-by-village potential and risk analysis. Funding to invest needs to be available. 
People are already willing to stop shifting cultivation but currently don´t have alternatives.  
 
15. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
Lack of financial resources, plus lack of confidence to risk investments.  
Markets are local, and many villages are too far off the markets and cannot access them.  
DAFO suggests creating a form to monitor which products are produced where and sold where, so 
that market assessments become possible, and prices can be regulated for the benefit of the farmers 
(who usually don´t get paid enough). Creation of this form could come from the Provincial Office for 
Industry and Commerce, collection of data by their District offices. 
 
16. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
They would probably benefit from that if there would not be the immense risk to lose investments 
(e.g. when livestock diseases kill the animals they purchased from borrowed money). Also, the interest 
rates need to be low so that poorer people can access MF, e.g. in Village Banks.  
 
17. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fibre industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers?

=== PAGE 233 ===
61 
 
 
Proposals will go through PAFO which will review the benefits for the villagers carefully. Consult with 
the villagers, and do an area survey. Monitoring and follow-up by DAFO. 
 
18. Any other remarks?   
 
Plans need to be realistic in terms of budget. Use regular village visits to raise other than usual topics 
(e.g. gender issues in the frame of livelihood improvement, something tangible for the villagers). Make 
meetings more attractive for villagers, making clear what the benefit for them is in attending.  
DDG DAFO: target the senior men in a village if you want to promote gender equality, and keep it sim-
ple and interesting (videos, games etc.).

=== PAGE 234 ===
62 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: DLWU Houaphan Sam Neua 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
FPIC and VDF implementation and management; no direct implementation responsibility for REDD+, 
e.g. village forest management agreement as part of FPIC process 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
LWU contribute to legal dissemination and mobilization of women in the villages to aid forest protec-
tion.  
 
3. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Knowledge and understanding in women low which affects meetings and participations significantly: 
low education rates esp. amongst women in remote areas 
 
4. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
Forest Management Committee has LWU member, but usually not more women (7 members total) – 
so women´s decision-making power is very limited. It is difficult to find more women for this task be-
cause most don´t feel educated enough to do the technical tasks related to that responsibility. 
 
5. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? Are there activities in the planned program they think they will/would like to support but 
would need more in-depth knowledge for? 
 
Once District Steering Committee is in place, conduct a gender training for them and us focused on the 
kind of activities which will be implemented on the village level.  
 
6. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are?  
 
The implementation is usually not gender-sensitive, very few people understand gender equality.  
 
7. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
Regulations and all legal documents should include aspects of gender equity, which build the basis for 
implementation. Create a specific guideline on gender for the implementation of programme activi-
ties. Add to the guidelines that line agencies have to send at least local language-speaking staff to the 
villages to ensure that everyone understands the activity and is able to participate.  
 
8. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
Challenge to follow through now with jointly signed land titles for wife and husband.  
LWU is part of LUP committees in the villages and tries to engage female villagers in the discussions.  
 
9. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute?

=== PAGE 235 ===
63 
 
Forest Management Committee of all villages have already one fixed female member (the LWU mem-
ber), so she could support women´s support to monitoring the forest.  
 
10. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
Promoted alternatives need to make sure that tasks in the production can be fairly distributed be-
tween men and women so to avoid increased work load for either, esp. women. Alongside promotion 
of more equitable share of domestic work (awareness raising campaigns).  
 
11. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
MOIC has to support the identification of new markets. Markets now are too far away for most re-
mote villages. Sometimes villages produce a lot (e.g. vegetables) but markets are too far away to bring 
it there and sell it.  
 
12. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
MF can aid women to start businesses in handicraft, livestock, agriculture. Main customers of MF insti-
tutions are currently women. Combine access to MF with business trainings for women. In case of 
cash crop promotion, provide such training before the introduction of new cash crops, so that women 
are prepared and more confident.  
More hands-on trainings to learn new skills are needed (e.g. handicrafts). Also not only talking about 
how to access markets, but organize learning tours for villagers to markets. 
When creating access to MF: Conduct educational trainings on MF which are sensitive to women´s 
fears and insecurities regarding risk and lower education levels. 
 
13. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers? 
 
Concession & labor fees should go to villagers, land goes back to village. Technical knowledge should 
be provided by the company to the villagers.

=== PAGE 236 ===
64 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PAFO Luang Namtha 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Preparing new structure for REDD+ implementation right now; PRAP finalized but awaits signing. Con-
sulted with Provincial REDD+ task force. Activities budgets are currently prepared, five core activities: 
REDD dissemination, forest regulation dissemination, scaling up PRAP activities & training, admin 
budget 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
No separation from GoL side. VDF or conservation fund oftentimes are more lead by women and are 
seen as key players in management and accounting. Patrolling is traditionally done by men, even 
though it is not specified to be like that. As long as forests are close to the village, women could also 
do that task.  
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
Women could have many roles – because they are more careful and considerate of the natural re-
sources. Women often have more valuable additional work, like handicraft/textiles. NTFP  collection. 
Rubber harvest done more efficiently and successfully by women. 
 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
We are aware that we need to involve especially women when it comes to the dissemination of forest-
related information to village women. We will separate in women and men discussion groups because 
otherwise women will not speak out. Women are also important educators towards their children. 
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Women are the key persons in collecting NTFPs etc, but in ethnic villages, it is mostly men who take all 
decisions. We need to increase our awareness raising to these communities regarding equal decision-
making. 
Lack of Lao language skills makes it difficult to communicate with ethnic villagers, esp. the women. 
They often only talk to the Naiban. But many ethnic groups, including Akha improved their Lao signifi-
cantly in the last ten years, so it is getting easier to access them.  
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
Women as money-keepers of the family possess higher benefits from the resources. In many ethnic 
minorities, men however have often the “last word” in decision-making. Not the case in the cities, 
where women usually have higher decision-making power. 
Men have more access to forest resources management. We need to get more women into the forest 
management. Women are usually the money keepers in Lao culture, so if women see the “cash value” 
of forest resources and their management, they will naturally want to become more involved.  
 
7. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
LWU only as a group. VDF has promoted a lot of women in managing roles, especially in regards to 
SME development. Ecotourism activities have promoted women into management positions.

=== PAGE 237 ===
65 
 
PAFO has some women in natural protection section (3 out of 8), forestry section (13 in total, 6 
women). 
 
8. What are their capacities, what would they need to improve? 
 
PAFO female staff has same capacities, but child birth puts them behind. Two female patrollers in Long 
District who work together with POFI as part of law enforcement.  
 
9. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
PAFO has two-three gender focal points, men and women, who is often involved in setting up activi-
ties and sometimes goes to the villages. Also, LWU is the go-to structure to implement any specific 
activities.  
 
A specialized training on REDD+ and gender would be useful before implementation starts. Also a 
training on improved facilitation and presentation skills for the staff to improve village work. 
 
10. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
Women were very much involved in the planning process of the current REDD* plan. The overall gen-
der-sensitivity is hard for us to assess.  
 
11. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
Not necessary to mention gender specifically in the regulations, but instead bring more women into 
the implementation. In some cases there is already a balance, but not everywhere. On Provincial level, 
balance is fine, but not in most villages, so focus there. 
 
12. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Patrolling is accompanied by PAFO, DAFO, DOFI together with militia and police. Not possible without 
villagers´ involvement. Villages often request GoL support. Work can be dangerous (hunters, loggers). 
Some women might have the capacity, but not in general.  
 
13. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
LUP has majorly completed except of villages with lots of immigration which makes it difficult for au-
thorities to update the necessary information to allocate land. Sustainable LUP needs to think more 
long-term than it previously has. Sing-District has particular immigration issue due to fast develop-
ment (pull location for many people). In terms of gender equality, LUP has so far benefitted everyone 
equally. Participation in forest-related decisions was very equal, and women and men feel equally in-
volved. 
 
14. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women know the forests well and should be largely involved in their monitoring. They are also viewed 
as more reliable and honest than men in providing this kind of information.  
 
15. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages.

=== PAGE 238 ===
66 
 
Cardamom, tea, NTFP. A negative point: in order to plant cash crops, small trees are often cut down. 
So the balance for agrobiodiversity is not perfect, leads to decreasing biodiversity. If we amp up cash 
crops, this also often means disturbance of wildlife, so we should find ways to limit disturbance.  
Shifting cultivation needs extensive labor, so any change from that to cash crops is likely positive in 
regards to people´s work load.  
In village consultations, women should be particularly targeted, esp. also with technical knowledge to 
empower them, and to utilize their role as their children´s educators.  
 
16. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
In the promotion, it is often good to discuss potential work divisions needed for a new product (e.g. 
men do planting, women harvesting etc.). 
Women usually know more about market access than men, and also what prices certain products get. 
That can be utilized in trainings. 
 
17. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
Microfinance institutions are often a high barrier for people to use as starters for a new value 
chain/product etc. because people are afraid of the interest rates and paying back the money on time, 
and might therefore not use it. Microfinance institutions possess very valuable technical knowledge 
though which can be useful for the villagers to learn how to identify sources for investment them-
selves, so a cooperation would be best. 
 
18. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers? 
 
Lessons learned from the past: organized study tour for villagers and provided them with seeds to em-
power them to start a new product, and PAFO made sure that a company buys the product (mak dao). 
In some cases, the companies provided the funds for these activities, sometimes PAFO if they have the 
budget for it. Another example: a paper company was built, so PAFO trained villagers how to plant 
bamboo to sell to that company.  
Both are running well, but they don´t feel these are sustainable solutions because price fluctuations 
tend to heavily impact the villages, often leading to deforestation because villagers rapidly need to 
plant other crops to earn additional income. 
If more companies are interested to invest, maybe agricultural land can be directly allocated to them.

=== PAGE 239 ===
67 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: PLWU Luang Namtha 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
PAFO usually coordinates with PLWU about forest-related activities, and vice-president and one tech-
nical staff are assigned to join all REDD+ consultations, including on the village level. Also join SUFORD 
activities on village level. Also gender-sensitive information dissemination to villagers.  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
LUP has been improved, many stopped shifting cultivation, jobs were created 
 
3. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like community 
forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone 
community forests? 
 
4. What women groups are currently involved in forest management modalities?  
 
LWU is not a key implementer but coordinates with all sectors to ensure gender equality. We wish 
more women to be part of the management also on village level. We need to mobilize women in the 
villages, and ask the village authorities to make sure that women equally attend. It is always a problem 
if only the head of the HH are called into meetings, because then only men join. Customary practices 
and too much house work hinder women further from attending. Education is lower for women, so 
they feel less confident in participating. All these factors need to be taken into account when planning 
village activities. 
 
5. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
We had some trainings as introduction into the sector but would appreciate more in-depth trainings 
on REDD+ and how to support the programme activities best. 
 
 
6. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
It was good that PLWU was involved in all consultations towards formulating REDD+ activities in the 
last year, so they feel it improved the gender-sensitivity of the process. 
 
7. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
LWU should be involved in the development of these regulations and guidelines. The Forestry Law has 
not been reviewed by them yet, so they don´t feel like they know enough. They want to improve their 
understanding once the law has been improved in the National Assembly.  
 
8. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Women are parts of different committees in the forest and should be systematically trained to also 
take part in law enforcement measures including patrolling.

=== PAGE 240 ===
68 
 
9. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
No specific challenges by gender, rather the general challenge that LUP has not been completed in 
some areas.  
 
10. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Women know the forests better than men and should therefore be strongly involved in the monitor-
ing of forest resources, esp. NTFPs.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
New crops need a gender-sensitive analysis before introduction if that crop would benefit everyone in 
the village and does not give women more work. 
Community-based learning and consultation activities need to separate women and men to make sure 
that all voices are heard equally.  
 
12. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
Make women more confident in starting a new crop/value chain. LWU and other sectors should be 
included in educated them several times and support them in identifying markets and promote their 
access for women to these markets. For example, this year cardamom suddenly did not sell well which 
scared many villagers away from trying out new products in fear of financial problems. We need a 
thorough documentation of lessons learned like this, and find sustainable solutions together.  
 
13. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
Having microfinance support is better than nothing but not the sole and optimal solution. For some 
women, this might help to get started. Very poor HHs do not take the risk in the first place, so micro-
finance alone is not the solution.  
 
14. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do you 
think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the invest-
ments are benefitting the villagers? 
 
Village consultations for such potential private sector investments need to ensure that village 
women´s voices and concerns are actively taken into account (only-women meetings etc.). 
 
15. Any other remarks?   
 
LWU should always be involved in village level activities because they can easily access village women. 
So they recommend to make the responsibility very clear that LWU is responsible to implement all ac-
tivities related to REDD+ and gender. This way it is ensured that gender is always an integral part. They 
feel ready to fully support the project.

=== PAGE 241 ===
69 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: Luang Namtha, District Lao Women´s Union 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
DLWU is usually invited by DAFO to join forest-related activities. No specific implementation experi-
ence in REDD+ activities so far but the Deputy Head of DLWU has participated in consultation meet-
ings for ICBF (by KfW), and bamboo projects. 
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
Women take part in forest management and protection, especially in regards to NTFPs. In the ICBF 
project, there are always also women in the village steering committees (usually the village LWU rep-
resentative). 
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
4. How could they be more part of it? 
 
5. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language, traditions, lower education. Early marriages in many ethnic groups. Children are living so 
close to nature and traditional life that they don´t want to go to school. In some ethnic groups and vil-
lages, not even the LWU can get the village women together: when they call for a women´s meeting in 
an Akha village, the men send their women away and attend the meeting themselves instead of their 
women. It´s very difficult to overcome their traditions. 
Also, road access and remoteness (in combination with lack of proper vehicles) is a barrier for staff to 
reach these villages. The District offices try to support each other with vehicles and in joining in activi-
ties together.  
 
What they do to overcome these barriers: information dissemination to both women and men, 
through women´s law information integrated into gender issues. Traditional gender norms which led 
men and women to believe that women are worth less than men are the biggest barrier to women´s 
inclusion in activities. Also, staff needs to adapt to villagers´ schedules. E.g., Akha women are not at 
home throughout the day, so if you want to meet them, the team needs to be flexible and wait until 
evening and sleep in the village. Also, changing traditions takes time – projects need to plan for re-
peated activities and flexible time frames to trigger change. 
 
6. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
Women are the key collectors of forest resources but most of the time are not given the opportunity 
to participate in anything related to village politics, including forest management.  
 
7. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
They feel they need more technical training on REDD+ and its gender implications to be able to fully 
support the new program.  
 
8. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?

=== PAGE 242 ===
70 
 
 
Very little. Gender is not an integral part of these planning processes and consultations.  
 
9. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The LWU Law should be consulted when drafting those guidelines and regulations. Opportunities for 
women to participate need to be actively integrated into any guideline, otherwise it will not happen. 
Also, include that the LWU should always by standard be involved in planning and implementation ac-
tivities, and any consultations. That would also then include that the LWU gets budgeted support to 
do this.  
 
10. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
LWU would like to be part of forest law enforcement measures. Village women should be part of the 
village steering committee where decisions about forest management and law enforcement needs are 
taken.  
 
11. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
Women and men have the same rights according to the Law but women are often not having the 
same opportunity to decide about their land use in comparison to men. That starts with a more equal 
and active participation of women in LUP village meetings which is often not realized. Women espe-
cially need to think about having only their own name on property which they inherited. Shared prop-
erty can have both names, but since women are still often at disadvantage when it comes to local legal 
procedures, they often lose their land, e.g. when their husbands die and the women remarries, and 
the land right was not clearly with the woman – the land usually then goes over into the men´s family.   
 
12. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
Whenever village conditions allow, both men and women should partake in forest resource monitor-
ing efforts, including patrolling if the traditions allow that. Whenever an active monitoring would not 
be possible for villagers (too far away, no vehicles, too dangerous, too much other work), they should 
at least always be consulted regularly. 
 
13. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
See next answer. 
 
14. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
LWU is often asked by projects to identify markets specifically for women which is necessary to do 
when introducing a new value chain. Many projects support women-typical income activities such as 
weaving/textile production but if there is no market and promotion of women´s market access, then 
the new value chain is not improving women´s lives 
 
15. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
Beneficial for women, village women should be included in the management of these banks at village 
level from the start. DLWU in Luang Namtha is not involved in microfinance. Difficult to assess for 
them if microfinance access would in fact empower women to start new products/businesses, but the

=== PAGE 243 ===
71 
 
DLWU would support this potentially beneficial activity to make sure that women are part of the man-
agement and implementation. 
 
16. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers? 
 
They don´t see potential for Luang Namtha District since there is no area for that. There is already a lot 
of rubber plantations. People don´t have funds to start such endeavors themselves, and there is no 
market to sell the new products. So any potential investment would have to analyze these challenges 
and keep sustainability and ongoing benefits for the involved people in mind. 
 
17. Any other remarks?   
 
DLWU Luang Namtha would be more than willing to implement own parts of the programme because 
they are usually only consulted. So a budgeted sub-implementation would be their favorite solution, 
or at least involve them in the steering committees for the program.

=== PAGE 244 ===
72 
 
GCF/GIZ, GoL interviews: Luang Namtha, District Agriculture and Forestry Office (DAFO) and District Office 
for Forest Inspection (DOFI) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. What is your role in REDD+ mechanisms implementation? 
 
Deputy DAFO head usually joins REDD+ consultations, but they feel they still have only limited 
knowledge of REDD+ 
But DAFO`s key role is to protect forests and their species, as well as general biodiversity/wildlife pro-
tection and emission reduction, and the adherence to laws and regulations, patrolling, deforestation.  
 
2. From your point of view: what are women´s specific roles in forest and land use, and in forest pro-
tection? 
 
Forest protection on village level, women have more roles and responsibilities because women usually 
go to the forest for NTFP production/collection and vegetable collection. Men mainly do dissemination 
and enforcement of regulations; only a few women are part of that level of protection/resource man-
agement.  
 
3. How are women already part of REDD+ mechanisms? 
 
In general, all activities aim to benefit all villagers equally. But especially in many ethnic groups, 
women are participating less in activities due to traditions. 
 
4. Which challenges do you see when it comes to remoter areas, women, ethnicity? 
 
Language, education, understanding of regulations and laws is very low. Use modern communication 
tools like posters, videos shown by LCDs to engage all villagers and to convey messages more playfully. 
 
5. Do you feel women have the same access to benefits from forest resources and their manage-
ment/decision-making? Is that different for different forest management modalities, like commu-
nity forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer 
zone community forests? 
 
In some villages, women are already part of village and forest management committees. DAFO thinks 
that the local LWU representatives are the best choices to systematically place into the forest man-
agement committees because they usually possess better education. 
 
6. How do you assess your current capacities to support the planned program in regards to gender 
equality? 
 
Implementation-wise we are ready, but always appreciate additional specialized trainings to improve 
our work, especially when the program requires certain knowledge and technical skills. We have suffi-
cient staff and capacities to implement the program. Study tours to other Provinces are very useful 
learning tools for them. 
 
7. How gender-sensitive do you think the current REDD+ mechanisms are? How much are REDD+ and 
gender aspects of it integrated into the SEDP?  
 
The activity is still too new for them to be able to assess that.  
 
8. The programme will support the development of regulations and guidelines based on the new For-
est Law: from a gender perspective, what needs to be thought of? 
 
The Forest Law is gender-neutral because law is law, and both men and women equally need to follow

=== PAGE 245 ===
73 
 
it once approved. Guidelines can be supportive in setting standards for village participation. Of course 
we also have to keep realities in mind – some ethnic groups just won´t let women participate, and 
even on the District Government level, we often struggle finding enough suitable female candidates to 
work with us. 
Since women are naturally already seen as the “protectors” of the forests, the development of guide-
lines can be a chance to foster this role for women. 
 
9. How can women be part in law enforcement measures?  
 
Women are much more reliable and committed to forest protection. They protect, men destroy. So 
we need to find ways to support women´s natural protection efforts. 
Women need to be formally part of law enforcement units. If it is not formalized beforehand, the vil-
lage authorities will just take over. Instead of approaching the village head (naiban), approach village 
LWU first. Could be entry point for PLWU/DLWU. Also, if women are more systematically placed in vil-
lage steering committees, they will also be more part of any law enforcement measures.   
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
Women´s and men´s names are both on land use titles now, so the legal status is equalized. Same for 
LUP.  
The challenge is within internal decision-making power relations in HHs which are harder to address. 
Land titling is not very advanced in the remoter areas of Luang Namtha.  
 
11. Development of a National Forest Monitoring System: how can women contribute? 
 
If such system is developed, formalize women´s support and contribution to that from the beginning. 
Women need to be part of that because they are main users and protectors of the forests. 
 
12. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
Which implications will that have on women´s work load? People´s livelihoods? What would that 
mean for the extension services provided? Programme will also include community-based learning 
and consultation activities with participating farmers/villages. 
 
If we want to stop deforestation, the focus needs to be on income-generating activities, including 
NTFP conservation, sustainable use of NTFPs, value-added products.  
Government needs to partake in village consultations since they will be part of the implementation.  
 
13. Promotion of deforestation-free value chains and access to markets: what are women´s greatest 
challenges to develop such value chains now, what are their barriers to access markets now? 
 
It is essential to focus on market demand when developing new value chains, but all in the frame of 
local traditions (e.g. Akha: textiles) to make it valuable and realistic for the villagers.  
Government needs to be part of the negotiations to ensure monitoring and support. 
 
14. Access to microfinance for these new value chains: how are women benefitting from that? 
 
Luang Namtha has only limited experience with microfinance. It could be very beneficial for people 
though to empower them to start new production methods, products etc.  
Besides microfinance, the DOFI sees VDF are great ways to empower especially women in leadership 
and management. Introducing village-managed funds for forest protection would empower women to 
take over that role.  
 
15. How do you see the potentials and challenges in inviting private sector investments in community-
based agroforestry in national production forests, including in the timber and fiber industries? Do 
you think villagers will be benefitting from such investment? How could the GoL ensure that the in-
vestments are benefitting the villagers?

=== PAGE 246 ===
74 
 
 
In Luang Namtha, rubber plantations are one of the drivers of deforestation. This needs to be taken 
care of, and avoided to do the same mistake again with another potential investment promotion. 
Government needs to be part of the negotiations to ensure monitoring and support. 
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Feasibility studies of every village are necessary before activities are decided upon because every vil-
lage is different.  
Road access/improvement is a huge issue for program implementation – many villages where defor-
estation is an issue are remote and hard to reach. So small infrastructure improvements should be 
part of the program. 
DAFO staff needs vehicles to access more remote areas.

=== PAGE 247 ===
75 
 
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Houaphan, Sam Neua, Ban Yard (Khmu & Hmong) – WOMEN GROUP (15 
women) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us something about how your life is like. 
 
Weaving, selling in Sam Neua, sometimes they have traders who regularly buy their weaving, shifting 
cultivation, paddy fields, livestock. 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Forest: 
Demarcation boarder clearing both, natural regeneration activities both (esp. youth); 
Men lead demarcation group, patrolling, timber harvesting for domestic construction, firewood collec-
tion (together with women), hunting 
Women collect vegetables, NTFP & tree fruit & bamboo shoots 
 
Land: work together, paddy fields, garden 
 
Livestock: poultry, everything near the house – women; further away (bigger animals): men 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Small planting activities; plantations of trees (rubber) inside the forest cover; adhere to the different 
forest management modalities according to LUP 
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly between men and 
women? 
 
Women are having higher work load than men because they take care of all the “less hard” tasks; men 
do the heavy tasks like plowing the field. This makes women busy over the course of a whole day.  
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Not of REDD+ as such, but about Environment Protection, climate change, forest protection and that 
we have to take care of it. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the years? E.g. Less re-
sources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
Resources becoming less and less over the last years. Since they started forest protection area, the 
trees recovered and to them it seems like there are more trees again. NTFPs got less. Women don´t 
want to walk too far away from the village (time constraints), so they have less NTFPs for domestic 
consumption.  
Soil quality went down, trying to use dung to fertilize but with little effect so far. No chemical fertiliz-
ers so far.  
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Not balanced within the village depending on how much you can collect and sell. Within HH, equal 
benefits.  
Women take care of finances. Decision-making about finances: small things sole decisions, bigger in-
vestments are discussed and decided jointly.

=== PAGE 248 ===
76 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, collaborative forests, 
protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests. 
 
Village use forest, protection forest, forest for NTFP collection 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that different for differ-
ent forest management modalities (like community forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, 
national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Have a Forest Management Plan. Committee has 9 members total, 3 women. Women participate in 
the discussions very well, esp. the LWU member who has higher education and is from the city and 
can bring lots of knowledge into the discussions.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
The existing LUP had positive effects for the villagers, esp. in regards to forest restoration and protec-
tion. No more conflicts about land since LUP, but as a suggestion it could be done for forest alloca-
tion/upland land as well because there are still conflicts between villagers. 
Land security did not change since LUP. They feel empowered and land-safe enough to negotiate with 
potential investors.   
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation activities with par-
ticipating farmers/villages. 
 
They hope to get more income, and to be able to construct a village meeting hall (and other things to 
develop the village). Interested in: vegetables to export to the markets, livestock, weaving, fish pond.  
Fears:  if full financial support by the project, they are ready to give up shifting cultivation. They just 
still do it because of lack of alternatives and financial resources to do the shift. 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management (village forest 
management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration activities) and monitoring (incl. 
patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
If women can work in groups, they would get involved in forest monitoring & patrolling. The pro-
gramme could train them how to do it, and they would like to get involved in that kind of forest man-
agement. In the committee, they already feel represented.   
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access them? 
 
Poor families because no transport to reach markets, and also because they often only produce very 
small amounts. Road condition is bad, esp. in rainy season (barely access then), so that should be the 
first thing to be changed. That would also change livelihoods in regards to health care access.   
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural practice etc.? 
 
Want Village Bank, would be best to access money on the village level and use it to do small invest-
ments. For what exactly, they would like to work with the programme in joint discussions and develop 
a plan together.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based agroforestry in na-
tional production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
They always support having new projects in the village, but are very careful with private sector in-
volvement. It must be completely ensured that the activity in the village will benefit everyone and is

=== PAGE 249 ===
77 
 
creating alternative jobs and increased income.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Priority on road improvement, increase paddy rice area, improve school building, irrigation systems, 
small village infrastructure like village hall, office. Small road to the paddy area would improve patrol-
ling as well. Financial support for forest management esp. for fire prevention (clearing forest line), pa-
trolling, surveying, replace demarcation signs.

=== PAGE 250 ===
78 
 
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Houaphan, Sam Neua, Ban Yard (Khmu, Hmong) – MEN GROUP (13 men) 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us something about how your life is like.  
 
Unity between men and women. Very poor living conditions/poverty. Low education, few jobs.  
Mainly work paddy fields, agriculture on shifting cultivation plantations.  
Deforestation decreased. Water supply good. Road access is at least there, so better off than other 
villages, but could still be improved. HH try to develop step by step. Some families don´t have enough 
rice throughout the year. Village has primary school. Compared to more remote villages, we feel we 
are having better conditions, but still many things to improve. Need to improve housing, commercial 
trade products. Some HH raise livestock to increase their income, but not too successful yet. Chal-
lenges in the village (Naiban) also include that the village is divided into two ethnic groups and villages 
which makes coordination and meetings harder. Road access improvement necessary for health care 
access. Improve school building. The Hmong group does not have enough paddy fields. They dug a 
road access to their fields with their hands. More forest land is available but too far away from their 
village (30km).  For secondary school, the kids walk about 6km to the neighboring village. 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Forest: men and women work together 
Land: Work together (harvest, fencing, paddy fields) 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Fire prevention, restoration. 
Patrolling currently done by men, but they feel women could also do that job if they want to do that.  
They also do watershed protection patrolling.  
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly between men and 
women? 
 
Men work more than women outside the harvest season because men check all the time on the fields 
whereas women are working at home & weaving. Naiban adds: men work harder but women work 
more. Men feel the main pressure to provide for their families is on men, and have to take on tasks 
and jobs which generate more income. They also feel like they always have to think ahead as much as 
possible to ensure their families´ income and well-being. 
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Never heard of REDD+, but of climate change, environmental protection etc. (activities by Clipad). 
Since the programme (2016), they started to protect their forest and created a Forest Management 
Committee which regularly reminds the villagers to take care of the forest.  
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the years? E.g. Less re-
sources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
Fruits on the trees increased because of the forest restoration measures, as well as bigger trees due to 
protection measures. Wildlife increased for the same reason. Good forest results in good/lots of 
mushrooms.  
NTFPs decreased.  
They also observe that the climate is changing: rainy season has more rain, more flooding, but the pro-
gramme (Clipad) helped to control the flooding.

=== PAGE 251 ===
79 
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Depends on how much work a family puts in, and how many family members contribute. But on aver-
age, all villagers benefit equally from the forest resources. Within HH, equal benefits, even in con-
sumption. 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, collaborative forests, 
protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests. 
 
Agroforestry area, NTFP. 
Protection forest is mentioned only after mentioning by programme team. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that different for differ-
ent forest management modalities (like community forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, 
national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests)? 
 
They feel women and men are both part of forest management, because they share tasks and have 
both men and women in the Forest Management Committee.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
No more conflicts about land with other villages any more since LUP, which they are very happy about. 
Forest protection measures are showing positive impact already (except for NTFP decrease).  
Recommendation: agricultural area should be divided by HH as well (DAFO came but still in the negoti-
ation process with villagers in conflict; for housing, areas are allocated already). 
Naiban: For the Forest Management, they still need funding for fire prevention (clearing forest line), 
patrolling, surveying, replace demarcation signs.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation activities with par-
ticipating farmers/villages. 
 
Villagers lack experience and knowledge on agricultural methods, and we have nothing to export to 
markets so far. So we need both technical and financial support to change to alternatives. Also, land 
analysis needs to be done to determine what cash crop would be suitable. We need support to do this 
analysis, as well as how to access markets. We want to be involved in consultations and decide to-
gether, and we want to feel sure that this change would improve our living conditions and income.  
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management (village forest 
management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration activities) and monitoring (incl. 
patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
Villagers are already an active part in forest management and are very keen to keep doing that, and 
take over new tasks if they feel it makes sense for the village.  
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access them? 
 
They feel like there are already a lot of vegetables on the Sam Neua market, so the transport costs are 
not worth the market trip.  
They would like to develop new value chains, new products (e.g. dried food which stores longer and is 
more unusual, so more people would buy it). 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural practice etc.?

=== PAGE 252 ===
80 
 
In the past, when funds were provided to villagers, they did not know how to use the money. So if ac-
cess to finance is provided, then jointly with business plan development.  
They feel taking loans is risky for the villagers in case they cannot sell their products. If analyzed care-
fully, MF/Village Banks would be great for the village. The village developed a lot in the last years, but 
with MF access they could start doing the investments into livelihood improvement as mentioned 
above.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based agroforestry in na-
tional production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
Private sector investment would be very welcome because they would create more jobs and infra-
structure in the village. They see potential for ecotourism with the nearby waterfall. 
Investments would need to be tightly controlled by the Government though to ensure that the villag-
ers benefit from the cooperation because we lack the experience and capacity to control the coopera-
tion ourselves. If a cooperation would change too much infrastructure in the village, they would not 
want it.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
Allocation of HH agricultural land needs to be continued.  
All programme activities should aim to increase people´s income through distinct products (similar to 
One District One Product), 
Road and school improvement will create better access to health care & markets, and education.  
Hmong representative repeats that they need road access to their fields and forest area.

=== PAGE 253 ===
81 
 
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Luang Namtha District, Ban Nam Mad (Akha ethnic); participants: 8 men, 27 
women) 
 
Notes: the interview was conducted with a mixed group of women and men of all ages. A separation by gender 
was impossible to get organized since the villagers had celebrations ongoing and decided that they would ra-
ther have one joint discussion. The discussion with the women also needed a lot of additional translation 
(Akha-Lao-English).  
 
Further observations: the village is located only a few kilometers outside main town Luang Namtha. The access 
to the city had significantly improved people´s access to health centers and markets. On the other hand, the 
trash problem of the village is immanent in every corner of the village. Environmental education has not been 
provided, and people´s understanding of the necessity of proactive environmental protection is basically not 
existing. Only the women showed a basic understanding of the correlation between their actions and the swin-
dling resources. 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell me how your life is like. 
 
Women: Harvest rubber in the morning, evening bamboo, rattan, broom grass, firewood & vegeta-
bles. Lot less work since women have road access & motorbikes & access to a rice mill. Getting up 
early to prepare rice and breakfast, feeding animals, washing. Women work more than men. 
Women earn more money than men, because men are lazy. Women are the money-keepers. 
 
Men: bringing harvest/rice down from the upland fields, now by tractor (until recently by foot or mo-
torbike). Shifting cultivation, no paddy rice.  
 
Rubber trees: share the work, depending on family 
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
See answer above. 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly between men and 
women? 
 
Depending strongly on family, all variations exist in this village. Generally, women work longer and 
more, while men do physically more straining work.  
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Since 2012 no timber harvesting regulation in place. 1mio LAK fine is to be paid per m2 harvested. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the years? E.g. Less re-
sources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
More people in the village, so the forest resources are getting less. Some people are harvesting contin-
uously without giving the forest the chance to recover.  
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from forest resources? How? 
 
Women benefit even more than men from the forest resources because the harvest everything from 
the forests and keep the money (and often earn more than their men).

=== PAGE 254 ===
82 
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, collaborative forests, 
protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests. 
 
Nearby is a natural protected forest area; land and forest allocation was only done between different 
villages so far. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that different for differ-
ent forest management modalities (like community forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, 
national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Mainly village authorities are taking decisions about all village decision, including forest management. 
No women in the village committee. Some women are ok with that, others not (but they don´t chal-
lenge the decisions).  
Note: After repeated attempts of getting the women to speak about their potential involvement in 
forest management, one woman speaks up stating that she would like to be an active part of the vil-
lage forest management. Then the women start a discussion on what ideas they have to support for-
est recovery, and how beneficial it would be if they could be part in decision-making. This discussion 
shows the importance of persisting in men-led discussions to hear women´s voices. The accompanying 
LWU member was helpful in explaining and encouraging women to speak – which showcases the im-
portant role the LWU is still able to play in village facilitations. 
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
No LUP or titling yet, only zoning. Process needs to be continued. Demarcation borders don´t mean 
much to them and the nearby villages – no one is really controlling the use.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation activities with par-
ticipating farmers/villages. 
 
Shifting cultivation is very hard and lots of work, so they would very much like to change to alternative 
crops. Rubber plantations meant less work for everyone, at least after the initial period (young trees 
need more care). 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management (village forest 
management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration activities) and monitoring (incl. 
patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
Women want to be part of the forest management, restoration activities, planning. Villagers want to 
increase patrolling in the future because currently, everyone is using the forest as they want and they 
see the resources decreasing.  
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access them? 
 
They keep some for their own consumption, and sell the rest on markets in Luang Namtha town 
nearby and a market in a nearby village. Rubber is sold to a company which is either coming to pick up 
harvested rubber or the villagers transport it to the company. 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural practice etc.? 
 
The village has no experience with any form of microfinance yet. With access to small amounts to bor-
row, the men would start small shops, the women would like to increase their handicraft and textile 
production and create a small business.

=== PAGE 255 ===
83 
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based agroforestry in na-
tional production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
The village would be open to a collaboration with the private sector, if the land is suitable.  
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
They would like to have access to the VDF, a bridge (requested since 10 years). They had built the 
school building by themselves but need more furniture for it. They feel like they are often requesting 
for things but rarely anything happens.

=== PAGE 256 ===
84 
 
GCF/GIZ, Village interviews: Luang Namtha District, Ban Nam Dy (Lanten ethnic group, natural tourism site; 4 
women, 10 men) 
 
Note: villagers asked for one joint meeting because they felt too busy to organize separate meetings. 
 
Implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Program through Improved Governance and Sustainable 
Forest Landscape Management 
 
 
1. Tell us about your everyday life. 
 
Naiban: rubber plantation care, paddy rice fields, some HH do shifting cultivation, livestock (pig, 
chicken, ducks, goats), few HH have small shops; paper production and textiles & handicraft mainly 
done by all women. Started to be tourism site in 2003 (officially opening in 2007 when they also re-
ceived funding support for that by ADB, today New Zealand´s Fund for Community Tourism Develop-
ment is supporting with funding until 2020), upon the idea of one of the villagers (a man). 7 villagers 
created the tourism site. When funding ends, the village plans to keep maintaining it themselves. 60% 
of the income from the site stays with the village, rest goes to Provincial Tourism Office and Tourism 
Fund and others. Villagers take care of it in rotation (cleaning, maintenance, ticket selling). No women 
in the management committee for the site because village women who stay in the village have low 
education (no literacy and calculation skills).  
The Naiban recognizes that they need external support to find ways to include women more in the 
management structures of the village. Women usually don´t want to participate in meetings. 
 
Women: they join meetings if they feel they can learn something. They feel shy, not educated enough, 
and as if they cannot contribute much.  
 
2. What are women´s and men´s specific roles in forest and land use? 
 
Villagers don´t use the forests much as the forest area is very small. Also see answer above. 
 
3. …and in forest protection? 
 
Only individual measures, nothing systematic.  
 
4. Do you feel like the work related to forest and land use are distributed fairly between men and 
women? 
 
Work is equally divided in our village: women do handicraft, paper, textile and clothing; men do con-
struction, paddy rice care 
Cooking, animal raising, rubber plantation care are done by everyone jointly 
 
5. Do you know of REDD+ mechanisms and why they are existing? 
 
Some families have little awareness about forest protection and watershed protection. They did not 
hear about REDD+ so far, but about deforestation, environmental protection, and they try to educate 
villagers who contribute negatively to that. 
 
6. From your knowledge of the forest and land: did you see any changes over the years? E.g. Less re-
sources, NTFPs etc.?  
 
10-15 years ago the biodiversity was significantly higher, now they perceive a stagnation. 
 
7. Do you feel like you benefit from your forest/natural resources equally? 
 
Income and benefits are shared equally within the HHs. 
Women: normally, the families keep the earned money together, but some men spend too much

=== PAGE 257 ===
85 
 
money on alcohol, so the women try to keep it together.  
 
8. What kind of forests do you have access to? Examples: community forests, collaborative forests, 
protection forests, national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests. 
 
LUP completed. Protected forest and use forest. 
 
9. Do you feel you are participating in forest management/decision-making? Is that different for differ-
ent forest management modalities (like community forests, collaborative forests, protection forests, 
national parks, wildlife reserves, and buffer zone community forests)? 
 
Women: we don´t have enough education to partake in any decision-making, and we are not strong 
enough. We would like to be part in decision-making, but don´t fulfill the requirements. The few 
women who have education either leave the village to the city or don´t want to be part in village man-
agement.  
 
10. LUP and improved tenure security: what are the current challenges esp. for women, what needs to 
be improved? 
 
Need to improve the existing LUP enforcement. When villagers don´t adhere to the LUP and cut down 
protected areas, they are called to the village office and have to pay a fine, and the District office is 
involved. But once the villagers do it again, no further consequences happen, so the villagers don´t 
take the protection areas serious enough. So enforcement is the key issue for our village. 
If the population is growing as expected, the LUP will also need to be adjusted and they will need 
more agricultural land.  
 
11. Programme wants to promote deforestation-free agriculture, away from shifting cultivation prac-
tices, and promoting alternative cash crop production practices: 
How do you hope this will change your livelihoods? What are your fears? 
Note: Programme will also include community-based learning and consultation activities with par-
ticipating farmers/villages. 
 
Villagers want to be involved in the consultations. Consultations teams need to be very clear that they 
want women to participate in meetings. Less than 10 families do shifting cultivation, so it is not seen 
as a big problem. We see that rubber prices are falling right now, so we need to think of alternative 
crops. 
 
12. The programme wants to make the villagers an active part of forest management (village forest 
management planning & agreements, forest planting, restoration activities) and monitoring (incl. 
patrolling): what do you think of that? Where do you feel women and men should be part of? 
 
See answer to question 9. 
 
13. What are your barriers to access markets? Which support would you need to access them? 
 
Rubber is currently the village´s main income source and bought by the only rubber company (Yun-
nan), which is trying to lower the price. Villagers are afraid that they lose income because of that mo-
nopoly soon.  
Handicraft and textiles are sent mainly to a center in Luang Prabang, and some to the Luang Namtha 
Tourism shop. They requested the Provincial Tourism Office to establish a connection, and the New 
Zealand Fund connected them and established a regular business. This is, however, just an additional 
income for the village, they are more dependent on rubber. 
 
14. What do you think of microfinance to start a business/invest in a new agricultural practice etc.? 
 
They have a village bank which made it easier for the villages to take small loans. They need more 
training for the village bank steering committee though, because financial literacy and understanding 
is still low.

=== PAGE 258 ===
86 
 
Women: most women do not take loans because they don´t know what kind of business/new product 
they could invest in. So a training and support in market demand analysis would be appreciated by 
both women and men. 
 
The village started their own VDF one year ago, and the money will be used for small infrastructure 
projects in the village.  
 
15. The programme wants to invite private sector investments in community-based agroforestry in na-
tional production forests. What do you think of that?  
 
In the past, we had a company approaching is to plant crops for biofuel but in the end, no one bought 
it. So a thorough market demand analysis is needed, and a diversification of crops and products to se-
cure income despite market fluctuations. Their dependency on rubber is too high, especially with the 
existing monopoly by Yunnan which already has huge concessions. 
 
16. Any other remarks?   
 
The funding support for the tourism site is ending soon, so the villagers are afraid what will happen 
then. The site already needs more maintenance than they can afford to provide. They also need fund-
ing and technical assistance in developing the site because many tourists just come to take photos of 
the village and the handicrafts but don´t go to the site. They have the idea to develop the site with ac-
commodation for tourists, and other interesting features like in other sites (swing etc.).  
 
They would also like more traders coming to the village and buy handicrafts – if that would happen 
regularly, many women would potentially be interested to take small loans to develop their handicraft 
businesses.  
 
Agricultural practices need to be improved, and market access beyond rubber.  
 
Watersheds are shared with other villages, so it is very polluted due to rubber pesticides. So even 
though villagers live at the stream, they experience severely limited water access.

=== PAGE 259 ===
GENDER ACTION PLAN             
 Version 4 (July 2022) 
 
Supporting a Funding Proposal to the Green Climate 
Fund 
 
Project Title:  
Scaling up the implementation of the Lao PDR 
Emission Reductions Programme through improved 
governance and sustainable forest landscape 
management (Project 2). 
 
Commissioned by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH

=== PAGE 260 ===
Page 2 
 
 
Contents 
 
1. 
Background and Introduction ............................................................................................. 3 
2. 
Gender Action Plan ........................................................................................................... 4 
3. 
Gender Action Plan and Indicators table .............................................................................. 5

=== PAGE 261 ===
Page 3 
 
1. Background and Introduction 
 
This Gender Action Plan (GAP) is for the Green Climate Fund (GCF) project “Scaling up the 
implementation of the Lao PDR Emission Reductions Programme through improved governance and 
sustainable forest land management” (Project 2). It forms the basis for operationalizing the results and 
recommendations of the gender analysis. It contains specific gender elements to be considered in the 
project design and during the implementation of project activities.  It helps the GCF project to advance 
gender equality through climate change mitigation and adaptation actions; and minimize social, 
gender-related and climate-related risks in all its actions. Moreover, it helps to monitor 
implementation of these measures and activities. Hence, the GAP ensures effective gender 
mainstreaming and integration of a consistent gender-perspective into the GCF project in order to 
maximize climate and development co-benefits. The aim is to promote opportunities, create an enabling 
environment for drivers of change and positive gender dynamics as well as to manage and mitigate 
potential adverse risks over the duration of the project. The GAP ensures that the project is compliant 
with GCF’s “Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020-2023” (GCF/B.24/15). The GCF’s 
guidelines from the “Revised Policy on the Prevention and Protection from Sexual Exploitation, Sexual 
Abuse, and Sexual Harassment” (GCF/BM2021/06) is also included in the project through the ESMP.  
 
The GAP is closely aligned with the component1 and outputs of the log-frame and planned activities 
outlined in the GCF Funding Proposal, where gender considerations are mainstreamed into all 
activities. It complements the Gender Assessment (FP Annex 8a), Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA, FP Annex 6a), Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP, FP Annex 6b), 
and Ethnic Group Development Plan (FP Annex 6d) that already contains gender-related aspects. In 
addition to the specific activities and measures of the GAP, the GCF project will not only follow the above 
mentioned GCF gender related policies, but also systematically apply some general measures in 
accordance with the GIZ Gender Strategy as well. In line with GCF, this gender action plan aims to 
enhance gender equality within the project’s  governing structure and day-to-day operations and it 
aims to promote the goals of gender equality and women’s empowerment through its decisions on 
the allocation of funds, operations and overall impact of its activities.  The overall objective is to 
contribute reducing the gender gap of climate change-exacerbated social, economic and 
environmental vulnerabilities and exclusions through GCF climate investments that mainstream 
gender equality issues.   
 
Gender equality is promoted by the Government of Lao PDR (GoL) and it has periodically formulated 
five-year strategies to advance women and promote gender equality such as the five-year Action Plan 
(2020-2025) and the National Strategy for Gender Equality (2016–2025) aligned with the recent 8th 
National Socio-Economic Development Plan as well as with Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5: 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. Lao PDR also has good legal frameworks 
to protect women and children from abuse and harassment and it is a party to the ASEAN Declaration 
on the Elimination of Violence Against Women and Children (VAWC) (1981), and has adopted the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989).  Similarly, the GCF project will not tolerate any form of 
Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, or Sexual Harassment (SEAH) and measure to address this has also 
been incorporated in this GAP to ensure that all appropriate measures to prevent, mitigate, 
investigate, and remedy SEAH in relation to acts perpetrated by project-related individuals in project-
related activities.  The ESMP has included measures to protect actual or suspected survivors and 
ensure their anonymity, physical safety and removal from proximity to suspected perpetrators through 
GRM and pathway referrals.   
 
1  Note: Project 1 used the term ‘outputs’ instead of components. In order to ensure alignment with the GCF Integrated Results 
Management Framework and new Funding Proposal Template, the term ‘component’ is applied under Project 2. Outputs under 
GCF’s IRMF are “Changes delivered as a result of project/programme activities that contribute to the achievement of outcomes.” 
– GCF. 2022. Guidance Note to support the completion of the IRMF elements of the revised funding proposal template for PAP 
and SAP, p. ii.

=== PAGE 262 ===
Page 4 
 
This GAP also commits to GIZ gender policy guidelines that include, but are not limited to the following:  
• 
A gender inclusive and gender-sensitive language is used in reports, training materials and 
publications. 
• 
In the project team(s), competencies on gender and gender-sensitive forest management will 
be considered during the hiring process and further developed by means of training. 
• 
The GAP will be executed by the different entities involved in the project management, 
including all concerned Government line agencies and development partners and led by the 
respective project’s Safeguards Team.  
 
 
2. Gender Action Plan 
 
The GAP, presented in the following Table, has been developed for the implementation of Project 2. It 
builds upon the GAP developed for Project 1, and has been revised and adjusted to reflect the design 
changes under Project 2 and lessons learned from Project 1 (see also the Gender Assessment in Annex 
8a for more information on the lessons learned and other findings from the gender assessment. The 
gender assessment and GAP have been developed through expert interviews with actors involved in 
Project 1, stakeholder consultations at the national, provincial, district and village level, and through 
the assessment of literature and key documents.

=== PAGE 263 ===
Page 5 
 
3. Gender Action Plan and Indicators table 
The following table comprises the Gender Action Plan for Project 2. As this Project builds on progress made under Project 1, the baseline percentage are 
often  based on the outcomes of project 1 activities, which reflect some progress achieved under Project 1 (conducted and as reported in the Annual 
Progress Reports – provided in FP Annex 18).  
 
 
2 It will include general monitoring data collection as well as specific safeguards, gender equality and social inclusion topics, and progress on co-benefits (e.g. food security) 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
1 
All (Core 
Indicator 2) 
Gender-responsive M&E 
system from project 1 to 
be extended to cover 
project 2 to track the 
number of female and 
male beneficiaries, and 
ensure gender-
responsive project 
management. 
Number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Project 1 target: 
120,000 persons from 
project 1 (60,000 
male, 60,000female) 
will be continued to 
be supported by 
Project 2 
390,391 indirect 
beneficiaries (195,196 
men, 195,195 
women) under 
project 1 
273,700 direct beneficiaries 
(136,850 men, 136,850 
women) 
723,382 indirect 
beneficiaries (361,691 men, 
361,691 women) 
 
Y:1-4 
Project M&E 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
the M&E 
System 
2 
 
Cross-
cutting (Co-
benefit 1) 
Mid-term and final 
household surveys will 
be conducted to collect 
gender disaggregated 
data.2  
Percentage (%) of 
female direct 
beneficiaries who 
confirm improved food 
security 
- 
70% by End of Project 
50% by Mid Term 
Y: 1-4 
Project M&E 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget  of 
the 
Household 
Survey

=== PAGE 264 ===
Page 6 
 
 
3 Note: It is out of the projects control if the LWU representative is available. The project team will call and attempt to coordinate in every village. 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
3 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Implement training for 
all concerned Provincial 
and District LWU, 
P/DAFO, P/DOFI (Forest 
Inspection) on gender 
and social inclusion in 
climate-resilient and 
deforestation agriculture 
and forest management  
 
See also Measure 9. 
 
 
 
Technical staff from 
District Agriculture and 
Forestry Office (DAFO), 
(Department of Forest 
Inspection) DOFI, and 
(District  Lao Women’s 
Union  (DLWU) have 
been trained in 
“Climate-resilient and 
deforestation-free 
sustainable land 
management  and 
Gender” 
Technical staff from 
DAFO, DOFI, and LWU 
have received no 
trainings (or, in rare 
cases, limited 
training) in gender 
issues pertaining to 
Climate-resilient and 
deforestation-free 
sustainable land 
management 
“Climate-resilient and 
deforestation-free 
sustainable land 
management  and Gender” 
workshops held for DAFO, 
DOFI, and LWU staff – each 
in a different province, 
each with approximately 16 
participants (including at 
least 4 female participants) 
 
Provide feedback from the 
participants in these 
trainings and workshops  
Y: 1 
GIZ/CSO 
Training 
provider to 
conduct 
training 
 
Project gender 
specialist to 
review all 
training 
modules. 
9,000 
4 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Engage Lao Women’s 
Union throughout 
project implementation 
to effectively build on 
existing gender 
structures and networks. 
 
Engage LWU and village 
representatives for the 
selection of location and 
timing of meetings to 
maximize the 
participation of women.  
 
Engage LWU for 
facilitation support 
throughout project 
Planning of community 
meetings and other 
village-based activities is 
done by reaching out to 
the Village’s Lao Women 
Union’s representative 
on suitable dates and 
timings. 
 
Invite LWU to all key 
project consultations.  
0 
100% of the time3 
Y_ 1-4 
Lao Women’s 
Union, DAFO, 
other 
implementors, 
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activity 
1.2.3

=== PAGE 265 ===
Page 7 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
implementation by LWU 
to ensure that women 
feel safe to express their 
views and options (e.g. 
during FPIC and PLUP 
meetings) 
 
Maintain 
communication with 
these representatives 
throughout 
implementation to 
ensure the project 
adequately supports 
women to overcome 
time constraints.  
5 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Introduce quotas for the 
participation of women 
in relevant project 
activities.  
 
Ensure that interpreters 
for local languages are 
present if needed to 
ensure accessibility for 
women of non Lao-Thai 
ethnic groups. 
 
Percent (%) female 
participants in 
community meetings 
Participation rates of 
women in community 
meetings are often 
below 40% 
40% participation of 
women in community 
meetings 
Y: 1-4 
DAFO 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activity 
1.2.3 
6 
All (cross-
cutting) 
See previous measures 
1-5. 
 
 
 
Percent of respondents 
that state they felt 
actively included in 
REDD+ activities in all 
project-related village 
meetings 
Baseline survey to be 
conducted during 
year 1 
50% of women in target 
communities state that 
they felt actively included 
in REDD+ related village 
meetings 
Y: 1, 4 
Department of 
Forestry (DoF) 
/ (Ministry of 
Agriculture 
and Forestry 
(MAF) & 
8,000

=== PAGE 266 ===
Page 8 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
REDD+ Desk & 
GIZ 
7 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Mainstreaming of 
gender equality and 
social inclusion within 
new or revised 
guidelines developed 
within the project.  
New or revised 
guidelines developed 
under the project to 
mainstream climate 
change adaptation 
consider gender as a 
crucial factor in land use 
planning, deforestation 
free value chains, forest 
protection, monitoring, 
equal user rights, and 
benefit sharing, as well 
as resource 
management 
Guidelines do not 
consider gender as an 
explicit factor in land 
use planning, 
deforestation free 
value chains, forest 
protection, user-
rights, and benefit 
sharing 
Development of 
New/revised guidelines as 
well as their dissemination 
explicitly consider gender 
Y: 1-4 
DoF/MAF, 
REDD+ Desk 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activities 
1.2.3(revisi
on by 
program 
safeguard, 
gender and 
M&E 
specialist) 
8 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Dissemination of best 
practices and lessons 
learned for gender 
equality and social 
inclusion (from project 1 
to project 2, and from 
the overarching 
programme to the 
broader development 
community and Lao 
institutions and villages) 
  
Disseminate best 
practices and lessons 
learned 
- 
Lessons learnt have been 
identified and are 
integrated in trainings, and 
knowledge sharing events. 
Y: 3 
GIZ technical 
advisors 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activities 
9 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Gender expert to review 
all training modules 
(materials, coursework, 
Gender expert reviews 
all training modules 
(materials, coursework, 
- 
All training modules 
developed by the program 
are reviewed by the 
Y: 2 
MAF and the 
program’s 
safeguard, 
11,200

=== PAGE 267 ===
Page 9 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
etc.)  in order to ensure 
they are gender-
responsive and 
adequately reflect 
gender equality and 
social inclusion. 
etc.)  to ensure 
mainstreaming of GESI 
program’s gender specialist 
prior to implementation 
gender, and 
M&E specialist 
10 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Train all field staff on 
gender equality and 
social inclusion within 
local outreach and 
extension, to enable 
them to adequately 
integrate gender-
differentiated needs and 
priorities when planning 
and implementing 
project activities 
Field staff/ extension 
workeds are trained on 
GESI, best practices and 
revised guidelines. 
Project staff and 
partners trained on GbV 
and SEAH.  
- 
100% of project extension 
and field trained.  
 
 
 
Y:1-4 
Included 
within 
project 
budget 
11 
 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Indicators from the gap 
will be fully integrated 
into the overarching 
project M&E system and 
reporting by the 
safeguard and M&E 
project staff. 
 
The indicators of the 
GAP are fully integrated 
into the M&E system 
and project reporting 
and are reviewed 
regularly 
Indicators from 
Project 1 GAP are 
fully integrated in 
Project 1. 
Adjustments from 
Project 2 are not 
included. 
Project 2 M&E system fully 
integrates indicators from 
the GAP. 
 
Annual reports, mid-term 
reports, and final reports all 
contain a chapter on 
gender. 
 
 
Y: 1-4 
MAF, REDD+ 
Fund 
Management 
Included 
within the 
project 
budget  
12 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Awareness raising 
campaigns supported by 
the project will include 
awareness raising on 
gender equality and 
social inclusion (GESI). 
All major communication 
materials and awareness 
raising campaigns are 
reviewed and approved 
by the program’s 
safeguard, gender, and 
- 
100% of all major 
communication materials 
and awareness raising 
campaigns are reviewed 
and approved by the 
Y:1-4 
REDD+ Fund 
Management, 
supported by 
implementing 
partners 
12,000

=== PAGE 268 ===
Page 10 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
M&E specialist  to 
ensure mainstreaming of 
GESI 
program’s safeguard, 
gender, and M&E specialist 
 
13 
All (cross-
cutting) 
Actively involve senior 
and technical staff to 
foster a government 
culture where gender is 
increasingly 
mainstreamed 
Gender sensitivity and 
women’s interest are 
guaranteed to be 
mainstreamed into the 
project. 
The Lao Women’s 
Union is part of the 
Project Steering 
Committee for 
Project 1 and joins 
87% of key village 
level activities in 
Project 1. 
The Lao Women’s Union is 
part of the Project Steering 
Committee and joins at 
least 80% of key village 
level activities.  
Y: 1-4 
NPMU, PPMU, 
Lao Women’s 
Union 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activity 
1.2.3  
14 
Activity 
1.2.1 
Engage women in 
trainings and activities 
related to the Provincial 
Deforestation 
Monitoring System and 
law enforcement. This 
includes gender-
responsive mechanisms 
for community 
monitoring. 
 
Monitoring of 
percentage of women 
implementing action 
related to PDMS 
Baseline survey to be 
conducted during 
year 1. 
Ongoing monitoring of 
women involvement in 
activity implementation in 
all major work areas of the 
project is assured and 
reported on.  
Y: 1-4 
MAF / DoF 
5,166 
15 
Activity 
1.2.2  
See measures 1-13 
 
Train PLUP teams on 
GESI and guidelines that 
enable PLUP to reflect 
the differentiated 
contexts, needs and 
priorities of men and 
women from diverse 
ethnic groups within 
villages.  
Percent (%) female 
participants in initial 
“PLUP” consultation 
meeting. 
Participation rates of 
women in community 
meetings are often 
below 40% 
40% participation of 
women in “PLUP” 
consultation meeting. 
Y: 1-2 
DAFO,  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
PLUP 
Activities 
(Activity 
1.2.2)

=== PAGE 269 ===
Page 11 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
 
16 
 
Activity 
1.2.3 
Develop SEAH code of 
conduct, and ensure 
GRM has a SEAH 
procedure. 
Train all project staff and 
partners on the Code of 
Conduct, GRM and 
Coordination 
Mechanism and Referral 
Services.  
 
Develop and provide 
training on Gender 
Based Violence-Sexual 
Exploitation Abuse and 
Harassment (Gender/ 
GBV-SEAH):  
(i) develop Code of 
Conducts (CoC);  
(ii) Monitoring / Records 
/ GRM (including a SEAH 
procedure for the GRM);  
(iii) Coordination 
Mechanism / Referral 
Services 
 
No project-level code 
of conduct.  
4 training courses related 
to GBV/SEH/VAWC 
delivered by the project to 
its own staff. (1 course in 
Vientiane Capital and 1 in 
each target Province) 
100 % of project staff 
signed CoC.  
 
Y: 1-4 
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
other 
trainings/w
orkshops 
17 
Activity 
1.2.2 and 
1.2.3 
Provide women with 
access to information to 
become aware of their 
legal rights under 
national and 
international laws in the 
context of capacity 
building activities. 
 
See measures 1-5 
Percent (%) female 
participants in “FPIC1” 
meeting, prior to 
obtention of consent. 
44% 
40% participation of 
women in “FPIC1” meetings 
Y-1 
Lao Women’s 
Union, Lao 
Front for 
National 
Development, 
Safeguards 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Action 
1.2.3 
18  
Activity 
1.2.2 and 
1.2.3 
See measures 1-15, 16  
 
LWU will support 
consultation processes 
to help strengthen 
gender equality in 
Percent (%) of female 
participants in FPIC1 
implementation 
trainings 
44% 
At least 40% of the 
participants to trainings are 
female. 
Y: 1 
Lao Women’s 
Union, Lao 
Front for 
National 
Development, 
Safeguards 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Action 
1.2.3

=== PAGE 270 ===
Page 12 
 
 
4 For more detailed information on the assumptions, refer to FP Chapter E.3. 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
program 
implementation, and 
ensure the 
differentiated needs, 
land use, and priorities 
of women and men are 
reflected in PLUP, VFAG, 
PSAP, VilFoCA and VFM.  
 
 
Team 
19 
Percent (%) of female 
participants in FPIC2+3 
implementation 
trainings at province 
level 
42% 
At least40% of the 
participants to trainings are 
female. 
Y: 1-2 
Lao Women’s 
Union, Lao 
Front for 
National 
Development, 
Safeguards 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Action 
1.2.3 
20 
Percent (%) of female 
participants in FPIC2+3 
implementation 
trainings at district level 
37% 
At least 40% of the 
participants to trainings are 
female. 
Y: 1-2 
Lao Women’s 
Union, Lao 
Front for 
National 
Development, 
Safeguards 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Action 
1.2.3 
21 
Activity 
2.1.1 
See measures 1-15, 16, 
18-20,  
 
Set quotas and hold 
targeted 
training 
opportunities 
(e.g., 
business 
capacities, 
financial literacy) and.   
 
Introduce quotas for the 
participation of women 
in PSAP investment plan 
elaboration, and 
implementation 
(including ensuring they 
access extension 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
Project 1 target: 
53,720  persons from 
project 1 (26,860 
men, 26,860 women)  
 
Project 2: 
0 
75,604 beneficiaries 
(37,802 men, 37,802 
women) adopting more 
climate resilient livelihood 
options4 
Y:1-4 
DAFO,  M&E 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget  of 
2.1.1 
22 
Activity 
2.1.1 
Percent (%) female 
participants in initial 
“PSAP” awareness 
meeting. 
Participation rates of 
women in community 
meetings are often 
below 40% 
40% participation of 
women in “PSAP”  
awareness meeting. 
Y: 1-4 
DAFO,  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
PSAP 
Activities

=== PAGE 271 ===
Page 13 
 
 
5 As per the VFAG guideline. 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
23  
Activity 
2.1.1 
support).  
Percent (%) of women-
led households joining 
PSAP agricultural 
extension activities and 
receiving support. 
Women-led 
households” 
represent in average 
3% of northern rural 
agricultural 
households (latest 
data available: 
WB/ADB Country 
Gender Assessment, 
2012). 
Note: women-led 
households are 
households which do 
not have a male head 
(e.g. husband died or 
left the 
family/household) 
At least 7% of the 
households joining PSAP 
agricultural extension 
activities and receiving 
support are women-led. 
Y: 1-4 
DAFO,  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
PSAP 
Activities 
24 
Activity 
2.1.1 
Percentage (%) of PSAP 
training participants that 
are women 
Participation rates of 
women in community 
meetings and 
activities are often 
below 40% 
At least 40% 
Y: 1-4 
DAFO,  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
PSAP 
Activities 
25 
Activity 
2.1.2 
 
Introduce quotas for the 
participation of women 
in VFAG set up and 
committees. 
Percent (%) female 
participants in VFAG set-
up and related 
community gathering 
 
Percent (%) female VFAG 
committee members 
40% 
40% participation of 
women in “VFAG set-up 
and related community 
gathering”. 
 
At least 30% VFAG 
committee members.5 
Y_ 1-4 
Lao Women’s 
Union, other 
implementors, 
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within 
VFAG 
budget

=== PAGE 272 ===
Page 14 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
26 
Activity 
2.2.1 
Integrate of gender 
aspects within the agri-
MSME screening 
processes and 
monitoring to ensure 
accessibility of funds to 
women-led agri-MSMEs. 
 
Hold targeted training 
opportunities for 
women(e.g., business 
capacities, financial 
literacy, business plan 
development,  extension 
services).   
 
Introduce quotas for the 
participation of women-
led agri-MSMEs in 
relevant project 
activities.   
 
Gender aspect is 
considered within the 
agri-MSME screening 
processes and 
monitoring 
- 
Gender consideration is 
explicitly integrated in the 
business partner screening, 
and targets are established 
to support women-owned 
or -led agri-MSMEs 
Y: 1-2 
Responsible 
consultant to 
support agri-
MSMEs;  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within the 
budget 
agri-MSME 
activities 
27 
Activity 
2.2.1 
Percent of women-
owned agri-MSMEs 
supported by the project 
0 – Agri-MSME 
support not started 
At least 30% or more of the 
agri-MSMEs supported are 
women-led. 
Y 1-4 
DAFO,  
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included in 
budget for 
value-chain 
developme
nt 
28 
Activity 
2.2.1 
Business skill 
development activities 
target female 
entrepreneurship 
 
 
No training 
conducted 
30% of participants are 
female 
Y_ 1-4 
Lao Women’s 
Union,  other 
implementors, 
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within 
business 
skills 
activities 
budget

=== PAGE 273 ===
Page 15 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
29 
Activity 
3.1.1 
 
 
Forestry advisors, in 
cooperation with gender 
experts will revise 
guidelines to ensure 
VFMs are designed in a 
gender-responsive 
manner, considering the 
differentiated priorities 
and needs of women 
(facilitated by gender-
sensitive guidelines, and 
staff trained on gender 
equality and social 
inclusion). 
Guidelines for the 
creation of local village 
forest management 
committees are gender-
responsive and set 
standards of 
requirements accessible 
for women, and the 
poor, and a quota for 
female representation 
within committees 
0 – No gender 
requirements 
associated with the 
establishment or 
operation of village 
forest management 
committees 
Village forest management 
committee guidelines 
(developed under Project 
1) will be followed, which 
set standards of 
accessibility for women, 
with a quota of at least 30% 
female committee 
members 
Y: 2 
GIZ Forestry 
Advisors 
2,000 
30 
Ensure VFM committees 
have women holding a 
permanent role through 
setting quotas, training 
men and women on 
VFM committee 
formation, related 
management and 
administrative skills, as 
well as safeguards (e.g. 
SEAH), and regularly 
monitoring VFMs.   
Percentage (%) of Forest 
Management 
Committees that consist 
of at least 30% women 
0 
village forest management 
committees supported by 
or engaging with the sub-
project consist of at least 
30% women 
Y: 4 
Included 
within the 
budget of 
Activity 
1.2.3 
31 
Activity 
3.1.1 
See measures 1-15. 
The project will raise 
awareness and promote 
gender sensitization to 
encourage the 
redistribution of 
Percentage (%) of the 
recipients of Cash For 
Work for Village Forest 
Management activities 
who are women” 
0 
at least 40% 
Y_ 1-4 
Lao Women’s 
Union, other 
implementors, 
Safeguards‘ 
Team 
Included 
within 
VFAG 
budget

=== PAGE 274 ===
Page 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
ID 
Project 
Activity 
Measures to strengthen 
gender equality within 
Project 2 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets, including sex-
disaggregated targets 
Timelin
e 
Responsibilitie
s 
 
Budget 
(EUR) 
domestic tasks, set a 
quota target to ensure t 
cash-for-work is 
accessible to and 
benefits women, and 
ensure regular 
monitoring of the quota/ 
indicator.   
32 
Activity 
3.1.1 & 
3.2.1 
Promote community-
based women-led 
patrolling groups and 
support their creation 
with capacity 
development and 
awareness raising. 
 
Assessments to confirm 
the interest in having 
women-led village 
patrolling groups in the 
target area conducted 
0 – no analysis of the 
potential for women-
led village patrolling 
groups in the target 
areas 
Short assessments 
conducted. 
Y: 2 
DOFI, 
supported by 
REDD+ Desk 
and GIZ 
2,000 
33  
Percentage of  women-
led village patrolling 
groups:  
- identified,   
- and trained  
In Project 1, women-
led patrolling groups 
were often led by 
women (25 out of 33 
villages) 
 At least 30% of patrolling 
teams are led by women 
Y: 3 
2,000
