=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
creationDate: D:20220928164633+09'00'
modDate: D:20220929094409+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
17 – 20 October 2022 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 13 
GCF/B.34/02/Add.05 
29 September 2022 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum V 
Funding proposal package for FP195 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.05 
Page b 
3 
107 
110 
113 
130 
145 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
147

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation
Country(ies): 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay
Accredited Entity: 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF)
Date of first submission: 
2021/04/16
Date of current submission 
2022/09/22 
Version number 
V9

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 
 
 
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
ACP 
Panama Channel Authority 
AFD 
French Development Agency 
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
AML 
Anti-Money Laundering 
ANDE 
National Electricity Administration 
APR 
Annual Performance Report 
ATTT 
On road Transit and Transport Authority 
ASI 
Avoid-Shift-Improve 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BEB 
Battery Electric Bus 
BEV 
Battery Electric Vehicle 
BMF 
German Federal Ministry of Finance  
BMZ 
German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development  
BN 
Banco National 
BNF  
Banco Nacional de Fomento  
BNP 
Banco Nacional de Panamá 
BpfA 
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 
BROU 
Banco República Uruguay  
CA 
Caja de Ahorro  
CAF 
Development Bank of Latin America 
CAPEX 
Capital Expenditure 
CEDAW 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 
CETRAPAM 
Metropolitan Area Passenger Transport Entrepreneurs Center 
CFF 
Cities Finance Facility 
CIME 
Electric Mobility Interinstitutional Commitee (PA) 
CNCC 
National Climate Change Commission 
DNCC 
National Directorate of Climate Change 
EASI 
Electrify-Avoid-Shift-Improve 
ENME 
National Strategy for Electric Mobility (PA) 
ESMF 
Environmental and social management framework 
ESMS 
Environmental and social management systems 
EV 
Electric Vehicle 
FA 
Financial Assistance 
FAA 
Funded Activity Agreement 
FDN 
Fondo de Desarrollo Nacional 
FIRR 
Financial Internal Rate of Return 
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GIEET 
Interinstitutional Group for Energy Efficiency in Transportation 
GIZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
HEV 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
ICE 
Internal Combustion Engine 
IDB 
Inter-American Development Bank 
IDFC 
the International Development Finance Club 
IEA 
International Energy Agency 
ILO 
International Labor Organization 
IM 
Intendencia Montevideo 
KfW 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
LAC 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
LAIF 
Latin America Investment Facility 
LCV 
Light Commercial Vehicle 
MADES 
Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
MEF 
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas 
MH 
Ministerio de Hacienda 
MIEM 
Ministry of Energy and Mining

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 
MoV 
Means of Verifications 
MRV 
Measurement, Reporting, Verification 
MTOP 
Ministry of Transport and Public Works 
MUPA 
Municipality of Panama City 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NMT 
Non-motorised transportation  
NUMP 
National Urban Mobility Policy  
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OPEX 
Operational Expenditures 
PA 
Panama 
PHEV 
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles 
PIMUS 
Plan integral de movilidad urbana sustentable para el área metropolitana de Panamá 
PMU 
Program Management Unit 
PNCC 
National Climate Change Policy 
PPP 
Public-Private Partnership 
PROPARCO 
Société de Promotion et Participation à la Coopération économique 
PT 
Public Transport 
PY 
Paraguay 
RFI 
Rapid Financing Instrument 
RFP 
Request for Proposals 
SC 
Steering Committee  
SCC 
Social Cost of Carbon 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SNE 
National Secretary of Energy (PA) 
SPV 
Special Purpose Vehicle 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TC 
Technical Cooperation 
TCO 
Total Cost of Ownership 
TTL 
Task Team Leader 
TTW 
Tank to Wheel 
UTE 
National Administration of Power Plants and Electrical Transmissions (Spanish: Administración 
Nacional de Usinas y Trasmisiones Eléctricas 
UY 
Uruguay 
VMT 
Vice Minister of Transport (PY) 
VMME 
Vice Ministry of Mining and Energy (PY) 
WACC 
Weighted Average Capital Cost 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
WTT 
Well to Tank 
WTW 
Well to Wheel

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1  
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the Simplified 
Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% 
for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Low-emission transport 
100 % 
100 % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Total: 3.3 MtCO2e  
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
Indicate number 
of direct 
beneficiaries 
Indicate number 
of indirect 
beneficiaries 
Indicate % of 
direct 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  
231,032,800  USD  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
76,616,550 USD 
 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to 
the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
9,821,100 
 
☒  Loan 
66,795,450 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
12/9/2022 
A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
 Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) – is a multilateral development bank 
created in 1970, and owned by 20 countries, 18 of which are in Latin America, and 
the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal, as well as 13 private banks in the region. CAF 
promotes a sustainable development model through credit operations, non-
reimbursable resources, and support in the technical and financial structuring of sub-
projects in the public and private sectors of Latin America. CAF is both the accredited 
entity and the implementing entity.  
 Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). GIZ is the 
German Agency for International Cooperation. It is a public-benefit federal enterprise. 
GIZ’s sole shareholder is the Federal Republic of Germany, represented in Germany 
by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the 
Federal Ministry of Finance (BMF). GIZ is headquartered in Bonn and Eschborn but 
operates from about 120 countries around the globe. 70% of its 20,000 employees 
are national staff. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
The E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation Program (hereinafter referred-to as E-Motion or Program) aims to 
enable a large-scale regional transition towards electro-mobility in Latin America focusing on intensive use vehicles 
leading to reduced fossil fuel consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and air pollutions. E-Motion will be implemented 
through two Funding Proposals: one by AFD (Sub-Program 1) as an Accredited Entity to cover 8 countries in Latin 
America, and one by CAF (Sub-Program 2) to cover the following 3 countries: Panama (PA), Paraguay (PY) and 
Uruguay (UY). See Figure 15 on the Partnership model of E-Motion. 
 
Climate Context 
Transport contributes almost one-quarter of the current global energy-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and is 
growing faster than any other energy end-use sector. Latin America already accounts for 10% of global GHG emissions

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3  
as of today and transportation related GHG emissions from many countries in Latin America represent even a higher 
proportion than global average. Limiting the global temperature increase to below 2 degrees Celsius requires changing 
this transport emissions trajectory, which involves the development of an integrated electromobility ecosystem 
encompassing various transport modes, coupled with the low-carbon production of electricity and hydrogen (Paris 
Declaration on Electro-Mobility and Climate Change & Call to Action, 2015). To achieve this goal International Energy 
Agency (IEA) modelling says electric vehicles (EVs) need to represent 35% of global sales in 2030. Latin America has 
strong enabling conditions in terms of clean transport and e-mobility. The region has one of the cleanest electricity 
generation portfolios in the world (high hydroelectric production and growing deployment of wind and solar power 
plants). For the countries of the E-Motion Sub-Program 2, i.e., Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay, the electrification of 
transport modes can reduce GHG emissions on a well-to-wheel (cradle-to-grave) base by 80-100% (50-90%) compared 
to fossil units due the respective low grid emission factors.  
 
Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) has been a long-standing framework for classifying mitigation interventions in the transport 
sector. A new dimension needs to be added to this framework: EASI: Electrify-Avoid-Shift-Improve. Electrification is a 
game-changer especially in emerging countries and a must if carbon neutrality shall be achieved. No shift and no 
improve measures alone will be capable to reach carbon neutrality in the transport sector. Electrification coupled with 
a fossil-free grid creates this opportunity. Not surprisingly do carbon neutrality plans involve a fully electrified vehicle 
fleet and some Latin American countries have developed national strategies and regulatory frameworks to go toward 
this direction (including tax incentives, EV targets for some segments, public transport concession with especial 
incentives for electric buses, among others. Sub-program 2 countries have currently their own electromobility strategies, 
but they still need financial assistance (FA) from external sources as they are developing countries. 
 
Electrification of public transport (PT) buses is an important component to modernize and upgrade the public transport 
system of countries. This results in new and attractive buses which incentivize passengers to use public transportation. 
Public transport systems are modernized through establishing new business models, which increase the financial 
stability and economic efficiency of public transport operators and systems, e.g., through separation of bus ownership 
and bus operations and the introduction of new investors with strong financial background to the sector. This shift of 
business models incited by e-mobility and thus E-motion will also promote, can be clearly observed in Chile and in 
Colombia where in both cases large capital investors have entered the market (electric utilities, private capital funds 
and bus manufacturers) which results in public transport operations being financially more solid (in both countries 
bankruptcy of traditional bus operators has been a major problem), more efficient and with better and lower cost access 
to capital. This results in e-mobility being a game-changer not only in terms of fostering low-emissions vehicles but also 
in modernization of the public transportation system increasing its attractiveness and thereby resulting in an important 
mode-shift towards public transport compared to a business-as-usual situation. Private and public national banks will 
be co-financier of many sub-projects of the E-motion, indeed, national banks and some private banks were interviewed 
and stated that they are willing to participate in E-motion as a financial executing entity by developing products to 
promote e-bus sub-projects or enabling credit lines to finance e-LCVs. Some of the entities were Caja de Ahorro, Banco 
General and Banco Nacional (PA), Banco Nacional de Fomento (PY), Banco de la República de Uruguay (UY). 
Therefore, to ensure an active participation of national development banks in the Program and allow them to gain 
experience and de-risk the sector, the Program will propose technical assistance and financial assistance- which are 
key to ensure that the credit line proposed by these banks are disbursed.  
 
The Program and Sub-Program activities will also improve the grid resilience and the resilience of urban infrastructure. 
Used batteries from EVs have a second-life application where they can serve as storage units and thereby (i) increase 
the resilience and independence of the grid at critical spots such as hospitals or schools; (ii) increase the grid resilience 
and reduce costs of renewable grids by increasing storage capacity capable of taking up electricity during times of over-
supply; (iii) act as peak shavers in urban settings. 
 
Social and Environmental Context 
In Latin America, levels of urbanization and motor vehicle use are higher than in most other developing regions 
throughout the world. Almost 75% of residents live in urban areas. Residents of urban areas experience greater 
exposure to air pollution, as in particular motor vehicles still emit harmful pollutants. As a result, air pollution is a large 
problem in most Latin American cities with levels affecting seriously human health. According to several studies, air 
pollution has significantly increased in cities within Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) due to the rapid increase in 
urban population, higher traffic and vehicle use, and industrialized zones. Latest data from the WHO indicate that in 
2016 almost 700 people in Panama, over 1,300 people in Paraguay and almost 1000 people in Uruguay died as a 
result of excessive exposure to fine particulate matter3. 
 
 
3 See: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/ambient-air-pollution-attributable-deaths

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4  
In LAC, approximately 100 million people are exposed to poor air quality, exceeding WHO guidelines. Despite poor 
information on air quality provided by environmental authorities, making it difficult to take action for critical air pollution 
episodes, it is evident that all large cities in Latin America show annual particular matter that exceed the World Health 
Organization Air Quality Guidelines 4. Among the most polluted cities in LAC are Santiago, Lima, Mexico City, or 
Medellín. Such Metropolises have experienced dramatic growth in the last two decades of the previous century (1980 
to 2000) forcing governments to implement a poorly organized mass transport system, however, some of them have 
taken the lead in electromobility adoption for public transport already: Mexico City with the renewal of its trolleybus 
system as well as the e-buses introduction on its BRT; Chile has more than 800 eBuses through PPP and Medellín has 
financed with Municipal funding 64 eBuses.  
 
This development and condition with environmental and social pressure on local ecosystems, can get even worse. In 
particular further migration from rural to urban areas will increase the population density in the areas and the demand 
for more public services, such as transportation, clean water, waste management. This will under business-as-usual 
condition go hand in hand with an increase in further pollution of regional eco system and natural resources. This is 
due to poor public policy in relation with clean air / sustainability, transition to clean energy, and low-carbon 
transportation in most countries in Latin America.   
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has created an unprecedented challenge for many Latin American countries, from the health 
and economic perspectives, but it is also opening new opportunities for an accelerated sustainable transformation of 
its energy, transport, and urban landscapes while contributing to economic recovery. A recent report prepared by the 
International Labor Organization (ILO) shows that fostering of electric mobility can have a significant positive job impact 
(ILO, 2020). 
 
Additionally, the pandemic has hit Latin American women’s employment very hard: according to the UN Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) the unemployment rate for women in the region is currently 
12%. Many of them have been pushed out of the market. But that figure rises to 22.2% if we assume the same level of 
labour participation for women as in 2019, which makes more sense considering that they have also been pushed out 
of the economically active population: forced to fully commit to care activities, they plainly aren’t seeking for new jobs. 
But they’ll will need to return and after the long pause, less jobs will be available, especially for women as it has always 
been after economic crises. Taking also into account that the transportation sector is traditionally very masculinized, 
the project also represents an opportunity to shorten the gender gaps related with job segregation.   
 
As well, it has the chance of reducing or broadening (whether gender issues are taken or not into account) the current 
disparities in access and use of transportation means by women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other 
vulnerable collectives. 
 
Transport Context 
Most of the transport sector was deregulated in the region for more than 3 decades until the beginning of the 21st 
century. Apart from some metro systems in a few capital cities, most of the public transport (buses and taxis) and urban 
cargo, suffered of atomization, lack of quality service, road insecurity, poor labour conditions, pollution, and congestion, 
driven by a poor management and control of the operations and almost no attention from the public sector. Major 
changes in transport in Latin America are slow and only occur when technological triggers allow them to set up the 
business environment to make this possible. It is important to bear in mind that the transport sector represents a big 
share of the daily trips (around 30% in most cities5, mostly captive), and in the case of urban logistics the sector is one 
of the main sources of employment, sadly informal in most cases. 
 
Business models in transport in LAC had a major change with de appearance of BRT. Behind its advantages on 
operation and service driven by a new technology, the BRT system introduced a new conception based on better 
accessibility, quality and economical sustainability for all stakeholders given the opportunity to formalize part of the 
sector. However, the implementation of this type of systems is not possible for all contexts and all cities, thus mobility 
serve by public buses is still the main mode in the region. Public transport is one of the pillars on the ASI framework in 
Latin America given the socioeconomically conditions of this part of the world, but in almost all cities the demand 
numbers have been decreasing against other modes specially motorcycles, adding more pressure and negative 
externalities to sustainable transport. This situation has worsened by the pandemic context that is putting at stake 
almost every transport system in Latin America. Electrification in transport represent an opportunity to re-think/re-plan 
urban mobility needs based on the pyramid of sustainable urban mobility concept, that allows multiple choices for 
transport in effective and efficient, encourage modal shift from private transport means. Thus, modern and improved 
 
4 See: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1462901120305542 
5 Urban Mobility Observatory (OMU – CAF) 
https://www.caf.com/app_omu/#graphic?i0=superf_area_metropol_km2_urba&i5=num_vehic_micro_bus&i2=viajes_hab_dia
_colectivo&i3=tiempo_hs_hab_dia

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5  
public transport system, including new and cleaner technologies, improved comfort and quality service will lead to 
modal shift, strengthened by comprehensive public policy that will be supported by TA component. PA, PY and UY 
have stated that energy transition in transport sector, at urban level, will require a group of mechanism that restrict 
private car use, give more vial space to public transport, improve social awareness about decreasing GHG emissions 
in this sector and how electromobility can contribute on this effort. For this purpose, local stakeholders need to be 
included in the process, where E-motion TA component would have a key role. E-Motion represents the opportunity to 
transform Public Transport, urban logistics and in general mobility for most of the countries in the region through new 
business models that can give better economic sustainability in the long run.    
 
Intervention Strategy 
The Program’s goal is to response on the current environmental and climate challenges in Latin American cities by 
accelerating EV deployment through a change of paradigm under a holistic approach. This will involve country specific 
financial and TA components. The underlying objective is to transit to a cleaner, better-organized, efficient, equitable, 
comfortable, secure, sustainable and affordable mass transport systems, using EV as the spearhead to promote this 
sustainable change. Ideally the Program should induce demand into better-organized, cleaner, efficient and affordable 
EV-based public mass transport, which in turn will translate into considering cleaner mobility for individual journeys (e-
Taxis, e-Bikes, etc). Indirectly, the Program could have positive externalities by fostering an adequate environment for 
other transport sub-sectors to join sustainable electric mobility, particularly individual vehicle owners and commercial 
fleets. The Program will share results about technical and economic benefits and comprise the dissemination activities 
to different stakeholders.  
 
The Program will implement interventions to kick-start EV mass deployment significantly earlier than under a BAU 
scenario by reducing the risk profile of investments and by comprehensive technical assistance. The key strategic value 
of the Program is that it functions as a market accelerator enabling a far faster uptake of e-mobility than under a BAU 
scenario avoiding a lock-in of long-lived assets in fossil technology. The Program fills the gap between initial pilots and 
long-term targets by addressing comprehensively TA and FA. These interventions are made in a time where e-mobility 
is commercially not yet viable and thus require initial investment support-like is the case in all countries which have a 
significant uptake of e-mobility. From pilot phase in PA, PY, UY, technical concepts have been tested positively and 
these in-developing countries need to move forward to big scale adoption through financial assistance (concessional 
loans) and thus, overcome on of the main barrier/gap which is the EV CAPEX. In parallel, TA component has been 
outlined (regulations, incentives, capacity buildings) to enable the countries’ long-term targets. PA, PY and UY are in-
developing countries and for that, they need and look for international funding sources such GCF, as they don’t have 
enough resources to provide concessional condition for invest. GCF and E-motion have had excellent receptivity from 
the subprogram 2 countries and their main authorities, as it represents an FA that is aligned to start the energy transition 
in the transport sector at an early stage and not only when prices reach parity between diesel and electric. This is the 
added value that E-motion represents to PA, PY and UY. 
 
The electrification of public transport is coupled with innovative business models, which will modernize the sector 
making it financially more stable and more efficient. The attractiveness of the public transport system is increased with 
improved services and new, clean buses. This can reverse the trend of decreasing mode shares of public transport 
and result in a sustainable urban transport system. TA component from E-motion will support public role to strength 
clean urban planning mobility based on the pyramid of sustainable urban mobility concept which stablish a framework 
to prioritize active mobility first, public transport second, urban logistic third and private mobility at last. Cities like London 
has had 10% of drops ins trips made by private car6 through Ultra low emission zones and congestion charge. This 
type of initiatives also has been pushed by Singapore, Milan and Stockholm. Cities like Sevillla and Oslo have worked 
in making parking difficult or expensive. Disincentive in private transport modes must come with efficient, affordable 
and cleaner mobility alternatives like electric buses, as new potential drivers can change their mobility choices if they 
have efficient and cleaner alternatives7. E-motion will work on both challenges by its TA and FA component. 
 
The Program focuses on electric commercial vehicles with high intensive use i.e., buses, light commercial vehicles 
fleets, public fleets and urban freight vehicles together with the required charging infrastructure and grid upgrades. No 
private usage vehicles are financed. The main investment area is on electric buses. Investments are linked with new 
business models and service delivery structures which enhance the attractiveness and sustainability of the public 
transport sector and thereby is an important component to ensure that current public transport ridership levels are 
sustained or even increased and the gender – and other socially-constructed – disparities in its workforce and ridership 
reduced or even eliminated through the implementation of new business models, such as ownership splitting, that may 
transform the transport sector (incl. green routes or green services concessions models, with only 100% BEB). The 
Program aims to become an important contribution towards mode shift, as it has been described in the previous text. 
 
6 https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/How-to-drive-a-modal-shift-from-private-vehicle-use-to-public-transport-
walking-and-cycling?language=en_US 
7 https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/are-hybrid-and-electric-buses-viable-just-yet

=== PAGE 12 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6  
Country Conditions and Ownership 
Latin America has strong enabled conditions in terms of clean transport and e-mobility. The region has one of the 
cleanest electricity generation portfolios in the world due to a high share of renewable, incl. large hydro power plants; 
the average grid emission factor of the Program countries of this funding proposal (Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama) 
amount to between 0 and 0.23 tCO2/MWh8. The adoption of an e-mobility strategy would allow the countries to move 
towards a decarbonisation pathway.  
 
The main motivating forces to foster e-mobility in the countries included in the Program are (i) reduce GHG emissions; 
(ii) improve air quality and reduce health problems associated with air pollution; (iii) reduce dependency on imported 
fossil fuels and exposure to external price shocks; (iv) achieve positive economic impacts related to reduced health 
costs, reduced fuel import bill and job equitable creation; (v) contribute to unveiling and satisfying the very different 
needs that workers and caretakers face regarding urban transportation; (vi) promote local industries and suppliers in 
the EV value chain; (vii) introduce innovative business models to modernize mass transport systems; and (viii) set the 
basis to facilitate a holistic change in urban clean mass mobility. 
 
The updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) of Sub-Program 2 countries all include measures to reduce 
transport emissions. The majority of countries have included in the NDCs electric mobility as a core mitigation measure 
to reduce transport emissions and have formulated concrete electrification targets through regulations, policies or EV 
roadmaps. In Panamá, the National Strategy for Electric Mobility (ENME) was approved in 2019, promoting four 
objectives until 2030: 10-20% of the total fleet of private vehicles will be electric; 25-40% of private vehicle sales will be 
electric vehicle sales; 15-35% of the buses in the authorized concession fleets will be electric; 25-50% of the public 
fleets will be made up of electric vehicles. Panamá’s updated NDC (2020) focuses mainly on mitigating emissions from 
the land use change sector and the energy sector, of which transportation accounts for about half of the sector’s 
emissions and represents the biggest challenge. Paraguay’s NDC aims to reduce 20% of the fossil fuel consumption 
by 2030, compared to the projected baseline (with respect to the BAU scenario to the year 2030). Unilaterally, the 
country aims to reduce 10% of projected emissions by 2030. Additionally, a conditional goal of 10% reduction in 
emissions projected by 2030 depends on international cooperation. The first NDC of Uruguay sets specific goals for E-
motion categories towards 2025: e-Buses (110 units), and electric light commercial vehicles (LCVs) (900 units), a 
network of electric vehicle charging stations throughout the main roads across Uruguay (52% completed in 2020), and 
a fast-charging network (no progress yet). However, these goals are part of a scenario conditioned to additional means 
of implementation (i.e. access to international financing). Emotion’s TA will contribute to define complementary 
roadmaps. Despite of having “national EV strategies” or Energy transition framework (see figure 1 in FP), in the three 
countries is still needed to complement with more specific roadmap for eBus adoption, public fleets, charging 
infrastructure, in order to determine initiatives and actions to be taken, stakeholders and roles, resources and deadlines. 
 
Political support, governance and law enforcement   
An utmost success factor for the implementation of national strategies and achieving countries’ NDC targets is political 
support to induce organizational and/or regulatory changes in the status quo of mass transport systems that will 
generate uncomfortable disruption at several levels, particularly to incumbent transport operations. Political 
establishment must be firm, forward looking, institutionally sound and credible to enact and enforce regulatory changes 
in favour of the public health and tackle climate change. The Sub-Program 2 will support and enhance through its TA 
component the political governance and regulatory enforcement in the countries to ensure long-term sustainability and 
transformation in the transport sector. Panamá, Paraguay and Uruguay have a good starting point to allocate GCF FA 
and TA to kick start EV adoption. Local authorities are working in electromobility aligned with their respective policy 
framework (see Figure 1), it is stated the need of incentives (direct/indirect) that should be allocated in the short-medium 
term to achieve 2030 EV goals, thus the need to find resources like GCF. This represents a good level of readiness to 
provide funds and accelerate electromobility, which is why E-motion’s value proposition was so attractive to the 
public and private stakeholders interviewed: 19 entities in PA, 14 entities in PY and 22 entities UY.  
 
 
8 Combined Grid Emission Factor by IFI Technical Working Group on GHG Accounting/UNFCCC (2021): Uruguay: 0.065 
tCO2/MWhel; Panama: 0.23 tCO2/MWhel; Paraguay: 0.00 tCO2/MWhel; See Annex 2

=== PAGE 13 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7  
Figure 1 Summary of policy framework where E-motion will take place in Sub-program 2 countries. 
 
Barriers to EV Deployment 
Main barriers to EV deployment are (i) 2-3x higher Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) of EVs resulting in higher capital 
requirements, higher finance and insurance costs and higher risk exposure due to higher debt levels; (ii) EVs are 
financially unprofitable in developing countries with long payback times. The incremental CAPEX of e-buses attracts 
additional finance costs compared to conventional units. The Program tackles this barrier by providing concessional 
loans which reduce the finance costs and technical assistance which promote new business models with lower costs 
and risks for public transport (PT) operators and through an optimal e-bus system design which reduces costs and 
operational risks. Other “second level” barriers are: (iii) governance structures and business models not conducive to 
EV deployment, especially in the public transport sector; (iv) limited know-how on optimal EV ecosystem design, 
maintenance & operations; (v) EV targets have been established but concrete and tangible support policies which are 
conducive to EV uptake are still missing. 
 
The Program tackles these barriers and offers a comprehensive e-mobility package including financial and technical 
assistance thereby improving the policy framework and the ecosystem and removing barriers which allows to kick-start 
mass deployment of EVs. E-motion seeks to avoid urban fleet renewal through combustion technologies and 
thus, delay electromobility adoption in 8-10 years more. The barriers of lack of financial profitability and high risks 
are overcome through concessional loans and TA which assists cities in designing optimal e-bus systems, which has 
a knowledge exchange platform and allows to learn from experiences of other cities in Latin America, and through 
training and capacity building of staff. The policy and regulatory work done with TA is also critical to increase profitability 
of e-bus investments e.g., through establishing concession contract lengths in line with the (longer) lifespan of e-buses 
or through tender documents which favour the participation of e-buses based on their positive environmental and health 
impact. 
 
Business Models 
Two components stand out that can improve in a decisive manner the attractiveness and commercial viability of 
commercial e-bus sub-projects: (i) bulk purchase –that will be tackled through the TA-, and (ii) separation of asset 
ownership and operations/management. Bulk purchase is important not only due to significant price discounts but also 
as this allows to optimize the e-mobility system in terms of charging infrastructure and bus types allowing e.g. to use 
fast-charged buses with common usage of chargers (up to 12 buses per charger). Separation of asset ownership & 
management is critical due to high investment costs of buses which require strong financial players with access to 
cheap long-term finance. Private bus operators typically have a weak balance sheet and are financially not preferred 
clients of FIs. Business models with asset separation have been successfully implemented in Chile with e-buses 
involving initially electric utilities and also bus manufacturers as well as private investment companies. To thrive such 
business models also need the regulatory framework defining payment schemes, procedures in case of bankruptcies 
of parties, clear long-term concession contracts etc. Separation of ownership and management can be done with public 
led delivery systems (public asset companies) or with private led delivery vehicles (special purpose vehicles within a 
private public partnership PPP). This needs to be adjusted and structured per country based on national and

=== PAGE 14 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8  
even local requirements, priorities and conditions. It is also essential to work on standardized bidding documents 
to acquire EVs in order to strengthen the ability to replicate this business model in Latin American cities. One of the 
main features of the Program will thus be to design, establish and implement such business models which can work as 
delivery vehicles for widespread commercial replication of e-buses (through the TA component). eBus in PA are two in 
the pilot with BYD; PY has just 2 two BEB in commercial phase. UY has 32 with the investment gap subsidy provided 
for the government. It’s too optimistic to consider that pilot phase has been overcome however, thanks to theses BEBs 
running in pilot phase (PA, PY) and commercial conditions (UY), data and TCO are now more accurate, and the 
remaining barrier still is the high upfront costs and lack of financial profitability. Bulk purchase also has great potential 
for eLCVs and e-public fleets  
 
Program Components 
The Program and its Sub-Program 2 have a comprehensive approach to establish an e-mobility conducive ecosystem 
at the local, national, and regional level, including activities such as targeted policy advice, business model 
development, stakeholder management, and capacity building (all of which gender mainstreamed) to ensure a 
favourable e-mobility environment combined with financial instruments to ensure deployment of large-scale fleets 
thereby de-risking future investments into e-mobility of investors. The Program can significantly reduce investment risks 
through the investment interventions combined with the implementation of business models and a policy framework 
conducive to EV deployment. 
 
For each country a market assessment (see Annex 2 for Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama) has been performed 
analysing (i) the current financial viability per vehicle sub-sector in terms of total cost of ownership, profitability, payback 
period, cash-flow and debt structure; (ii) required financial instruments and support structures to overcome viability 
barriers; (iii) market readiness of EVs related to the countries current and projected cost structure. Interventions are 
designed to accelerate market readiness and to foster widespread commercial deployment of EVs without further 
financial assistance. Therefore, interventions in each country are targeted to vehicle segments where (i) existing 
conditions are favourable for EVs (in terms of policies, energy prices, interest of investors); (ii) targeted financial and 
technical support can make a decisive change and (iii) national market conditions would allow by the end of the Program 
a sustained uptake of EVs based on commercial conditions. 
 
The Sub-Program 2 of the E-Motion Program is implemented in Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama and has the following 
components:  
 
 
Component 1: Establishment of an e-mobility conducive ecosystem by providing Technical Assistance to create 
a policy and business framework conducive for massive deployment of EVs on a local (project design, business 
model design and development, city EV policies, training etc.), national (sectoral electrification roadmaps, 
stakeholder coordination, support of national enabling policies for EV deployment, advice on battery re-usage, 
recycling and disposal) and a regional level (capacity building, knowledge materials, outreach and dissemination, 
program monitoring). 
 
Component 2: Deployment of large-scale e-bus fleets (major investment component) coupled, when possible, 
with innovative business models for e-bus fleets based on a separation of asset ownership and operations 
modernizing and increasing the attractiveness of the public transport sector whilst also making it financially more 
efficient and sustainable. 
 
Component 3: Deployment of electric light commercial vehicles (public9 and private). 
 
Component 4: Deployment of large-scale fast-charging and gender aware infrastructure for the countries.  
 
Project management: Establishing a Program Management Unit (PMU) for project implementation and impact 
monitoring. 
 
The Program has a comprehensive and ambitious Gender Action Plan (GAP) targeting to improve gender equality and 
reduce sexual harassment in public transport. 
 
Sub-Program 2 Outcomes 
The Sub-Program 2 supports a paradigm change to low-emission transportation systems in the target countries 
Panamá, Paraguay and Uruguay. The Sub-Program shall help to overcome barriers identified to kick-start the mass 
deployment of commercial EVs. Long-term outcomes to be achieved are (i) GHG reduction: EVs have significantly 
lower lifecycle GHG emissions than fossil units in all countries included in the Program and mode shift triggered through 
program investments and technical assistance from modes with high levels of carbon emissions per passenger-km 
(private vehicles) to low carbon transport modes (public transport); (ii) improved air quality; (iii) reduced fossil fuel import 
dependency; (iv) improved fuel economy: EVs are up to 3-4x more energy efficient than fossil vehicles.  
 
9 Component 3 is for both, public and private fleets in light commercial or light passenger vehicles. Just to be clear, public e-
fleets is not for providing public transport systems (eBuses which is component 2), is for operation of many public entities 
within the countries that also needs to decarbonize their mobility operations.

=== PAGE 15 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9  
The Sub-Program 2 key figures are: 
 
 
Total investment USD 231 MM 
 
GCF investment USD 76.6 MM (33%) of which USD 66.8 MM (29%) loans and USD 9.8 MM (4%) grants 
(technical assistance) 
 
Co-finance ratio 67%  
 
Mitigation impact over lifetime of assets 3.3 MtCO2e directly of investment sub-projects  
 
GCF cost of intervention of investment sub-projects 23 USD /tCO2e for direct emission reductions  
 
Energy savings: 31,400 TJ energy directly saved 
 
Program Pipeline 
The E-Motion Sub-Program 2 envisages to finance at least one project in each participating country. The initial project 
pipeline includes 14 sub-projects (6 in Panama, 4 in Paraguay and 4 in Uruguay, see Annex 2). The Program will 
finance directly individual sub-projects and will work also through financial intermediaries which provide loans to 
purchasers of commercial EVs (commercial or public use). Delivery models show that financial assistance will be mainly 
channelled through Special Purpose Vehicles (public, mixed or private led), or through financial intermediaries and 
electric utilities. The anticipated implementation arrangements, including the selection criteria that financial 
intermediaries will use to deploy the finance to public and private companies and disbursements process of resources, 
are described in the section B.3 (Delivery channels and new business models) and B.4 (Implementation Arrangements).

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
10 Climate Watch, Historical Emission, 2021: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions  
11 Climate Watch, Historical Emission, 2021: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions  
12 National Communication, 2019: 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/20191231%20URUGUAY%20NC5%20EX%20SUM%20ENG.pdf  
13 IEA, Tracking Transport, 2020: https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-transport-2020  
14 According to IEA, 2021, emission has drop in 2020: “A common theme across all economies is the scale of the impact of 
the pandemic and lockdown measures on transport activity. The decline in CO2 emissions from oil use in the transport sector 
accounted for well over 50% of the total global drop in CO2 emissions in 2020, with restrictions on movement at local and 
international levels”. https://www.iea.org/articles/global-energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2020  
15 Climate Watch, Historical Emission, 2021: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions  
16 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_chapter8.pdf 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate Change Problem and the Relevance of Electric Mobility 
Latin America already accounts for 10% of global GHG emissions as of today. Overall, the transport sector in Panama, 
Paraguay, and Uruguay account for 47%10, 90%11, and 57%12, respectively, of the countries’ total CO2 emissions. For 
comparison, globally transportation is responsible for 24% of direct CO2 emissions from fuel combustion in 201913,14 
and transportation in countries of the European Union (EU27) accounts for about 28% of total CO2 emissions on 
average. The climate impact of the transport sector in the program countries is expected to increase even further in 
coming years. According to data from Climate Watch, the sector contributes already to about one-third of the current 
energy-related GHG emissions in LAC. In Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay, emissions from transportation are even 
higher and increasing faster than any other energy end-use sector. In 2018, the transport sector in the three countries 
jointly emitted 16.1 million tCO2eq, which is above 50% of all energy related GHG emissions in each country (in 
Paraguay even above 75%) and15 sub-program 2 directly would able to mitigate about 5% of this total. From Figure 2, 
in the period 1990-2018 Panama has the greatest CO2e emission increase with 3,4x the 1990’s PA levels; Paraguay 
had 1,7x and Uruguay 1,2x of increase compared with 1990’s respective levels. 
 
In addition, NDCs for Panama and Uruguay are explicit in EV adoption, where E-motion would contribute with 150 and 
200 eBuses compared with 50 and 110 eBuses for NDC targets, respectively. In the case of electric public fleets, NDC 
in Panama targets to 700 EVs and E-motion would contribute with 400 EVs. Finally, in the case of eLCVs, NDC in 
Uruguay targets to 900 EVs and E-motion would contribute with 100 EVs. 
 
Figure 2: Development of GHG emission from transportation in Panamá, Paraguay and Uruguay   
 
Source: Climate Watch, 2021 
 
Current transport demand per capita in developing and emerging economies is far lower than in Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries but is expected to increase at a much faster rate in the 
next decades due to rising incomes and development of infrastructure16. GHG emissions from transport are anticipated 
to rise from today’s levels by nearly 20% by 2030 and close to 50% by year 2050 unless major action is undertaken. 
Limiting the global temperature increase to below 2 degrees Celsius requires changing this transport emissions

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
17  This includes BEVs, fuel cell and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs); paris-electro-mobility-declaration.pdf 
(windows.net) 
18 Avoid in theory also has the potential of zero GHG emissions– however, avoiding 100% of motorized transport is unrealistic 
trajectory, which involves the development of an integrated electromobility ecosystem encompassing various transport 
modes, coupled with the low-carbon production of electricity (Paris Declaration on Electro-Mobility and Climate Change 
& Call to Action, 2015). The Paris Declaration on Electro-Mobility calls for the deployment of electric vehicles (EVs) 
compatible with a 20% share of all road transport vehicles in 2030. To achieve this goal modelling performed by the IEA 
suggests that EVs need to represent 35% of global sales by 203017. 
 
Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) has been a long-standing framework for classifying mitigation interventions in the transport 
sector. A new dimension needs to be added to this framework: EASI: Electrify-Avoid-Shift-Improve. Electrification is a 
paradigm change and not a simple improvement. The latter caters more to hybrid vehicles, eco-drive, increased vehicle 
occupation rates etc. i.e., typical efficiency measures. Electrification is a game-changer and a must if carbon neutrality 
shall be achieved18. EVs improved efficiency around 3-4x and emit zero local air and noise pollutants, and when coupled 
with renewables electricity, they have immense GHG reduction benefits, especially plugged into grids which are clean 
or projected to get clean. No shift measures and no improve measures will be capable to reach carbon neutrality in the 
transport sector. Electrification coupled with a fossil-free grid creates this opportunity. Not surprisingly do carbon 
neutrality plans involve a fully electrified vehicle fleet.  
 
Electrification of public transport buses is an important component to modernize and to upgrade the public transport 
system of countries. This results in new and attractive buses which incentivize passengers to use public transportation. 
More important is however the impact caused on modernization of public transport systems through establishing new 
business models which increase the financial stability and economic efficiency of public transport operators and public 
transport systems e.g. through separation of bus ownership and bus operations and the introduction of new investors 
with deep pockets to the sector. Both movements are spearheaded by the electrification of public transportation due to 
the different financial structure of e-buses with a high upfront investment and a long recovery time of investments. This 
shift of business models incited by e-mobility can be clearly observed in Chile and in Colombia, the 2 countries in Latin 
America, which have already embarked on electrifying their public transport fleet and both of which have within this 
process changed their business models and how to deliver public transport services. In both cases large capital-heavy 
investors have entered the market (electric utilities, private capital funds and bus manufacturers), which results in public 
transport operations being financially more solid (in both countries bankruptcy of traditional bus operators has been a 
major problem) and with better and lower cost access to capital. E-motion will allow to decrease the cost access to 
capital by delivering concessional loans with very low interest rate. From Accredited Entity CAF, they are able to provide 
sovereign or private interest rate that will be blended with CGF loans and being delivered through different executing 
entities in order to keep lower capital cost to final investors/operators. See Table 3 the potential financial executing 
entities interviewed to implement E-motion’s FA. 
 
Figure 3 Potential financial executive entities for e-motion sub-program 2

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
19 Source: Harmonized IFI Default Grid Factors 2021 (v3.1, January 2022, "Combined Margin Grid Emission  
Factor, gCO2/kWh”, Electricity Consumption)   
If local banks are involved, that are more familiar and reduced their own risk profile as well for the investments then 
access to capital can be increased, also at lower cost. From market study (Report ID T4 in Feasibility Study-Annex 2), 
private and public banks were interviewed, some of which have already financed electric vehicles such as the co-
financing required by operators in UY for the acquisition of BEBs using the investment gap subsidy that the government 
enabled in 2019-2020. In the 3 countries (PY, UY, PA), the banks expressed interest in contributing to the national 
policies to promote electromobility, stating that a good regulatory framework helps to be able to transfer concessionality 
to operators, which is a work stream of the TA. 
 
The change of the business model is directly linked to e-mobility as (i) new investors are competitive with traditional bus 
operators with e-mobility due to the high amount of capital involved; (ii) the interest of new investors is linked to electric 
mobility due to their business background; and (iii) e-mobility will not float with the traditional business model as 
operators do not have sufficient capital, to finance  higher costs and vested interests with the repair and spare parts 
market which is a major business for fossil buses but not for e-buses. This change of the business model solidifies public 
transport operations, reduces in the long-term its costs (due to lower financial costs) and allows for upgrading of the 
service offer with the separation of ownership and operations and investments not only in new buses but also in 
improving the network, fare integration, and increased usage of electronic means. These measures can be better 
implemented by a transport authority if transport operators just operate instead of managing the system as they do 
nowadays. This results in e-mobility being a game-changer not only in terms of fostering low-carbon vehicles, but also 
in modernization of the public transportation system increasing its attractiveness and thereby resulting in an important 
mode-shift towards public transport compared to a business-as-usual situation.       
   
Already today electric vehicles can result in less GHG emissions per kilometre than conventional ICE vehicle, even 
including a life-cycle approach as is shown for the case of Uruguay, one of the countries involved in the Program, for 
BEB. Given the low grid emission factor (0.065 tCO2/MWh19) in the country due to high share of renewable energies 
(approx. 93-98% including large hydropower), a BEB can reduce WTW GHG emissions in Uruguay by 92% and “cradle 
to grave” GHG emissions by 84% compared to an ICE bus (see figure below).  
 
Figure 4: GHG Impact of Electric Urban Buses (example from Uruguay) 
 
Source: Annex 2.; TTW = Tank to wheel, WTT = well to tank; Main assumptions: energy consumption based on values for Uruguay; annual mileage 
64,500 km; Urban standard bus (diesel) 40 l/100km and BEB 1.3 kWh/km; 16-year lifespan diesel and BEB; 8-year lifespan of battery; battery set of 
average 300 kWh; 145kg CO2/kWh battery (assumed average, IFEU, 2019); grid emission factor for Uruguay 0.065 tCO2/MWh 
 
Electrification is happening within all vehicle segments. However, long-range vehicles such as inter-urban buses or long-
haul trucks are only at the start of electrification process. Hydrogen technology might be, at least initially, a more 
appropriate technology solution for these vehicle segments. Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs) are the most competitive 
and also have the largest environmental impact in urban areas. Hybrid and plug-in hybrid vehicle technologies have

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
20 See Annex 2 
21 (IEA, 2020) 
22 in decreasing EV stock numbers PR China, USA, Norway, France, Japan, Germany, Netherlands and the UK 
23 See e.g. Electric vehicle trends | Deloitte Insights or McKinsey Electric Vehicle Index: Electric Vehicle Trends | McKinsey; 
See for an analysis per country per Program targeted vehicle segment Annex 2 
been outgrown by the fast development of battery technology and only offer a limited GHG impact. For commercial 
vehicle applications at least (buses, light-commercial vehicles) manufacturers have switched towards full electric 
vehicles. Hybrids as well as plug-in hybrids are therefore not considered in this Program (see for further details 
Benchmark Report in Annex 22). 
 
The Program focuses on high-utilization vehicles (buses, light commercial vehicles and public fleets). These represent 
in the countries covered by the Sub-Program 2, 20-50% of road-based transport emissions20 (see example from Panama 
in Figure 5). Electric commercial vehicles are the vehicle segment closest to being at cost-par with fossil units, due to 
high usage and long distances which often has a faster payback period. They have a high mileage and are used in 
urban areas where most people live. Replacing such units thus has a high GHG as well as air quality and health impact.  
 
Figure 5: GHG emission from transport by vehicle segment 2019 and 2030 under BAU scenario (TTW, example from 
Panama) 
 
Source: Annex 2, Country Diagnostic for Panamá  
 
Program activities will also improve the grid resilience and the resilience of urban infrastructure. Used batteries from 
EVs have a second-life application where they can serve as storage units and thereby (i) increase the resilience and 
independence of the grid at critical spots such as hospitals or schools; (ii) increase the grid resilience and reduce costs 
of renewable grids by increasing storage capacity capable of taking up electricity during times of over-supply: this feature 
is especially important for grids moving towards high rates of (supply unpredictable) renewables; (iii) increase grid 
resilience through acting as grid shavers, especially in urban settings, thus reducing peak impacts. 
 
Accelerating Transformation towards Low-Emission Mobility 
By 2019 there were about 4.8 million full electric cars on the worlds’ roads21. 8 countries have more than 90% of all 
electric cars in operation worldwide22. Only Norway and the Netherlands have an EV car share above 5%. Considering 
different income levels, EV deployment is still at an infant stage in Latin American countries and lags behind Asia or 
Europe. Under a BAU Scenario prices of EV’s are dropping reaching cost parity or full commercial viability in 5-15 years 
depending on the vehicle category and the country23. The Program’s core function is to accelerate EV deployment in 
involved countries through financial and technical assistance. The Program ensures at-scale transition towards e-
mobility and closes the gap between the current pilot stage and commercial large-scale sustained growth.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
24 UN Environment, Electric Mobility: Developments in Latin America and the Caribbean and opportunities for regional 
collaboration, 2018 
Figure 6: Intervention window of E-Motion Program
 
Source: AFD FP, 2021 
 
The Program implements the required interventions to kick-start mass deployment significantly earlier than with a BAU 
scenario by reducing the risk profile of investments and by comprehensive technical assistance. The Program only 
works in countries and vehicle segments where this gap can be closed, i.e., where conditions for promoting on a larger 
scale e-mobility are met and where simultaneously commercially sustainable e-mobility deployment is feasible within 5 
years by kick-starting the process and by eliminating barriers towards commercial uptake. This is the reason why the 
Program does not have the same sequencing and activities as well as support levels in all countries. The Program is 
thus not about pilots and initial technical assistance but about accelerating market based commercial EV deployment, 
acknowledging that there would be “ready to implement” opportunities in more organized and sophisticated segments 
(i.e. well established BRT systems, well-organized and credit worthy unions, etc). Feasibility Study (Annex 2) include 
criteria for financing potential investment sub-projects. Market Study/Strategy of intervention report (T4 within Feasibility 
Study – Annex 2) considered multiple stakeholders (public sector, operators, banks, providers, among others), finding 
from interviews that electromobility must be coupled with a general modernization and restructuring of the transport 
system, mainly to strengthen public transport. This is how the transport authorities require support to define the best 
roadmap to formalization, supported by regulation and working with the unions to define the enabling conditions that 
sustain this transition and promote their repayment capacity and make sub-projects eligible. In this sense, there was an 
excellent reception in the interviewees to work this roadmap through E-motion TA, so that financial resources are fully 
allocated to new and better organized actors/sub-projects. A case of this initial trend is Panama, where new companies 
have already been established (Colon City and Herrera City) groups of ex-individual vehicle owners, thus preparing their 
financial profile for reforms and concessions that will be developed within the framework of the National Electric Mobility 
Strategy (ENME) and potential incentives to be implemented.     
 
Strengthening Public Transport (PT) 
Private vehicle growth is prevalent in all Program countries resulting in decreasing mode shares of public transport (PT). 
In many countries the PT sector is under severe financial pressure with limited willingness of financial institutions to 
further finance the sector without structural change of business models and/or explicit government guarantees on 
minimum revenues. This situation has aggravated with the COVID-19 pandemic. It is a result of atomized ownership 
structure, financially weak transport operators and lack of an integrated attractive offer for clients. Moreover, with one of 
the fastest urbanization and motorization rates worldwide, the vehicle and motorcycle fleet in Latin America may triple 
over the next 25 years, reaching over 200 million units in 205024. In sub-program 2 countries some work is in progress 
on revenue guarantees model, where Panama is quite advanced, as they have been working in BEB adoption through 
operational leasing business model, were authority and METRO support/guarantee MiBus (only concessioned bus 
operator in PA) repayment to the fleet provider. PY has been analysing this model through IDB support and VMT (Vice-
ministry of Transport) but TA are required to implement progressively PPP or operational leasing from “green routes” to 
the whole system. In the case of UY, further work needs to be performed through TA. However, in UY the first call for 
their ebus subsidy has the “fideicomiso” as a public tool to guarantee the proper implementation and repayment.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
25 Currie, 2018 
26 See Annex 2 
27 Source: Harmonized IFI Default Grid Factors 2021 (v3.1, January 2022, "Combined Margin Grid Emission  
Factor, gCO2/kWh”, Electricity Consumption)   
28 2019 
29 Emissions – Global Energy & CO2 Status Report 2019 – Analysis - IEA 
Electric mobility offers a unique opportunity to re-structure the PT sector, introduces new PPP and business models 
(incl.  green routes of BEB) based on separation of asset ownership and operations, when possible, favours the entry 
of new financially stronger players and leads the structuring of a modern, attractive, and integrated offer to potential 
users of PT. This disruptive, and largely unpopular among existing transport operators, move is provoked through e-
mobility which requires the adoption of new business and service delivery models that also consider the needs and 
interests of different users’ segments and profiles, such as women, other caretakers, children, people with disabilities. 
It also entails that the Program not only makes a paradigm shift towards e-mobility and ultra-low carbon mobility but also 
strengthens and enhances the attractiveness of public transport thereby allowing for a mode shift towards public 
transport (mode shift in relative terms compared to a BAU situation which means in some countries stopping the negative 
downward trend of decreasing mode share of PT). Customers might also appreciate an EV more due to less noise or 
due to a positive image and therefore ridership of electric buses could increase resulting in a positive mode shift towards 
PT and therefore additional EVs. As well, if the buses and their infrastructure are not only greener and cleaner but also 
accessible, designed for running errands besides of commuting, child-friendly, violence-free, the potential of attracting 
a market segment that currently relies on private cars, motorcycles and taxis is significant. A report of the UN 
Environment found for example that e-buses could attract 1.9% additional ridership compared to diesel units.25 However, 
such results are preliminary and might be city and country dependent. As mentioned previously more important is, 
however, the impact caused on modernization of public transport systems through establishing new business models 
paired with investments in improving PT systems, which increase the financial stability and economic efficiency of public 
transport operators and public transport systems. This results in e-mobility being a game-changer not only in terms of 
fostering low-emission vehicles but also in modernization of the public transportation system increasing its attractiveness 
and thereby resulting in an important mode-shift towards public transport compared to a business-as-usual situation. 
 
Local Context 
Latin America has strong enabling conditions in terms of clean transport and e-mobility. The region has one of the 
cleanest electricity generation portfolios in the world (high hydroelectric production and growing deployment of wind and 
solar power plants). Therefore, the adoption of an e-mobility strategy would allow the sector to move towards a 
decarbonisation pathway. The table below shows the carbon intensity of electricity generated of Sub-Program 2 
countries. With these grid factors EVs can reduce GHG emissions on a well-to-wheel (cradle-to-grave) base by 80-
100% (50-90%) compared to fossil units26. 
 
Table 1: Grid Emission Factor of Sub-Program 2 Countries  
Country 
Grid Emission Factor 
Electricity27 
Panama 
0.230 tCO2/MWhel 
Paraguay 
0.00 tCO2/MWhel 
Uruguay 
0.065 tCO2/Mwhel 
World average28 
0.475 tCO2/MWh (2019) 
Source: Grid emission factor based on CO2 emissions from electricity generation in relation to net generated electricity based on 
country diagnostics in Annex 2; world average based on IEA29 
 
The region is also well known for having developed innovative bus-based transportation systems and cities like Bogotá, 
Medellin, Santiago and Curitiba have become international benchmarks for innovation in this area. Finally, Latin America 
has a positive local manufacturing context: three large vehicle producers operate in the region (Argentina, Brazil and 
Mexico) and Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile are called the “Lithium Triangle”, as the three countries hold more than half of 
the world’s lithium reserves that are an essential material for building electric batteries.  
 
The main motivating forces to foster e-mobility in the countries included in the Program are: 
• 
Reduce GHG emissions; 
• 
Improve air quality and reduce health problems associated with air pollution; 
• 
Reduce dependency on imported fossil fuels and exposure to external price shocks;

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
30 For instance, there are Economic Complementation Agreements (ECAs), currently in effective use, within the framework of 
ALADI, related to the automotive industry that could lead to manufacturing of parts in UY for the Brazilian and Argentinean 
markets. 
31 https://www.who.int/airpollution/data/cities-2016/en/ 
32 https://www.who.int/gho/phe/en/ 
33 Mitchell G. and Dorling D. 2003. An environmental justice analysis of British air quality, Environment and Planning, vol. 35, 
909-929 
34 Clougherty J. 2010. A Growing Role for Gender Analysis in Air Pollution Epidemiology, Environmental Health Perspectives, 
118(2), 167-176 
35 A Growing Role for Gender Analysis in Air Pollution Epidemiology | Environmental Health Perspectives | Vol. 118, No. 2 
(nih.gov)  
36 https://www.globalpetrolprices.com/Panama/ 
• 
Re-structure and modernize the public transport system to increase its attractiveness and mode share; 
• 
Achieve positive economic impacts related to reduced health costs, reduced fuel import bill and equitable job 
creation; 
• 
Participate in the new growth industry of EV and battery manufacturing.30 
 
Air pollution is a large problem in most Latin American cities with levels affecting seriously human health. According to 
the latest urban air quality database, 98% of cities in low- and middle-income countries with more than 100,000 
inhabitants do not meet WHO air quality guidelines31. The WHO estimates that annually 4.2 million deaths result due to 
excessive exposure to fine particulate matter equivalent to 7.6% of all deaths32. The transport sector is thereby a major 
source of air pollution. The poor are disproportionately affected by air pollution as they tend to live and work closer to its 
sources33. Children and the elderly are particularly vulnerable. Recent studies show that women are more affected by 
poor air quality than men34. There is no available information that correlates specific transport-related air pollution with 
the observed higher prevalence of respiratory mortality among women. However, numerous epidemiological studies35 
show that air pollution in general affects more women than men. The differentiated consequences are in general 
attributed to gender roles as well as to a combination of women´s bigger loads of caretaking activities and their higher 
poverty rates. 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has created an unprecedented challenge for many Latin American countries, from the health 
and economic perspectives, but it is also opening new opportunities for an accelerated sustainable transformation of its 
energy, transport, and urban landscapes while contributing to economic recovery. A recent report prepared by the ILO 
shows that fostering of electric mobility can have a significant positive job impact primarily due to the induced impact of 
savings of consumers on fossil fuels and vehicle maintenance resulting in increased spending on goods with a high-
income elasticity which tend to be labour intensive service-goods (ILO, 2020). 
 
CAF has conducted in all Sub-Program 2 countries a diagnostic and market study. A brief context is given per country 
below with more information found in the country diagnostics in Annex 2.  
 
Panamá 
Area 
Population 
GDP/Capita 
Vehicle Fleet 
Diesel price 
Electricity price 
75,475 km2 
4.2 million 
15,731 USD 
1.3 million 
0.69 USD/l 
0.17 USD/kWh 
Sources: Annex 2; energy prices are retrieved from global petrol prices website36 
 
The deployment of electromobility in Panama is generally on a pilot scale. Charging infrastructure is mainly supported 
by private companies, such as ENSA, Celsia Panama, Bavarian Motors and Ciudad del Saber. Panama’s national 
government aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector, hence different departments promote 
sustainable mobility and alternative means of transport. The National Strategy for Electric Mobility (ENME) was approved 
in 2019, promoting four objectives until 2030: 10-20% of the total fleet of private vehicles will be electric; 25-40% of 
private vehicle sales will be electric vehicle sales; 15-35% of the buses in the authorized concession fleets will be electric; 
25-50% of the public fleets will be made up of electric vehicles. Panama’s updated NDC (2020) focuses mainly on 
mitigating emissions from the land use change sector and the energy sector. Transport sector in PA represents about 
24% of national GHG emissions.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
37 https://datos.bancomundial.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=PY  
38 https://www.globalpetrolprices.com/Paraguay/ 
Paraguay 
Area 
Population 
GDP/Capita 
Vehicle Fleet 
Diesel price 
Electricity price 
406,752 km2 
7.3 million 
5.415 USD37 
2.5 million 
0.68 USD/l 
0.06 USD/kWh 
Sources:  see Annex 2; energy prices are retrieved from global petrol prices website38 
 
Paraguay’s NDC aims to reduce 20% of the fossil fuel consumption by 2030, compared to the projected baseline. 
Unilaterally, the country aims to reduce 10% of projected emissions by 2030. Additionally, a conditional goal of 10% 
reduction in emissions projected by 2030 depends on international cooperation. Among the measures to be 
implemented in the transport sector, action lines for more efficient technologies in this sector are being evaluated 
together with the Vice Ministry of Transport, with electric mobility being one of these possibilities. See Figure 1 for policy 
framework in this country. Paraguay has two ideal attributes that could make possible to take full advantage of the 
benefits that electromobility offers and that makes it especially interesting for its deployment in the country: the energy 
surplus generated by hydroelectricity, and the competitive price of the electricity tariff. However, PY is on a very early 
stage with regards EV adoption (2 ebuses). Thus electric vehicles provide the opportunity to reduce various 
environmental and financial externalities resulting from mobility dependent on fossil fuels. Transport sector in PY 
represents about 29% of national GHG emissions. In this context, the country is taking its first steps in the transition 
towards electric mobility, advancing with the development of technical standards for electric vehicles, implementing 
“green routes” with chargers installed between the three main cities – Asunción, Ciudad del Este, and Encarnación – 
and starting to operate the first two electric buses on the streets of the Metropolitan Area of Asunción. Electromobility is 
seen as a possible strategy to make use of the surpluses of renewable electricity generation, thus reducing the amount 
of fossil fuel imports. In fact, both the National Development Plan 2030 and the National Energy Policy 2040 consider 
electric mobility to be one of their dimensions to achieve the country’s development goals. Paraguay has great potential 
in public fleets as the country has set targets to ANDE and to public fleets in general: By 2021, 10% of renewal with 
EVs; by 2030, 20% of renewal with EVs and ANDE 50%; by 2040, 50% of renewal with EVs and ANDE 100%. ANDE 
owns 1300 vehicles. 
Uruguay 
Area 
Population 
GDP/Capita 
Vehicle Fleet 
Diesel price 
Electricity price 
176,215 km2 
3.5 million 
16,200 USD 
1.5 million 
0.94 USD/l 
0.08-0.37 
USD/kWh 
Sources: see Annex 2 
 
The transport sector in Uruguay is responsible for high GHG emissions, specially associated with fossil fuel use in road 
transport. In 2017, CO2 emissions were 3.73 MtCO2, accounting for 64 % of total CO2 emissions in the energy sector. 
In parallel, Uruguay is a country recognized for its recent transition to renewable energy in the power system, with 95% 
renewable sources in the power generation mix, which is a good framework for electromobility adoption. Uruguay has 
adopted several national strategies that promote energy efficiency, increased renewable energy supply, and the 
reduction of fossil fuel consumption. Several initiatives (e.g., incentives and regulation) aim at achieving lower emissions 
until 2030. Additionally, the National Sustainable Mobility Plan promotes a transition towards transport technologies with 
better energy efficiency.  
 
The NDC of Uruguay sets specific goals for E-motion categories towards 2025: e-Buses (110 units) and electric light 
commercial vehicles (LCVs) (900 units), a network of electric vehicle charging stations throughout the main roads across 
Uruguay (52% completed in 2020), and a fast-charging network (no progress yet). However, these goals are part of a 
scenario conditional on additional means of implementation (such as access to international financing).  
 
In summary, the work carried out in each country (PA, PY and UY) collected information from each context and from 
multiple actors, among them are those who have been directly involved with ongoing EM projects (buses, private, public 
sector). This is how the main gaps to be resolved with the program (TA and FA) have been captured, cross-sectionally 
highlighting access to concessional financing that allow scaling up EV adoption now and not having to wait until prices 
drop by 5 to 8 more years. This is due to the fact that it is not desired to block the renewal process for up to 8-10 more 
years, since if it is renewed for a new combustion vehicle, using this asset until their useful life necessarily delays the 
adoption of electric vehicles.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
39 https://www.changing-transport.org/about/  
40 http://www.euroclimaplus.org/en/mobility/nump-uruguay-en  
41 https://www.iadb.org/en/project/RG-T3078  
42 https://www.thegef.org/project/global-programme-support-countries-shift-electric-mobility  
From a technical point of view, urban mobility in each of these 3 countries operates optimally, therefore, there is certainty 
in initiating adoption on a larger scale (the technical gap has already been overcome). However, another point that is 
reiterated is the need to have public charging points, which has also been integrated into E-motion. 
 
Finally, each country has its own challenges caused by each local context, indicated in Annex 2-Pre-feasibility Study, 
and that the Program seeks to solve through TA. 
 
Related projects/interventions  
Multiple actors are engaged in promotion of e-mobility. CAF, AFD group, GIZ and KfW, all of which are included in the 
E-Motion Program, are important actors in e-mobility in various Program countries. IDB also intends to present to the 
GCF a program focused on e-mobility, which will have complementarities with the E-Motion Program. The two programs 
will collectively have the potential to contribute with transformational change in the transportation system of the Region.  
 
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is also an active e-mobility player in various countries e.g. financing a pilot 
fleet of e-buses studies and implementation in Paraguay or the technical-economic evaluation to acquire three to five 
electric buses for the Historic Centre in Panama City (PA), which would be under the conventional scheme of owning 
the fleet and MiBus; or TA for ebuses study case in Uruguay. IDB also intends to present to the GCF a program focused 
on e-mobility for the Latin American region, which will have complementarities with the E-Motion Program. The two 
programs will collectively have the potential to contribute with transformational change in the transportation system of 
the Region. For instance, IDB will include different elements such as green hydrogen and maritime transportation, urban 
regeneration and technical assistance on value-chains as different elements, IDB proposal would be limited to sovereign 
loans or sovereign-guaranteed loans.  IDB and its role to promote electromobility in sub-program 2 countries has been 
clearly identified and discussed throughout the work conducted in PA, PY and UY. E-motion will implement TA and FA 
in accordance with the need of each country context, properly articulated through their respective technical groups (all 
of them interviewed): CIME in PA, Electromobility Strategic Table in PY and GIETT in UY; in order to avoid overlap 
parallel FA and/or TA programs that may happen at the time. We don’t have further detail on IDB’s activities for its 
regional program also applying for GCF. 
 
As part of their energy and transport sector low-carbon recovery plans, countries are requesting more support from all 
multilateral agencies towards a paradigm shift to low emissions transport systems, with a boost to electromobility and 
green hydrogen. UN Environment is implementing the GCF Readiness Program “advancing a regional approach to e-
mobility in Latin America” in thirteen countries in the region. The Program focuses on enabling strategies and policies 
to scale up electric mobility. The individual Tas per country have been designed so that a complementarity exists with 
on-going and planned initiatives of other actors.  
 
Baseline activities and projects/programmes in the region and target countries implemented by leading 
intergovernmental organizations and multilateral development banks focusing on the introduction of electric mobility 
include: 
 
GIZ – Changing Transport 39: Supporting partners in defining low carbon transport strategies, implementing 
climate actions to reduce emissions and harnessing sustainable transport benefits. On e-mobility there is 
Euroclima+ Urban Electric Mobility supporting in the development of an E-Mobility Master Plan for Public Transport 
and Logistics and strengthening capacities for sustainable urban mobility planning and promoting electric urban 
mobility planning in Uruguay and Paraguay40. 
 
IDB – Accelerating NDC Implementation. Unlocking Clean Buses in LAC41: Technical Cooperation (TC) is to 
improve public transportation in LAC cities through the replacement of diesel buses with low-carbon hybrid or 
electric alternatives. IDB is also active in financial structuration of about 30 BEB in Paraguay. 
 
UNEP – Global Programme to Support Countries with the Shift to Electric Mobility42: The aim of the Global 
Programme (covering Antigua & Barbuda, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Grenada, Jamaica, Peru and St. Lucia in 
LAC) is to support low and middle-income countries in overcoming these barriers through a combination of 
technical assistance and investment. Technical assistance on the Country Child Project level includes awareness 
raising campaigns, capacity building and the development of instructional structures to support the introduction of 
electric mobility. It furthermore includes laying the ground for large-scale market introduction of electric mobility 
through 1) The development of policies, including fiscal, regulatory and local measures; 2) The establishment of

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
43 https://movelatam.org 
adequate business models and finance mechanisms; and 3) The development of plans and studies to ensure 
environmental sustainability. The investment component of the Country Child Projects will be used for electric 
mobility demonstration projects to allow for the creation of local experience to de-risk the technology and to attract 
investors to upscale electric mobility in the respective countries. 
 
UNEP GCF Readiness Programme on E-Mobility in Latin America: The UNEP Regional Office in Panama 
currently implements a GCF Readiness Programme on E-Mobility with the title “Advancing a regional approach to 
e-mobility in Latin America” including Argentina, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. The project has a budget of USD 2,800,000 and aims at building capacity, 
development of e-mobility policies and business models, identification of strategies to finance the shift to electric 
mobility in the region and will be implemented combining a national with a regional approach, whereby close 
collaboration is sought for with the GEF Global E-Mobility Programme. 
 
UNEP – MOVE Electric Mobility in Latin America43: In 2016, UNEP and Mario Molina Centre Chile launched a 
regional platform to accelerate deployment of electric mobility in Latin America. Since then, MOVE has provided 
(1) capacity building to public technical officers from almost 20 countries in the region through online webinars and 
face-to-face meetings, (2) knowledge creation on the uptake of electric mobility in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
(3) technical assistance, through the elaboration of National Electric Mobility Strategies in Colombia, Argentina and 
Panama and (4) resource mobilization to enable countries to transition to electric mobility – with a special focus on 
electric road mass transit. 
 
The E-Motion Program will leverage on ongoing programs of GIZ and Euroclima+ specifically trough the following 
aspects: 
 
 
The NUMP in Uruguay will set a long-term vision regarding sustainable mobility that will enable different sectors to 
engage. The NUMP will generate capacity at the city level to develop mobility plans, those plans expect to be 
financed in private public partnership. Consideration for future financing models is welcome. Uruguay is building a 
working group that will set the agenda for fleet renewal as for energy production. Considering their almost 100% 
renewable electric grid, they are exploring Hydrogen and Bio-fuels. Governance capacity is suitable to pilot energy 
transition as to work on innovative multi-actors networks to accelerate the transition and to outreach lessons 
learned to other countries. 
 
The NUMP in Paraguay will set a long-term vision regarding urban sustainable mobility by the development of the 
Multimodal Electromobility Master Plan for Urban Public Transport and Logistic in Paraguay. This NUMP will 
generate ecosystem, the master plan and its MRV (monitoring, report and verification), capacity building, a social 
awareness campaign with its respective communicational strategy; and electromobility projects and financial 
instruments that will be leverage by E-motion. 
 
In addition, as GIZ is one of the E-motion partners and therefore, the complementarity of the ongoing projects/programs 
will be direct and consistent in order to not duplicate efforts in TA. In the case of the IDB, and other TA that are taking 
place in the country, it is important to point out that E-motion will validate the needs proposed in the TA component 
through the continuous coordination of the technical teams of each country (CIME in PA, MS Strategy Table in PY, 
GIEET in UY). The previous is because they are the ones who orchestrate the needs of normative studies, institutional 
strengthening, project structuring, among others. Finally, E-motion has already met with all the technical teams 
mentioned, with which the TA proposal for the program was built. 
 
The ongoing and planned project / programmes are addressing the current inexistence of socially and economically 
viable alternatives to fossil fuel road transport, as one of the key associated drivers for the on-going reliance on internal 
combustion engine transport. However, despite those ongoing initiatives, persistent barriers to the broad adoption of 
low-emission electric vehicles exist in many countries, particularly: (i) High up-front investments, (ii) lack of 
information/awareness, (iii) policy and planning challenges,  (iv) limited institutional capacity, (v) range anxiety and 
limited availability of charging infrastructure, (vi) limited offer of electric vehicles and electric vehicle supply equipment 
in low and middle income countries, (vii) uncertainty with regards to end-of-life issues of used EV batteries.  
 
For the further acceleration of shifting the transport sector towards low-emission e-mobility solutions, overcoming the 
investment barriers will be key in the Program countries. Gap finance and financial incentives are still missing to a larger 
extend. The E-Motion Program and its Sub-Programs will hence support closing the funding gap of higher up-front cost, 
while providing business model support and complementary TA elements for commercial fleets and general enabling 
activities, which will help accelerating the transformation towards low-Carbon mobility in the respective countries.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
 
The theory of change is described in the following, a detailed diagram for the E-Motion Sub-Program 2 is included in 
Annex 24. 
 
Climate Problem 
The environmental problem of sharply increasing GHG transport emissions due to fossil fuel-based vehicles (ICE) is 
addressed by the Program through the promotion of low-emission transport modes and electrification. The current 
situation and business-as-usual projection will result in a non-attainment of climate targets. Fossil vehicles are in urban 
areas a significant driver of worsening air quality resulting in severe health impacts affecting above-proportionally 
women and vulnerable people. Electric mobility combined with low carbon electricity production can significantly de-
carbonize the transportation sector whilst improving air quality. However, e-mobility solutions are not properly structured 
and only to a limited extent deployed in the Program countries, resulting in growing GHG emissions from passenger 
and commercial road transport.  
 
Goal Statement  
The Program aims to persuade people to use clean public transportation modes by enabling a large-scale regional 
transition towards electro-mobility in Latin America, focusing on intensive use vehicles leading to reduced fossil fuel 
consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and air pollutions. This will induce not only more demand into the existing 
public transport network, but also a shift in mindset among the users considering low-emissions options within their 
regular journeys.  
 
If countries succeed to kick-start mass deployment of EVs and the shift to low-emission transportation modes, transport 
climate targets can be achieved as mobility emissions are reduced significantly. To achieve zero-emission transport 
systems EV technology fuelled by emission-free renewable energies is critical. Ambitious climate targets for 2030 
require GHG reductions relative to the baseline in the transport sector. A rapid and massive EV deployment is 
necessary due to the long permanence of the vehicle stock.  
 
The Programme’s headline Goal Statement is: IF the regulatory and political framework (including standards, 
regulations, subsidies and tax reforms, and procurement guidelines) is enhanced for EV deployment, relevant public 
and private stakeholders are trained, e-buses and e-LCVs are financed and deployed, and charging infrastructure is 
prepared, financed and constructed THEN the foundations for a mass deployment of e-mobility and ultra-low emissions 
mobility is created and the attractiveness of public transport is enhanced (towards low-emissions, reliable, efficient, 
secure and affordable public transportation), hence, cities can influence users’ mobility patterns and promote a mode 
shift towards public transport (/ non-motorised transportation) BECAUSE an e-mobility and public transport conducive 
ecosystem is created, while the mass deployment of e-buses and e-LCVs is kick started and innovative business 
models are promoted.  
 
Paradigm Shift  
The Program supports a paradigm change to low-emission transportation systems. The Program not only shall 
overcome the barriers identified to kick-start the mass deployment of commercial EVs, but also represent a turning 
point on how cities can influence users’ mobility patterns by setting the foundations of a low-emissions, reliable, efficient, 
secure and affordable e-transportation. 
 
Scale:  
Accelerated EV investments take place due to an e-mobility conducive policy environment, innovative business models, 
lower performance and income risks and the entrance of new market players. For instance, the Program involves the 
local banking sector to accustom it’s risk and opportunity perception, and develop appropriate business models for 
electric mobility deployment finally leading to lower costs of financing EVs. Also, by supporting the development of EVs 
regulatory framework and EV acquisition, the Program will reduce the acquisition of fossil fuel vehicles. The 
transformative shift is possible through the accelerated uptake of commercial EVs and electric public transport thanks 
to an improved ecosystem for EVs with (i) financial assistance (FA) made available for EV investments as well as (ii) a 
equate technical assistance (TA) on each pre-identified scalable EV segments in each country.  
 
The country studies show that depending on respective scenarios the Sub-Program 2 will have significant spill-over 
effects that lead to an uptake and acceleration of EVs in all major vehicle segments. The high-potential scenarios show 
that spill over effects lead to 100% of newly registered vehicles being electric in 2030.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
Replicability: Replicability is based on three pillars:  
 
1. Market based price decrease: EV prices are decreasing in all vehicle segments due to decreasing battery prices 
and increasing competition and supply of EVs. Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) parity with fossil vehicles is expected 
in the targeted vehicle categories by 2025 and price tags of EVs will get close to fossil models by 2030. TCO alone 
will in many cases be competitive (electric vs combustion) however not be a sufficient argument to support the 
switch towards EVs if the upfront incremental investment is still significantly higher and the risks are still perceived 
to be higher. However, decreasing vehicle costs is a very important ingredient to make EVs commercially viable 
without need for further financial assistance. Finally, the gradual emergence of a second-hand market for e-vehicles 
may also help to establish certainty about prices in case of resale of vehicles and thereby reduces the risk of 
financing E-vehicles. 
2. Reduced risks and costs for 2nd and 3rd sub-projects due to showcasing of successful implementation sub-
projects and business models. Risks which are reduced by large fleet applications are: (i) vehicle reliability and 
vehicle performance risks; (ii) improved information and therefore lower risk on assessing the re-sale value of used 
EVs as a key step for introducing business models based on leasing; (iii) less risk concerning maintenance & repair 
capabilities and availability of spare parts including secondary spare parts markets; (iv) reduced risk on the 
workability of new business models in practice. The Program assists in this process by designing and implementing 
business models and by enabling with concessional finance the uptake of large fleets, which are critical to reduce 
these risks. Vehicle performance is influenced by multiple external parameters such as climatic or traffic conditions 
as well as by the operator itself, e.g., maintenance, types of tires used, or driver training making a guarantee of real-
world performance very difficult. Pilot sub-projects cannot create the required information and base for reducing 
these risks – this has resulted in many countries worldwide having done pilots without ever reaching large-scale 
fleet implementation because not getting access to financial support and grant. 
3. Policies which are more conducive for e-mobility. This allows EVs to be more competitive. Countries have 
however been careful with such policies prior having assurances that this will not result in significant cost increases 
of the transport sector. The Program will improve the framework conditions for EVs through Technical Assistance. 
However, this will be dependent on having implementation sub-projects in place that showcase their commercial 
and technical viability. The paradigm shift as well as medium- to long-term sustainability of the proposed Program 
beyond the project lifetime is achieved by laying the foundation for an EV conducive ecosystem, which results in 
investors purchasing EVs on a commercial base. Barriers towards mass EV deployment have been successfully 
eliminated or significantly reduced through the Program interventions, such that replicability of proposed business 
models and financing structures can be maintained in the long-term without concessional support from GCF (see 
particularly sub-component 1.5). 
 
Sustainability: 
A core element of the intervention strategy of the Program is the medium-term commercial viability of EVs. For each 
country and vehicle segment the commercial feasibility has been assessed based on expected future price 
developments. Only vehicle types and countries per areas have been included where it is deemed as feasible that a 
sustainable commercial uptake of EVs will take after Program end without further concessional finance from the GCF.  
The magnitude and time of commercial uptake of EVs is accelerated in a decisive manner by the Program through the 
operations of large fleets and through risk reduction measures making investment in EVs feasible for investors. Lower 
risk profiles of EV investments are attained directly due to FA investments for example due to better information of 
performance and operational costs of EVs, improved maintenance and management of EVs, through the establishment 
of fast charging infrastructure and through TA due to improved regulatory and enabling conditions (including concession 
contracts) for EVs, due to proven business models more in accordance with the financial profile of EVs and due to 
policy roadmaps which create a conducive e-mobility surrounding.  
 
The establishment of a conducive EV framework, local business models which match the EV situation (e.g. separation 
of ownership and usage of assets) as well as reduced (perceived) risks of operating EVs due to the experience gained 
with large fleets all make it feasible that at the end of the Program implementation period EVs are taken up massively 
and at a far larger scale than in absence of the Program. Also, in absence of the Program EVs will still be purchased 
but in a lower rate– the difference the GCF can make is that the uptake and corresponding GHG reductions are made 
faster and at a large scale.  
 
Finally, at the sectoral level the Program will deliver road maps for electric mobility in public transport and LCVs (public 
and private) for countries which do not yet have such sectoral roadmaps. The roadmaps guide policymakers in creating 
a long-term enabling policy environment conducive towards increased investments in e-mobility. On a regional level

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
44 The co-benefits of this programme are elaborated in more detail in section D.3. 
the knowledge products and outreach events assist other countries in implementing e-mobility sub-projects and 
contributes towards the creation of a non-reversible dynamic towards electrification of the transport sector.  
 
Country needs: 
Regarding specific national regional and municipal needs of the sub-program 2 countries, the Technical Assistance at 
the national level will be differentiated according to the needs of the country. No program country, with the exception 
of Uruguay, has experience with fleets of EVs as targeted by the Program but only with pilots with singular buses. 
Annex 2 provides country reports including the specific scope of each country-specific TA component. Targeting the 
large cities is far more effective in these countries as this serves as lighthouse for other cities to follow, whereas second 
wave sub-projects might focus on secondary cities, according with the strategy of intervention of Uruguay, Paraguay, 
and Panamá. Despite the lighthouse effect, secondary cities will significantly benefit from lessons learned of this 
programme, e.g. regarding institutional capacities/capacity needs, technical know-how, business and operational know-
how, and de-risking approaches – see above the paragraph “Replicability” 
 
The transportation sector is transformed to a sustainable low-emission system with a dominance of public transportation 
and non-motorised transportation (NMT). Multiple countries in the region are establishing Green Recovery Plans due 
to the COVID-19 crisis as a vehicle to transform the society by investing in profitable infrastructure which creates 
economic, environmental and social benefits, short-term jobs and a long-term greening of the economy. Electrified and 
sustainable public transportation systems are thereby a core feature. 
 
Outcomes & Co-Benefits 
 
Long-term outcomes 
 
 GHG reduction (Long-term Outcome 1): An increased share of low-emission transportation is reached by 
replacing fossil fuel-based vehicles. EVs have significantly lower lifecycle GHG emissions than fossil units in all 
countries included in the Program. The expected GCF fund-level impacts are reduced GHG emissions through 
increased access to low-emission transportation, resulting in direct emissions reductions of 3.3 MtCO2 over the 
asset lifetime of investments co-financed by the Sub-program 2. 
 Reduced energy dependency (Long-term Outcome 2): EVs use domestic resources, hence reliance on imported 
fossil fuels is reduced. Thereby also the resilience of the country’s economy to external oil price shocks is increased. 
 Improved fuel economy (Long-term Outcome 3): EVs are up to 4x more energy efficient than fossil vehicles, 
hence energy efficiency in the transport sector is increased. Electricity consumption even if pursuing an ambitious 
EV penetration level such as proposed by the EV30@30 target supported by the International Energy Agency (IEA) 
is marginal compared to national production levels – however, localized grid problems need to be addressed. 
 Implementation of innovative business models facilitated (Long-term Outcome 4): The Programme 
introduced new business models that allow for the separation of fleet ownership and operation as a precursor, 
among others, for paradigm shift. This also includes the support of public and private financing institutions including 
leasing entities with appropriate technical assistance. 
 Co-benefit 144 - Improved air quality and health: EVs have no combustion emissions and are a crucial instrument 
to achieve clean air in cities. Commercial vehicles are a major source of PM2.5 and NOx emissions in cities. By 
replacing fossil fuel powered commercial vehicles with EVs the air quality is improved significantly. Such 
improvement reduced deaths and health issues associated with poor air quality. Also, the replacement of 
combustion engine vehicle will lead to reduced noise pollution. 
 Co-benefit 2 - Socioeconomic benefits: Due to a higher energy efficiency and particularly due to the reduction of 
GHG emissions, the programme saved costs related to energy consumption, pollution, and global warming 
externalities. Moreover, the uptake of the EV market and promotion of a modal shift in public transportation led to 
the creation of new jobs. 
 
Meanwhile the Sub-Program 2 contributes significantly to sustainable development goals (SDG) 3 (“good health and 
well-being”), SDG goal 7 (“affordable and clean energy”), SDG goal 9 (“industry, innovation and infrastructure”), SDG 
goal 11 (“sustainable cities and communities”), and SDG 13 (“climate action”). 
 
Short term outcomes

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
The Program will result in (i) increased number of BEBs; (ii) strengthened public transportation with new and innovative 
business models; (iii) increased number of e-LCVs and e-public fleets; (iv) additional new fast-charging infrastructure; 
and (v) establishment of a conducive enabling environment for the further up-take and spill-over to other transport 
segments promoting low-emission transportation. 
 
The incremental number of EVs is directly influenced through the FA of the Sub-Program 2 by lowering the current 
financial investment barriers and indirectly through the creation of an e-mobility conducive environment which sparks 
further investments in commercial EVs. Latter is achieved through TA activities whilst also being a consequence of the 
FA, which reduces the risk profile of future EV investments. New business models combined with electric mobility 
increase the attractiveness of public transport and result in a mode shift towards public transport in relation to a BAU 
scenario. 
 
The e-mobility conducive eco-system is related to policy initiatives, more attractive business models, impacts on 
reducing risk profiles for e-mobility investments, the availability of charging infrastructure and the experience with mass 
fleet deployment of commercial EVs.   
 
The Sub-Program Outcomes related to the four Components are the following: 
 Outcome 1: Action is taken by the Government toward an e-mobility conducive ecosystem by 
 
enhanced coordination, planning, and capacity for promoting electric mobility 
 
required regulatory technical standard and implementing policy frameworks for electric mobility 
 
implemented appropriate emission standards and mandates 
 
implemented policy frameworks for ensuring the long-term sustainability of low-carbon electric mobility 
 
the created enabling investment climate for implementing policy frameworks for electric mobility  
 
Outcome 2: The mass deployment of e-buses is kick-started and the public transport ridership is increased by 
 
Finance of e-buses kick-started the mass deployment and provided evidence of technical, financial, social, 
and environmental sustainability  
 
Ridership of public transport and e-buses is increased through smart infrastructure measures 
 
Outcome 3: Finance of e-LCVs kick-started mass deployment and provide evidence of technical, financial, social, 
and environmental sustainability. 
 
Outcome 4: Investment in low-emission (fast) and inclusive charging infrastructure laid the foundation for the 
deployment EVs in the commercial fleets and facilitate further spill-over to other segments. 
 
The incremental number of EVs is directly influenced through the FA of the Program by lowering the current financial 
investment barriers and indirectly through the creation of an e-mobility conducive environment which sparks further 
investments in commercial EVs. Latter is achieved through TA activities whilst also being a consequence of the FA 
which reduces the risk profile of future EV investments. The individual outputs to achieve the outcomes are further 
detailed in section B.3.  
 
Outputs 
The Outputs that result in an enhanced e-mobility conducive ecosystem are the following: 
 
Output 1.1.1: A national sustainable and inclusive e-mobility strategy and implementation plan established / 
complemented / A multi-stakeholder and gender inclusive consultation strategy is implemented and 
recommendations for a long-term coordination mechanism are delivered to key government actors 
 
Output 1.1.2: Key public and private stakeholders are trained (including on gender policies) 
 
Output 1.1.3: Public and private stakeholders’ awareness enhanced 
 
Output 1.2.1: Regulatory standard reform proposal that includes gender-equality policy issues for electric 
vehicles delivered 
 
Output 1.3.1: Standards and policy framework for regulating eligible emissions developed 
 
Output 1.3.2: An appropriate monitoring system for air pollutants for the Metropolitan Area of Asunción 
 
Output 1.4.1: Standards and a policy framework for regulating the disposal of electric vehicles developed 
 
Output 1.4.2: New business models, including the responsibility of vehicle distributors delivered 
 
Output 1.4.3: Waste management stakeholders are trained on EV management 
 
Output 1.5.1: Proposal for regulatory subsidy and tax reforms for the uptake of electric vehicles developed 
 
Output 1.5.2: Business models, financial schemes and procurement guidelines delivered 
 
Output 1.5.3: Project sourcing and preparation delivered for pipeline sub-projects 
 
The Outputs that result in the kick start of mass deployment of e-buses and an increase of the public transport ridership 
are the following:

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
Output 2.1. Financing of e-bus sub-projects is provided, and e-bus fleets are deployed by bus operators 
 
Output 2.2. Smart facilities for enhanced public transport access, improved inter-modality and non-motorised 
transport are implemented and in operation 
 
The output that results in the kick start of mass deployment of e-LCVs is the following: 
 
Output 3.1. LCVs (public and private) are financed and deployed 
 
The outputs that result in the construction of a low-emission charging infrastructure are the following: 
 
Output 4.1. Technical preparations for fast charging infrastructure investments finalised, incl. engineering and 
procurement process 
 
Output 4.2. Low-emission fast-charging infrastructure financed and construction of in relevant municipalities 
completed 
 
Program Activities / Inputs 
The Sub Program 2 activities (see section B.2(b)) are aligned with financing needs targeted towards reversing the 
current trend of increasing transport emissions and towards low-emission electrified and sustainable transportation 
systems. The Program outputs will be achieved through providing: 
 
 
Inputs 1: Loan de-risking of investments to enhance bankability and leverage resources in electric mobility and 
sustainable urban transport systems (under Component 2, 3 and 4). Concessional investment are a game-changer 
and allow to make EV investments sufficiently attractive to pull-in private and public capital. Investments are related 
to urban public transport buses, public fleets and light commercial vehicles (LCV) used in the urban context. Public 
transport investment sub-projects are linked to replicable and innovative business models which allow for a 
modernization and increased attractiveness of public transport. Public fleets and light commercial vehicles are 
linked to the establishment of fast-charging infrastructure which allows to fundamentally de-risk the investment in 
such vehicles and removes a core barrier to mass deployment of such vehicles.   
 
Inputs 2: Grant-based technical assistance under Component 1 to enable EV conducive environments on a local, 
national and regional level fostering innovative business models, policies which favour e-mobility, training and 
capacity building measures to strengthen local know-how and capabilities, performance monitoring and outreach 
activities to increase awareness and information on e-mobility, and gender actions to reduce existing gender gaps 
and to foster an equitable public transportation system. 
 
Inputs 3: Grant-based technical assistance to source and structure investment sub-projects for the Program which 
act as door-opener and catalyser of innovative business approaches and of EV mass deployment (Component 1). 
 
Barriers and Risks Addressed by the E-Motion Program (Sub Program 2) 
 
Financial barriers 
Higher up-font procurement costs: A core barrier to EV deployment is the 2-3x higher CAPEX of EVs including 
associated infrastructure, e.g., grid connections and bus depot upgrades. The higher CAPEX results in higher 
capital requirements, higher finance and insurance costs and higher risk exposure due to higher debt levels. Higher 
CAPEX can be partially or fully recovered with lower Operational Expenditures (OPEX), primarily lower energy and 
maintenance costs and a higher lifespan of EVs. However, the profitability of EVs is only in the long-term and 
insecure. In the majority of involved countries, the differential investment in an e-bus is not recovered during its 
lifespan, due also to having to re-invest in batteries and chargers during the asset lifetime. Municipalities and 
transport operators in developing countries therefore prefer to invest scarce capital resources in a larger number of 
new fossil vehicles although electric units have potentially lower total costs of ownerships (TCO).  
 
Table 2. Capital demand diesel and electric bus (example from Uruguay) 
2020 
Diesel Bus 
BEB 
%BEB/diesel bus 
Capital investment 
$182,000 
$358,000 
197% 
2030 
Diesel Bus 
BEB 
%BEB/diesel bus 
Capital investment 
$182,000 
$230,545 
127% 
Source: Annex 2 
This barrier can be overcome with alternative financial structuring and business models which allow financially 
stronger players with lower capital costs to invest in assets whilst transport companies (private or public) operate 
the system based e.g. on leasing schemes.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
Profitability barrier: Currently EVs are financially unprofitable without support in any of the countries included in the 
Program. Whilst TCOs can be lower than of fossil units, this does not take into account the time value of money or 
risk. The market studies (for E-Motion Program Sub-Program 1 and 2) show that in general the Financial Internal 
Rate of Return (FIRR) of investing in EVs is lower than for investing in fossil units and the differential investment is 
not profitable. This barrier is overcome through concessional financing in the short term and in the medium term 
through policies which increase the financial attractiveness of EVs. Such medium-term policies and measures could 
include business models, financial schemes, and procurement guidelines while building capacities among 
stakeholders, such as local financial institutions, to enhance risk perception. Medium-term policies could also 
involve regulatory subsidy and tax reforms for the uptake of electric vehicles. In addition, market forces result in 
decreasing EV purchase prices and associates’ components, batteries in particular (based on battery and BEB 
price decreases of US DOE and trend prices of BEB prices of last 5 years from PR China manufacturers). 
 
Fiscal barriers 
Unfavourable business models and fiscal environment for EV deployment. The barrier prevalent in various countries 
are governance structures and business models not conducive to EV deployment. Innovative and localized business 
models that redefine the roles and the risk allocation among involved private and public actors are required. Local 
regulations, contract structures, payment systems and fare structures are frequently not favourable for e-buses. 
Adjusting such structures can be a game-changer for e-mobility allowing to apply innovative business models 
adapted to the eco-system of e-mobility. Public transport concession contracts are in general not conducive (too 
short) for e-buses, credit subjects are weak, many transport operators with small fleets are prevalent in many Latin 
American countries and many PT systems and operators suffer from severe financial problems not making them 
credit subjects to banks. The following figure shows in an exemplary manner the barriers related to business 
structures and measures to overcome these for e-buses. 
 
Figure 7: Intervention Instruments to Overcome E-Bus Deployment Barriers
 
Source: AFD FP – E-Motion Sub-Program 1  
Regulatory barriers 
Policy environment not conducive for mass EV deployment: The barrier is related to conducive policies. Initial steps 
have been taken by all countries and some have developed comprehensive EV targets and roadmaps. However, 
policies have not yet boiled down to the implementation level and require more clarity and a higher level of detail to 
foster mass change. As example, targets on numbers of EVs on the road in 2030 are a visible signal. However, if 
they are not followed up with incentives, activities and measures to actually get there, they will remain a paper tiger. 
A sector-specific roadmap for example for electrification of public transport which identifies short-, medium- and 
long-term actions to be taken, funding options and responsibilities, will have a much larger potential to achieve real 
results.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
Lack of optimal vehicle & charging standards, incl. battery recycling & disposal: The barrier is related to a lack of 
know-how on optimal EV ecosystem design (identification of type of EVs to use, fast/slow/opportunity charging etc.), 
maintenance & operations, as well as on used battery management policies including options of 2nd-life usage, 
recycling and disposal. This barrier is overcome through regulatory support, capacity developing and training efforts 
as well as knowledge materials. 
 
Technical barriers 
Performance risks and related perception of EVs: Refer primarily to higher than expected energy consumption, 
energy costs, maintenance costs and repair costs. The higher risk of EVs compared to fossil vehicles as the 
technology performance level in the respective country is unknown, the long-term profitability of EVs depends on 
long-term energy price development and cities and operators lack know-how in EV system design, maintenance 
and operations. Energy costs in many countries are dependent on time of usage and are split in a consumption and 
demand charge requiring multiple ex-ante assumptions on vehicle usage which have an intrinsic imprecision. 
Performance risks are also related to vehicle power, usage possibility and battery lifespan. This results in a 
(perceived) high-risk profile of EVs. Some of the risks can be covered through contractual measures whilst others 
require experience of large-scale operations. The investment sub-projects will allow to gather real data on EV 
performance thus reducing performance risks of investing in EVs. 
 
Lack of low-emission infrastructure investments for enhancing deployment of e-mobility: One of the main barriers 
for EV deployment is a missing large charging infrastructure in the cities that generates trust in these new 
technologies. In countries of Sub-Program 2, most of the light vehicles are bought in secondary markets with 
reduced prices (e.g., in Panamá) from generally recognized brands, in that sense, promoting the dynamization of 
this secondary market while helping built a large charging infrastructure in the countries will help with the shift to 
EVs, while the program finance large new and well-organized fleets.  
 
Social barriers 
Disregard of transportation uses other than those employment related. Travel patterns considered when designing 
buses, stops, charging facilities, routes, infrastructure for modal shifts, etc. respond to a male standard. Many 
studies around the world show that decision-making regarding the abovementioned transport policy considerations 
is biased: it mostly takes into account commuting purposes, and a stereotypical (male) worker as a model user. 
Although nothing is planned to deliberately disadvantage women, the lack of appraisal of their patterns, needs or 
difficulties results in their exclusion at a certain extent, ergo, a less efficient system. Women, who are responsible 
for about 75% of all caregiving activities, don’t make point-to-point daily journeys. They tend to trip-chain, to combine 
short walks with motorized travel, to spend more time in the buses, at the stops, at the streets; to travel with children 
and other dependants, to carry strollers, purchases, etc., and to suffer from sexual harassment and other gender-
based public forms of violence. If a paradigm shift ignores this information, it will not only be less efficient and 
transformative, but it also carries the risk of deepening the existing gaps and gendered forms of exclusion. 
 
These barriers can be overcome in the most efficient and effective manner by targeting high-usage vehicles and by 
focusing on cities as this allows for a high mitigation impact with a good value for money, is less complex due to less 
involved stakeholders, is in the political influence area of cities which are known to be drivers of the transformational 
shift towards e-mobility and is a more equitable approach as the focus is on commercial, public and shared mobility 
fleets and not on private passenger cars. The Sub-Program 2 tackles these barriers and offers a comprehensive e-
mobility package including technical assistance (Component 1) thereby improving the policy framework and the 
ecosystem and removing barriers which allows to kick-start mass deployment of EVs and the long-time shift to low-
emission transportation, financial support for e-buses (Component 2), financial support for commercial EVs 
(Component 3) and charging infrastructure (Component 4).  
 
Assumptions and drivers 
The key assumptions of the Program are that (i) investments in EVs take place as planned, despite potential 
unpredicted impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic or any other drivers for economic crises; (ii) the political framework in 
the programme countries is stable, hence the performance of political willingness and support throughout the 
programme implementation is as expected; (iii) fleet electrification and new operational models for public transport 
services are perceived and adopted well by the society in each country; (iv) the countries undertake and put additional 
measures in place to enhance and make public transport more attractive, e.g. attractive fares linked to new business 
models to provide better service, improvement of the quality of service, better trip experience, dedicated buses lanes, 
enhanced service (incl. more lines, and interconnection etc.); (v) beyond the programme scope, the interest of new 
investors is linked to electric mobility and new business models (hence the programme’s paradigm shift potential can

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
45 Assumption VII is a fundamental assumption related to the mid- to long-term grid performance in the envisaged case of a 
large-scale roll-out of EV deployment and high penetration rates for buses, LCVs, and spillover effects to other vehicle 
segments, such as private cars and taxis. As shown by the pre-feasibility studies, the initial e-vehicles financed by the program 
do not depend on this assumption – despite certain recommendations made regarding micro level grid impacts that should be 
addressed by the Program’s infrastructure interventions. However, in order to adapt to implications/risks associated with 
assumption VI and ensure the paradigm shift component of the Program, activity 1.1.1a aims at preparing studies to assess 
impacts on the countries’ grid, charging infrastructure, and power generation capacity under high shares of e-mobility. Varying 
scenarios of low carbon electric vehicle and renewable energy penetration will be analysed against a business-as-usual 
scenario. The studies aim at identifying required grid capacity in different parts of the countries, as well as analysing the impact 
of different electric vehicle charging scenarios on the grid (not only as an overall power requirement). 
46 See Table 1 from Annex 2-Feasibility Study. 
unfold); (vi) capacity building leads to effective know-how transfer and spill-overs, (vii) EVs have lower emissions than 
fossil units (i.e., electric energy systems can cope with growing EV charging demand with renewables);45 (viii) future 
electric vehicle capex and energy costs will decrease. 
 
In addition, a key driver for the accelerated uptake of EVs will be spill-over effects to other vehicle categories influenced 
by the project’s business models and financial schemes. This will be flanked by the strong political support and 
prioritizing of e-mobility and renewable energy. 
 
The theory of change diagram for the E-Motion Sub-Program 2 is included in Annex 24, taking into account the FA and 
TA Component 1 to 4. Outputs are detailed in B.3. Country specific theory of change illustration can be found in the 
country reports T4-Market Study and Strategy of Intervention46 for each country, i.e., Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Program 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Program 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Program 
Outcome 3 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Program 
Outcome 4 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Long-term 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Long-term 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Long-term 
Outcome 3 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Long-term 
Outcome 4 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Program Description & Intervention Strategy 
The E-Motion Program and its Sub-Program 2 in Uruguay, Paraguay and Panamá shall contribute to overcome the 
barriers to mass deployment of commercial EVs. The Program has a comprehensive approach and includes 
implementation-oriented activities such as targeted policy advice, business model development and capacity building 
to ensure a favourable e-mobility environment combined with financial instruments to ensure deployment of large-scale 
fleets. The establishment and operation of large-scale EV fleets works as proof of concept of the commercial viability 
of EVs and fosters a mass replication without further concessional finance. The Program can reduce risks through the 
investment interventions combined with the implementation of business models appropriate for EVs (e.g., asset and 
operation separation; operating/financial leasing, Bus-as-a-Service and PPP schemes). 
 
For each country, a market assessment (see for details section below) has been performed analysing (i) the current 
financial viability of commercial EVs in terms of total cost of ownership, profitability, payback period, cash-flow and debt 
structure; (ii) required financial instruments, which are currently not available, to overcome current financial viability 
barriers; (iii) market readiness of EVs in the specific country based on energy and vehicle prices and future expected 
EV costs. Interventions are designed to accelerate market readiness and to foster widespread commercial deployment 
of EVs without further financial assistance. Therefore, interventions in each country are targeted to vehicle segments 
where (i) existing conditions are favourable for EVs (in terms of policies, energy prices, interest of investors, clean 
electricity mix to ensure environmental integrity); (ii) limited financial support can make a decisive change and (iii) 
market conditions allow in the medium term (by the end of the Program) for a sustained uptake of EVs based on 
commercial conditions.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
47 E-motion does not promote earlier replacement or scrapping of vehicles. Scrapping Programs in any case have limited 
merits as for example in the case of buses old municipal buses could still be used to replace even older rural or private 
transport buses with low mileage. 
48 This is the reason why plug-in hybrid buses and not full electric buses were purchased for the BRT Peshawar. 
49 ICCT, 2020: Real-World Usage of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles 
The Feasibility Study in Annex 2 provides market assessments for buses, public fleets and LCVs in all Sub-Program 2 
countries (Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama). The proposed intervention instruments are thus targeted to the specific 
country situation and follow the concepts of minimum degree of concessionality and high potential of commercial uptake 
at the end of the Program. Also, the needs for technical assistance on a national and local level has been identified 
through country specific diagnostics and stakeholder consultations. This has resulted in interventions not being 
suggested for all countries in all vehicle segments. 
 
The Program is for commercial EVs and charging infrastructure. Private passenger cars and motorcycles are not 
financed. Commercial vehicles result in a much larger impact in terms of reduced GHG emissions and improved air 
quality and have significantly lower GHG abatement costs than private vehicles. With a small number of vehicles and 
a limited investment, a large impact and a high visibility can be achieved. Concessional finance for private vehicles is 
socially inequitable and could result in a mode-shift from public to private transportation. Commercial EVs targeted are 
urban electric buses which have attracted the most attention from stakeholders in the involved countries, public fleets 
and urban light commercial vehicles. 
 
The potential segments for investment sub-projects in Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama that have been identified (see 
also Annex 2) are: 
 
 
e-buses. Public / private bus operators with different legal regimes, which could operate 650 e-buses. In business 
model 1 (direct purchase), the operators would own/lease the fleet (e.g., leave from a special purpose vehicle).  
 
e-LCV. A variety of LCV users, both public entities and private companies are interested in investing in this type 
of EV. The potential is 1,150 e-LCV to be financed under the Sub-program 2. This operation could be managed 
via a funding Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) leasing those vehicles. From this total, 900 eLCV are for public fleet 
operations. The three countries have been implemented and/or plan to create a scrapping program47. To have a 
scrapping program for public fleet will enable the scrapping for other segments such private LCVs. 
 
The Program only includes 100% BEVs. Hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) 
are not included. HEVs and PHEVs were an intermediate technology as long as BEVs were not yet technologically 
mature (see for details Annex 22). Hybrid buses can recover their incremental investment but only have a limited 
environmental impact of around 20% of emission reductions. A review of >50,000 plug-in hybrid buses deployed in PR 
China revealed that the overwhelming share of plug-in hybrid buses are never re-charged and thus only result in 20% 
energy and GHG savings (ADB, 2018). Exceptional cases where such buses can make sense are in countries or cities 
with electricity supply problems and frequent prolonged black-outs48 or on very demanding routes. PHEV light vehicles 
are not a commercially attractive option. The battery size of PHEVs is small resulting in an electric driving range of only 
30-50km. Most PHEVs models can only use AC slow chargers which means charging of more than 1 hour to re-charge 
their already small batteries. A recent study of ICCT revealed that commercial PHEVs only run 20% of real-world driving 
on electricity49. Also, PHEVs are more complex and expensive to maintain due to having both electric and internal 
combustion powertrain. The limited operational savings are insufficient to recover incremental investments of PHEVs 
compared to fossil or hybrid units. Hydrogen or fuel-cell vehicles are not included in the Program. They use on a life-
cycle base 3-4x more electricity than BEVs due to highly energy intensive hydrogen production. They therefore result 
in most countries in an increase of GHG emissions compared to fossil units, except if hydrogen supply is exclusively 
based on electrolysis using renewable energy. In such cases hydrogen can be of interest especially for long-haul 
vehicles or large vessels. However, this is not the scope of this Program. 
 
Market Assessment 
A market viability assessment has been made for each of the three vehicle segments (urban buses, public fleets and 
LCVs) in each country based on local prices, costs and operating conditions (for all E-Motion countries). This reflects 
the current market situation for EVs which is then expanded, based on projected future selling prices of EVs until 2030 
(again per vehicle segment and country) to assess commercial viability of vehicles without financial support. Financial 
parameters used for the assessment are primarily TCOs, the FIRR compared to the weighted average capital cost 
(WACC) of the transport sector, the dynamic payback, cash-flow and debt levels and required equity investment levels 
(see Annex 2). Whilst results differ between countries and vehicle segments core take-aways are:

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
50 This rate is higher even than the total investment capital as FIs in general only finance a percentage of the vehicle cost and 
not the associated charging infrastructure, grid connection or bus depot upgrades which are considered non-marketable 
assets. 
51 Includes vehicle, charging infrastructure, grid connection and vehicle depot upgrades (if required). 
 Regulations are often not conducive for EV investment e.g., the length of concession contracts is too short for long-
term investments or concession payment systems are not conducive for other ownership structures. 
 Long-term market signals and target from the governments are missing e.g., mitigation target for the transport 
sector, incl. measures such as zero emission shares / plans / restrictions, emission standards etc. 
 Non-discounted TCOs of e-buses are in various countries lower or at-par with fossil units. However, this depends 
on various critical assumptions including lifetime of EVs versus fossil vehicles, maintenance costs, energy usage 
and energy costs and battery replacement costs.  
 The differential FIRR (profitability of the incremental investment in an EV versus a fossil vehicle due to operational 
expenditure savings) is in the large majority of cases below the benchmark WACC, which means the investment is 
not profitable. 
 The dynamic payback time of EVs is long (often beyond 10 years) and in general exceeds the concession periods 
of transport operators and in many cases also exceeds the asset lifetime. 
 EVs require 2-3x more investment capital, 3-4x higher equity investment50 and higher loan volumes resulting in a 
balance sheet laden with debt and high consequential risks. Most investors prefer to purchase more fossil vehicles 
thus renewing their fleet more rapidly or increasing revenues instead of investing in costly EVs. 
 EV investments result in prolonged periods of cumulative negative cash-flow which can result in liquidity problems 
of investors. 
 The lack of large fleets results in scepticism concerning the reliability and performance of EVs and a lack of know-
how on EV maintenance. Also, spare parts are scarce in the country without deployment of large fleets. No party 
wants to be the first mover and take the risk, although many acknowledge that this might be an interesting 
investment. 
 
Business models in many countries are not conducive for EV deployment. Example for buses: short period for 
concession that is not enough to amortize eBuses investment, subsidy and payment index only to passenger transfer 
and not considering a component for kilometres travelled or level of service. New business models (see for more details 
section below) based on separation of asset ownership and operations or leasing models also require risk instruments 
to be in place e.g., fare systems managed by third parties with automated debiting to the vehicle asset company to 
ensure payments, vehicle transfer agreements in case of operator default, vehicle insurance systems or bankable 
concession contracts.  
 
Financial Support Instruments 
The market assessment identified that without initial support commercial EVs are not yet viable in Program countries. 
The market assessment also identified the main financial support instruments required: 
 
 
Concessional loans 
 
Equity (private sponsor) 
 
The level of support is determined per country and per vehicle segment. Rates established based on the market 
analysis and the objective of minimum concessionality levels are shown in the table below. Financial structure 
considers: 90% of the Sub-Program investments are funded with loans (65% of loans from CAF, 35% of loan from 
GCF). Remaining 10% is funded by equity from private sponsors. 
 
Table 3: Proposed Financial Instruments under the Sub-Program 2 (maximum levels as % of total CAPEX) 
Country 
Instrument 
Electric 
Buses51 
e-LCVs 
e- Public 
Fleets 
Urban 
fast 
charging 
Panama 
Concessional 
loans 
90% 
90% 
90% 
100% 
Equity (public 
or private 
sponsor) 
10% 
10% 
10% 
0% 
Paraguay 
Concessional 
loans 
90% 
90% 
90% 
100% 
Equity (public 
or private 
sponsor) 
10% 
10% 
10% 
0%

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
52 Phase II had no subsidies for e-buses and all contracts were awarded to fossil bus systems as e-bus offers were non-
competitive 
53 This subsidy has a cap, 4% of the national bus fleet for public transport (about 130 buses). In 2020, after the first call a total 
of 30 BEB have benefited so there are 100 left but conditioned to: 1) technical evaluation of the 30 BEB and 2) for the actual 
COVID 19 scenario that have impact country fund availability. E-Motion’s Sub-Program 2 aims to contribute to reactivate this 
subsidy, to actually allocate resources to increase the target (4%) 
54 See Benchmark Report in Annex 22 
55 Source: Grutter Consulting; contract with ADB for monitoring of e-bus fleets in 18 cities with 60,000 buses financed by 
leasing funds with support by ADB 
Uruguay 
Concessional 
loans 
90% 
90% 
90% 
100% 
Equity (public 
or private 
sponsor) 
10% 
10% 
10% 
0% 
 
Concessional loan conditions of GCF are expected to be 0.75% interest rate for public and 1.10%  interest rate for 
private sector plus service and commitment fee when applicable. The loan tenor is for 15 years maximum. 
 
The viability of the Program is highly dependent on the accessibility of concessional funding. The absence of this 
financial support limits the ability of public and private initiatives to invest in EV fleets. Initial financial support for large-
scale fleet deployment of electric buses as well as LCVs is critical and there is sufficient international evidence to 
support this statement. So far, even in developed economies, no country worldwide has been able to deploy a large-
scale fleet of commercial EVs without financial support (see feasibility study in Annex 2). The following sections 
summarize the international experience. 
 
Table 4: Investment Grants for E-Bus Purchase 
Country 
Incentive 
China 
100% of incremental bus cost subsidized; chargers and grid connection up to 100% subsidized; electricity price 
initial 3-5 years subsidized; decreasing rates since Program start in 2009 
India 
80-100% of incremental bus cost subsidized in Fame II; chargers subsidized. FAME I 2015-2019 had 20 
percentage points higher subsidy levels than FAME II 
Germany 
80% of the total incremental cost of e-buses and 40% of all other costs for charging infrastructure, grid connection, 
bus depot upgrades subsidized plus coverage of 100% of costs for the establishment of new maintenance centres 
Switzerland 
80-100% of incremental costs of buses and 100% of charging infrastructure and grid connection costs subsidized 
UK 
75% of incremental bus and charging infrastructure costs subsidized under Phase II (since 2019); under Phase 
I (2016-2019) 90% of incremental costs were financed 
Poland 
100% of incremental cost of entire e-bus system subsidized 
USA 
90% of incremental cost of entire e-bus system subsidized 
Colombia 
100% of incremental CAPEX of entire e-bus system was paid in Medellin and Phase I in Bogota. 100% of 
incremental total lifetime cost of e-bus system (CAPEX plus OPEX) subsidized in Phase III in Bogota (16% 
incremental cost compared to fossil units)52 
Chile 
100% of incremental cost of entire e-bus system for Phase I (200 buses) subsidized with monthly instalments 
during 10 years; phase II longer concession periods for e-buses compared to conventional units (+40%) and 
additional points in tenders 
Uruguay 
100% of the incremental cost of e-bus plus chargers is paid in monthly instalments for 7 years; the government 
subsidy for e-buses equals the government savings on subsidies saved on diesel fuel.53 
Source: Grutter Consulting (2020), attached a Benchmark Report of the Sub-Program 1 FP (Annex 22) 
 
Countries consistently subsidized 80-100% of the entire e-bus system incremental cost for the initial phase. Countries 
decreased their subsidy rates significantly within few years (e.g., China, India, UK, Chile). The importance of upfront 
investment subsidies – independent of TCOs – to kick-start deployment of e-buses is thus clear. It also shows however 
that once a large fleet is established, subsidies can be reduced gradually and even be eliminated due to more 
competitive prices of e-buses combined with the experience of mass operations of e-buses. Concrete examples are54: 
  
 
In PR China, the average subsidy level per 12m urban e-bus decreased within 5 years from 150,000 USD per bus 
to 30,000 USD per bus and is expected to be fully eliminated by 202255. 
 
In India, under FAME I 2017-2019, e-buses where subsidized with 60% of incremental costs. This was reduced to 
40% under FAME II 2020-2021 (40% of a lower absolute value meaning absolute subsides where reduced by more 
than 50% within 2 years). 
 
In the UK, the 1st scheme for low carbon buses (until 2017) subsidized 90% of the incremental cost and the 2nd 
scheme, since 2018, 75% of the incremental cost of e-buses (including charging infrastructure).

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
56 Grutter Consulting, personal communication with TransMilenio 
57 Component 3 is for both, public and private fleets in light commercial or light passenger vehicles. Just to be clear, public e-
fleets is not for providing public transport systems (eBuses which is component 2), is for operation of many public entities 
within the countries that also needs to decarbonize their mobility operations. 
 
Chile subsidized for the first lot of 200 electric buses 100% of incremental costs. The next lots received no more 
investment gap subsidies but some additional benefits for e-buses relative to fossil units in tenders which is 
translated into higher payments per distance driven or per service unit for e-buses (TransMilenio, Colombia 
analysed the tenders of Santiago and estimates the subsidy to amount to more than 16% of total costs per km56).  
 
Uruguay subsidized for the first lot of 30 buses 100% of the incremental cost, through a National law that was 
intended to be up to 150 buses for the whole country.      
 
Delivery Channels and new business models 
Once the E-motion implementation stage begins in each country, it will be necessary to have the active involvement of 
the national technical teams that conduct electromobility in each country of sub-program 2 (see abbreviation list): 
 
 PA: CIME, SNE, MiAmbiente, ATTT 
 PY: VMT, VMME, Strategic Electromobility Table, MADES, ANDE 
 UY: MIEM, GIEET, MiAmbiente, MTOP, UTE 
 
These teams must articulate with the other relevant entities identified by E-motion, to generate the enabling conditions 
(regulation, incentives, private-public alliance) that allow the replicable operation of the electromobility sub-projects that 
will receive funds from financial assistance (FA). As it was mentioned in previous section, Figure 3 summarizes potential 
financing executing entities identified during the market study; and all them have been interviewed during the market 
study with high interest in E-motion value proposition.   
 
Finance is channelled to investment sub-projects through: 
 
1) Financial intermediaries for loans for the purchase of e-LCVs (public57 and private) which are mostly owned by 
public and private companies. CAF has identified a number of reputable intermediaries. Some of CAF potential 
partners for the implementation of this component include In Panama: Banco Nacional, Caja de Ahorro, Banco 
General; in Paraguay with Banco Nacional de Fomento; in Uruguay: Banco de la República de Uruguay and private 
banks like Santander and HSBC. It is also important to mention that CAF has, or have had, working relationships 
with some of these institutions.  
 
CAF will enter into loan agreements or amend existing loan agreements with Financial Intermediaries to deploy an 
e-LCVs credit line. Financial Intermediaries loan agreements will contain Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and 
Countering the Financing Terrorist (CFT) clauses.  
 
CAF will establish a methodology to follow appropriate commercial practices and procedures in all projects financed 
with GCF resources. In the provision of financing, CAF will perform a due diligence of the Financial Intermediaries 
and carefully assess their ability to meet their obligations under the loan agreement. 
 
CAF and GCF proceeds will be lend to Financial Intermediaries, which will in turn on-lend these proceeds to public 
and private companies. CAF will contractually ensure that the financial conditions provided by GCF are transferred 
to the public and private companies. 
 
CAF as per the loan agreement will have the ability to reject a sub-loan. The Financial Intermediaries screen 
potential loan recipients (i.e., the final beneficiaries) in accordance with the eligibility criteria presented below and 
then present a list to CAF for final approval. CAF has the ability to reject a proposed sub-project (loan recipient). 
Moreover, it will be a requirement in the credit line rules that refinancing is not allowed. Financial Intermediaries 
will disburse GCF and CAF loans to public and private companies consistent with the mandate of the Program and 
eligibility criteria. As part of the Program, CAF teams will provide technical assistance and capacity building to help 
Financial Intermediaries conduct internal procedures to evaluate eligible projects, check compliance with the 
mandate and put in place monitoring systems. No project may be financed with GCF’s resources if it does not meet 
the conditions required by the GCF according to the FAA. The Program Management Unit will review and assess 
projects eligibility. In addition, contractual obligations will be established for both: the Financial Intermediaries and 
the agreements with beneficiaries.  
Loans will be repaid by the public and private companies to the Financial Intermediaries, and after those resources 
will be transferred to CAF. CAF will repay the resources to GCF.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
58 Beneficiaries will need to maintain a satisfactory assessment throughout the investment life. 
59 Beneficiaries will need to maintain a satisfactory assessment throughout the investment life. 
 
The eligibility criteria for accessing e-LCVs credit line are listed in the table below.  
 
Table 5: Eligibility criteria to access to e-LCVs credit line  
Criteria 
Description 
Beneficiaries 
Public and private companies that uses own or rented 
fleets for operations  
Eligible investment 
Electric light commercial vehicles 
Plug in Hybrid vehicles are not eligible  
For high millage use 
For people and goods transportation (urban logistics) 
Financing thresholds  
Up to USD 12.1 MM 
Refinancing is not allowed 
Minimum co-financing by the beneficiary  10% 
(expected 
upfront 
down 
payment 
by 
beneficiary/ultimate borrower)  
E&S category  
B or C (category A is not eligible) 
Other conditions 
Vehicles must be new (not second hand) 
The technology must comply with the current national 
regulation 
The technology must guarantee at least 8 years of the 
battery. 
The operational solution must be proven by the 
promoters for each project, according to the 
characteristics of the beneficiaries 
Purchase must include charging systems for the fleet 
Provision of technical maintenance must be provided  
At least 15 years of lifespan 
Satisfactory money laundering, integrity, and credit 
rating assessment58  
 
Table 6: Eligibility Criteria to access to Sub-projects (From LFIs)  
Criteria 
Description 
Eligible borrowers 
Small-medium size logistic, last mile, Local/urban 
delivery companies, supermarkets, local authorities 
(municipal)  
Eligible investment 
Electric light commercial vehicles 
Plug in Hybrid vehicles are not eligible  
For high mileage use 
For people and goods transportation (urban logistics) 
Financing thresholds  
Up to USD 5.0 MM 
Refinancing is not allowed 
E&S category  
B or C (category A is not eligible) 
Other conditions 
Vehicles must be new (not second hand) 
The technology must comply with the current national 
regulation 
The technology must guarantee at least 8 years of the 
battery. 
The operational solution must be proven  
Purchase must include charging systems for the fleet 
Provision of technical maintenance must be provided  
At least 15 years of lifespan 
Satisfactory controls against money laundering, 
integrity, and credit rating assessment59  
 
2) Direct loans to public authorities (e.g., municipalities, federal states), Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), and/or 
other private companies including, asset management companies, leasing companies and/or other private existing

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
60 Beneficiaries will need to maintain a satisfactory assessment throughout the investment life. 
concessionaries to deploy funds for the acquisition, operation and management of electric fleets. SPVs can be 
publicly owned (public delivery model e.g., ownership of a municipality), a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or fully 
privately owned (e.g. by electric utility, investment fund or private transport operator). In the majority of bus 
investment, projects either fully private or municipal owned projects are expected. 
 
CAF will enter into loan agreements with public authorities, special purpose vehicles (SPV) and/or other private 
companies including public utility firms, asset management companies, leasing companies and/or existing 
concessionaires to deploy funds for the acquisition, operation and management of electric fleets including those 
related to ESG. 
 
CAF and GCF proceeds will be lend and disburse to public authorities, special purpose vehicles (SPV) and/or other 
private companies including public utility firms, asset management companies, leasing companies and/or existing 
concessionaires. CAF will contractually ensure that provisions established in the FAA are reflected in the credit 
agreement. Moreover, it will be a requirement in the credit line rules that refinancing is not allowed. 
 
As part of the Program, CAF teams will provide technical assistance and capacity building to help counterparts 
perform internal procedures to evaluate eligible projects, check compliance with the mandate and put in place 
monitoring systems. No project may be financed with GCF’s resources if it does not meet the conditions required 
by the GCF according to the FAA. The Program Management Unit will review and assess projects eligibility.  
 
Loans will be repaid by the counterpart to CAF. CAF will repay the resources to GCF. 
 
CAF will directly select the sub-projects in accordance with the eligibility criteria. The eligibility criteria for accessing 
e-Buses finance are listed in the table below.  
 
Table 7: Eligibility criteria to access to E-buses finance  
Criteria 
Description 
Beneficiaries 
Public authorities (e.g., municipalities, federal states), 
Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), public utility firms or 
asset companies for e-buses 
Eligible investment 
Battery Electric Bus in all technologies available (Fast 
Charging, Slow charging, opportunity charging) 
Charging systems and infrastructure included 
Plug in Hybrid Buses are not eligible  
Financing thresholds  
From USD 25 MM to 50 MM  
Refinancing is not allowed 
Minimum co-financing by the beneficiary  
10% 
E&S category  
B or C (category A is not eligible) 
Other conditions 
 
Buses must be new (not second hand) 
The technology must comply with the current national 
regulation 
The technology must guarantee at least 8 years of the 
battery 
The operational solution must be proven by the 
promoters for each project, according to the 
characteristics of the beneficiaries 
Purchase must include charging systems for the fleet 
Provision of technical maintenance must be provided 
At least 15 years of lifespan 
Satisfactory money laundering, integrity, and credit 
rating assessment60 
 
3) Loans to electric utilities or third parties which establish urban fast-charging infrastructure for e-public fleets and e-
LCVs - e.g. Naturgy in Panama, ANDE in Paraguay and UTE in Uruguay. 
 
CAF will enter into loan agreements with public authorities, special purpose vehicles (SPV) and/or other private 
companies including public utility firms, asset management companies, leasing companies and/or existing

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
61 Beneficiaries will need to maintain a satisfactory assessment throughout the investment life. 
62 CAF Risk Manual for Credit Operations, CAF’s Risk Manual for Investments, CAF’s Guide for Credit Ratings of Project 
Finance Operations, among others, 
63 Hybrid trolleybuses (trolleybuses with battery) can also be financed if they proof to be a more cost-efficient option than 
usage of battery-electric buses considering also infrastructure replacement and maintenance costs. 
concessionaires to deploy urban fast-charging infrastructure. Financial loan agreements will contain AML/ CFT 
clauses.  
 
CAF will establish a methodology to follow appropriate commercial practices and procedures in all projects financed 
with GCF resources. In the provision of financing, CAF will perform a due diligence of the counterpart and carefully 
assess their ability to meet their obligations under the loan agreement. 
 
CAF and GCF proceeds will be lend and disburse to public authorities, special purpose vehicles (SPV) and/or other 
private companies including public utility firms, asset management companies, leasing companies and/or existing 
concessionaires. 
 
As part of the Program, CAF teams will provide technical assistance and capacity building to help counterpart 
conduct internal procedures to evaluate eligible projects, check compliance with the mandate and put in place 
monitoring systems. No project may be financed with GCF’s resources if it does not meet the conditions required 
by the GCF according to the FAA. The Program Management Unit will review and assess projects eligibility.  
Loans will be repaid by the counterpart to CAF. CAF will repay the resources to GCF. 
 
CAF will directly select the sub-projects in accordance with the eligibility criteria. The eligibility criteria for accessing 
urban fast-charging infrastructure finance are listed in the table below.  
 
Table 8: Eligibility criteria to access to urban fast-charging infrastructure finance 
Criteria 
Description 
Beneficiaries 
Public authorities (e.g., municipalities, federal 
states), public utility firms, SPV’s under PPP 
arrangements or private companies  
Eligible investment 
Urban fast-charging infrastructure for public use 
Financing thresholds  
From USD 2 MM to 10 MM  
Refinancing is not allowed 
Minimum co-financing by the beneficiary  
10% 
E&S category  
B or C (category A is not eligible) 
Other conditions 
Interoperability must be guaranteed 
The technology must comply with the current 
national regulation 
Renewable sources of energy are desired 
Being part of a network is desirable 
Smart charging is also desired 
Satisfactory money laundering, integrity, and 
credit rating assessment61 
 
In addition, eligible sub-projects must fulfil the following criteria: 
 
 
Sub-projects must reduce GHG emissions and have a positive sustainable development impact; 
 
Sub-projects must demonstrate a transformational potential; 
 
Sub-projects must be financially viable, according to CAF internal policies62 and an agreed expected investor’s 
hurdle rate (EIRR between 8% and 18%); 
 
Sub-projects must meet the environmental and social safeguard policies of CAF; 
 
Sub-projects must be in compliance with relevant national and local laws and regulations; 
 
Sub-projects with potential adverse impacts on Indigenous people will not be eligible; 
 
Sub-projects shall have a gender action plan taking into account guidelines developed in Annex 8; 
 
Sub-projects shall undergo a climate risk analysis and, if merited, specialized climate hazard mitigation studies 
shall procure to propose technical and technological solutions to be incorporated in the final designs; 
 
Sub-project shall strive to generate employment and local economic development; 
 
Only commercial vehicles for passenger or cargo transport are financed; 
 
Only full-electric battery-electric vehicles are eligible63;

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
64 Charging infrastructure can be unbundling from operator ownership, this is the concept of charging as a service, where bus 
operator or any fleet operator pays a monthly fee where is included energy and infrastructure (assets and maintenance). This 
is a possible business model among a diversity of models. Regulatory framework could impact in the new upcoming business 
models as well. 
 
No pilot program/project with less than 20 EVs are financed: 
 
All sub-projects will require a monitoring system to collect data and disseminate results 
 
The Sub-Program 2 envisages to finance at least one investment project in each participating country. In the case that 
become unfeasible to finance any sub-project in a particular country, the resources will be re-allocated in other countries 
under the same component. No more than 50% funding shall be invested in one specific country. Investment projects 
will be determined on a “first come, first served” basis, depending on their level of maturity at the time of availability of 
GCF proceeds. 
 
In addition, EVs are purchased instead of new conventional vehicles i.e. the old unit is at the end of its lifespan and not 
retired or phased out prior normal replacement. The intervention of the Program that instead of a new fossil vehicle a 
new electric vehicle is purchased. What happens with the old vehicle is the same in the project case or in the baseline 
case. The difference is not the old vehicle but the BAU new vehicle (fossil) against the Program new vehicle (electric). 
All emission impacts and financial calculations are also a comparison of a new fossil against a new electric unit. The 
Sub-Program 2 does not promote earlier replacement or scrapping of vehicles. Scrapping Programs in any case have 
limited merits as for example in the case of buses old municipal buses could still be used to replace even older rural or 
private transport buses with low mileage. The Program does not change the number of vehicles but the vehicle 
technology. Instead of 650 new diesel buses (BAU) the Program will support 650 new electric buses. What happens 
with the old buses being replaced by new diesel or electric units is the same in the baseline and project case. Therefore, 
the Program does not add vehicles. In absence of the Program the exactly same amount of vehicles would be 
purchased, just fossil instead of electric units. 
 
The major innovative business models proposed for e-buses are structured around bulk purchase and splitting asset 
ownership and operations. Unbundling ownership and operation can also include the provision of power, chargers and 
bus depots. Leasing by fleet owners can be limited to the vehicle or include also maintenance and energy64. Leasing 
can effectively reduce the barrier of upfront investment. E-buses can have lower TCOs and leasing models can bring 
this advantage to bus operators. Various models are used separated in the type of leasing, the type of leasing company 
or components leased. The importance of these business models for e-buses relies in their ability to reduce upfront 
CAPEX barriers which are larger than for fossil vehicles. Difficulties of leasing models for e-buses are the long-payback 
period resulting in long lease terms required to make e-buses competitive. This again results in difficulties as 
concession contracts might be for a shorter duration than the payback time for e-buses and question concerning the 
actual lifespan of buses as well as the re-sale value of a leased e-bus arise (there is only a very thin market currently 
for used e-buses). Without proper estimate of the re-sale value of used e-buses and the actual lifespan a determination 
of the lease fee is complex. Long payback periods and a high CAPEX also result in high finance costs and the 
importance of low interest rates. Asset separation can allow for new, financially stronger companies, to enter the market 
and act as SPV leasing vehicles as they can have access to less costly financing sources.  Supporting these business 
models will add to the additionality of GCF resources by de-risking the sector and providing incentives to new actors 
to invest in the sector. The Program will work with municipalities, the national government, transport operators and 
companies willing to invest in urban transport schemes in concession contracts, regulations and the structuring of 
business models conducive for e-bus deployment. The delivery scheme can thereby be public or private led (see 
figures below). 
 
PANAMA BEB MODELS 
In the case of Panama City, there are two main situations: i) concessioned operator which is MiBus (only one); and ii) 
small bus owners. In the case of MiBus, they have been analyzing through a TA with the World Bank several financing 
structures to implement their BEB renewal process (2021 to 2023, with 237 BEB). MiBus will be the public off-taker for 
BEB, which is part of public entity Metro of Panama. Figure 8 depicts an operational leasing model in which an SPV 
purchases the vehicles and leases them to the concession operator MiBus, which becomes the project off-taker. 
MiBus’s incomes are from Metro of Panama and by tariff collection. Metro would guarantee payments to the SPV. SPV 
provides BEB leasing and access to concessional loans from E-motion. The offtake agreement makes fee conditional 
to performance. Demand risk is retained by MiBus.  
 
Figure 8 e-bus APP operational lease business model for Panama. Source: based on models shared by MiBus and World 
Bank TA

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
65 UTRAPSA is a new operator Company made of a group of small bus owners. They already organized and are willing to 
implement, at least 20 BEB for Chitre-Santiago Route. 
 
 
The previous business model won’t directly be feasible for the rest of the transport service in Panama. ZEBRA project 
indicates that the adoption of electromobility in public transport buses requires that cities study their mechanisms to 
restructure their current systems. This will attract investment, BEB supply and a better level of service for the city. In 
this sense, the strategy recommended is to start with small or medium concessions that involve 100% electric axes or 
routes, which have high visibility, high demand and social support in order to ensure the conditions to make the 
operation sustainable in the transition process. In this way, the ecosystem begins to be stimulated, authorities assume 
new leadership and operators begin to organize themselves into formal companies to remain in the system and in the 
business, access to concessional loans. In Santiago province, UTRAPSA 65 is moving on that direction and with 
MOVILISA the route Chitre – Santiago has been studied to operate with BEB. Figure 9 describes a potential business 
model that could be feasible for structuring a new concession in Santiago where UTRAPSA has a contract with ATTT 
and lease BEB (offtake agreement). The security trustee manages concession payments that would be covered with 
ticket collection and concession budget from ATTT. E-motion would provide concessional loans to MEF which provides 
concession budget to ATTT. The offtake agreement makes fee conditional to performance. Demand risk is retained by 
ATTT. 
 
Figure 9 Potential business models for new concessions in Panama with privates’ operators. Source: own elaboration 
 
 
PARAGUAY BEB MODEL

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
Figure 10 schematizes the business model, which does not follow a PPP structure. Still, it is necessary to structure the 
model with project financing techniques. The SPV is the same fleet provider, who purchases the buses and leases 
them to individual private bus operators, which become the offtakers. The transport authorities (VMT and Asuncion 
Municipality) manage E-motion funds to implement a new version of the scrapping program through MH (concessional 
loan). Also they may grant operational subsidies to cover the difference between fees and costs, contingent upon 
performance. Most of the money movements (monthly lease payment collection, dividends, interest payments, etc.) 
will be made via a Security Trustee. The Security Trustee will have separate account, one for each individual private 
bus operator (CETRAPAM members, MAGNO). Demand risk is retained by VMT and/or Mun. Asuncion. 
 
Figure 10 e-bus financial lease business model for Paraguay. Source: own elaboration
 
 
URUGUAY BEB MODEL 
Figure 11 schematizes the business model, which does not follow a PPP structure. Still, it is necessary to structure the 
model with project financing techniques. The SPV is the same fleet provider, who purchases the buses and leases 
them to individual private bus operators, which become the offtakers. The city of Montevideo (IMM) may grant 
operational subsidies to cover the differences between fees and costs, contingent upon performance. Emotion would 
provide a concessional loans component that would have MEF as executing entity, in the current “fideicomiso” 
framework. Financial leasing would be a good option for the bus operators (COETC, UCOT, CODELESTE, COME), as 
they are smaller operator than CUTCSA and they actually make BEB deal with one common OEM (Yutong) and share 
depot (in the case of the first two companies).    
 
Figure 11 e-bus financial lease business model for Uruguay Source: own elaboration

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
Also, the conventional business models of direct purchase can be an option if some off-takers prefer to keep ownership, 
like CUTSA may want. In this alternative, the current “fideicomiso” model for BEB subsidy would be the business model 
complemented by concessional loans through intermediate banks (see reference model of direct purchase in figure 
above). However, transition to restructure Uruguayan public transport systems needs to be started. In this sense, the 
strategy recommended is to start with small or medium concessions that involve 100% electric axes or routes, which 
have high visibility, high demand and social support in order to ensure the conditions to make the operation sustainable 
in the transition process. In this way, the ecosystem begins to be stimulated, authorities assume new leadership and 
operators begin to organize themselves to remain in the system and in the business and access to concessional loans. 
Examples of Chile and Colombia in e-Bus Promotion 
Chile and Colombia have been particularly successful in promoting e-buses. Why that? What was the game-changer? 
 
Chile 
The case of Chile is especially interesting due to the introduction of new business models separating bus ownership and bus 
operations. The first batch of 200 electric buses was based on investments of electric utilities leasing e-buses to operators, in 
order to boost their core business (energy sales and the installation of charging infrastructure). Critical for the first batch of e-
buses was not only the investment of electric utilities but also a government subsidy for the entire incremental investment cost of 
e-buses versus fossil units as well as changes in concession contracts reducing risks for investors in vehicle assets and ensuring 
payments from vehicle operators. In subsequent tenders ownership of e-buses is mixed with some offers based on JVs of bus 
operators with bus suppliers and others being JVs of bus operators with investment firms. Electric utilities are no longer engaged 
or have teamed up with capital investment firms as they do not consider vehicle investments to be a part of their core business 
(e.g. AMP Capital and NEoT Capital have entered as investors). The government no longer pays for incremental investment costs 
but still offers other advantages for e-buses such as longer concession periods and additional points in the bidding process 
representing effectively a subsidy to e-buses. Critical take-aways from the Chilean case are: (i) separation of ownership and 
operations can be an effective instrument to promote e-buses and can bring in new financially strong players into the industry; (ii) 
for kick-starting the process investment subsidies are critical; (iii) e-buses still require incentives to be competitive with fossil 
buses; (iv) required subsidies can be reduced significantly after an initial fleet of e-buses and after having established a working 
business model. 
 
Colombia 
Large Colombian cities already run successfully since many years BRT systems with private operators and a public system 
manager paying companies based on distance driven cum service delivery targets. E-buses have been introduced for secondary 
routes based on local e-bus targets. The initial batch of 500 e-buses (2019) was based on a tender which only allowed for the 
provision of e-buses. A subsequent second tender which allowed for any technology resulted in all winning offers to be fossil 
buses, thereby clearly showing that e-buses are not yet commercially competitive (end 2019). The third tender (2020) included 
significant additional points for e-buses as well as longer concession periods. This made electric buses competitive with fossil 
units but also resulted in 16% higher per-km costs of buses which is being paid by the municipality. The experience of Colombia 
reveals two important points: (i) e-buses can be inserted into public transport operations and will be offered by private operators 
if concession contracts are sufficiently attractive and if e-buses receive benefits compared to fossil units; (ii) without financial 
incentives e-buses are commercially not yet competitive. However, some large cities such as Bogota are willing to pay for these 
incremental costs due to e-buses improving air quality and reducing GHG emissions. 
 
PANAMA e-public fleets and e-LCV model 
Figure 12 shows the common model proposed for fleets cases: e-public fleets and e-LCVs in Panama. The most 
efficient business model requires selecting one or more private fleet providers on a competitive tender (least monthly 
payment), request them to set up a SPV for this project. As this is a financial lease, the SPV and the fleet provider may 
have the same shareholders. The SPV would lease the vehicles to both private and public parties. E-motion would 
provide a loan through banks (public in preference to keep concessional conditions to final users) which have separate 
account, one for each private entity. In the case of public fleets, E-motion would provide concessional loans to MEF for 
the management of the EV public fleet program (EVs and charging infrastructure).

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
Figure 12 e-public fleets and e-LCV financial lease business model for Panama
 
Source: own elaboration 
Also, the conventional business models of direct purchase can be an option in some off-takers that prefer to keep 
ownership. ACP pointed they prefer direct purchase as they have a maintenance team.  
 
PARAGUAY e-public fleets and e-LCV model 
In the same line as previous diagram, Figure 13 shows the common model proposed for fleet cases: e-public fleets and 
e-LCVs in Paraguay. Emotion would provide a loan through banks (public in preference to keep concessional conditions 
to final users) which have separate account, one for each private entity. In the case of public fleets, E-motion would 
provide concessional loans to MH for the management of the EV public fleet program (EVs and charging infrastructure). 
 
Figure 13 e-public fleets and e-LCV financial lease business model for Paraguay. Source: own elaboration
 
 
URUGUAY E-public fleets and e-LCV model 
Figure 14 shows the analogous diagram for Uruguay where E-motion would provide concessional loans to MEF for the 
management of the EV public fleet program (EVs and charging infrastructure).

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
Figure 14 e-public fleets and e-LCV financial lease business model for Uruguay. Source: own elaboration 
 
The same financial loan conditions independent of the beneficiary are requested from the GCF. The same financial 
hurdles are faced if vehicles are operated and owned by a private or a public entity. Program finance will not result in 
competitive distortions or favouring of specific private service providers as loans for LCVs are given through open-
access FIs and loans to private and public owned public transport operators are based on competitive bidding. 
Program Components 
 
The Program is structured in four components supported by overachieving project management: 
 
Component 1: Establishment of an e-mobility conducive ecosystem (Technical Assistance) 
 
Component 2: Deployment of e-bus fleets and enhancement of public transport (Financial 
Assistance) 
 
Component 3: Deployment of e-public fleets and light commercial vehicles (Financial Assistance)  
 
Component 4: Fast-charging infrastructure (Financial Assistance) 
 
Project management: Program Management Unit 
 
Component 1:  Establishment of a conducive e-mobility ecosystem 
This component addresses the barrier of lack of business models and policies conducive to EV deployment (barriers 
1.1. policies non conducive for EV mass deployment; 1.2. unfavorable business models). 
 
This component and associated activities provide technical assistance to enable effective financial assistance and to 
create a (gender-responsive) policy and business framework conducive for massive deployment of EVs. Activities are 
coordinated and realized together with national authorities to ensure complementarity of different endeavors.  
 
To address the technical assistance needs of each country and of each project in particular, it is contemplated to work 
through technical assistance packages that will be approached from a regional, national and local perspective. A first 
package of assistance will be established at the regional level and will serve as a sharing platform to provide information 
and general technical assistance to create a community of practice in electromobility. A second package contemplates 
the more specific works that must be developed at the national level and that, due to their own conditions, require 
particular attention. It will be oriented to the particular needs of strengthening the regulatory and normative framework 
such as strategies and public policy instruments related to promotion of electromobility. As it was mentioned in Figure 
1, the three countries have partially a comprehensive policy framework for promoting EV, which some of them already 
has their own Electromobility Strategy (like Panama) or are in process to be published (Paraguay and Uruguay). E-
motion’s TA will complement each country context in line with their existing policies and strategies. Roadmaps will be 
developed related to specific country needs, like planning the fast-charging network in Uruguay, as it was mentioned 
in the interview with UTE. Finally, a technical assistance package will be structured at local level and will focus on 
specific project development addressing particular local context in which they will be developed. 
 
The TA component lays the foundation for a long-term shift to low-emission transportation and the deployment of e-
buses and commercial EVs and addresses several identified barriers, outlined in section B.2. Activities under this 
component address the barrier of higher up-front procurement costs, the profitability barrier, and the barrier of 
unfavorable business models and fiscal environment for EV deployment, by supporting alternative financial structuring,

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
66 Enhancing the policy environment might also include to mainstream gender aspects into policies, targets, and roadmaps. 
The Gender Assessment Report (see Appendix 8) provides several good practices to counteract Gender-based Violence 
(GBV) and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH), such as the establishment of appropriate Grievance 
Redress Mechanisms (GRM). 
67 Outcome 1.1 comprises 2 sub-components. For the respective countries, only one of the sub-components applies to the 
individual country context. 
68 Taking into account ongoing activities on developing a national strategy, if any, e.g., In Uruguay, the project on Promotion 
of Electric Urban Mobility under Euroclima+. The TA component may be adjusted to missing and complementary elements 
and/or the implementation of the first measures targeted under the roadmap, depending on the specific situation in each 
country and gaps existing at the time of the Sub-Program 2 implementation start.   
business models, and medium-term policies which increase the financial attractiveness of EVs. Furthermore, TA 
addresses regulatory barriers, like an insufficient policy environment (including targets and roadmaps),66 which is not 
conducive for mass EV deployment and the lack of optimal vehicle and charging standards, (including battery recycling 
and disposal). Also, TA helps overcoming the technical barrier of performance risks and related perception of EVs and 
establishes data gathering on EV performance. 
 
Component 1,2,3 and 4 jointly address social barriers, particularly the disadvantage of women in current transportation 
patterns (see also section B.2.).  
 
This technical assistance strategy according to demands of increasing specificity, will allow the sharing of successful 
experiences among the participating countries and cities, avoiding the repetition of work that can clearly be adapted 
and then applied according to particular local conditions. This also translates into a more efficient use of resources with 
a broader coverage from the general to the particular of each case. General aspects that are a fundamental part of the 
enabling conditions for the development of electromobility can be addressed without neglecting the accompaniment of 
the different phases that the formulation of a project requires to meet the first objective of the Program, which is the 
successful implementation of electromobility. 
 
The establishment of an e-mobility conducive national ecosystem will comprise the sub-components 1.1a, 1.1b, 1.2, 
1.3 and 1.4:  
 
Outcome 1.1: The government enhanced coordination, planning and capacity for promoting electric mobility67 
Sub-Component 1.1a - Enhancing policies and strategies on electric mobility (PY and UY): Establishment (or 
complementing68) of an e-mobility conducive national ecosystem with sub-activities on design and divulgation of 
sectoral roadmaps (for instance, electrification of public transport, electrification of public fleets; electrification of urban 
freight), support of national enabling policies for EV deployment, and capacity development at national level. The 
Program intends to establish in all countries where not yet available roadmaps for electrification of public transport and 
roadmaps for public fleets and urban freight. Sectoral specific and gender aware roadmaps are a tool to steer climate 
investments and initiatives beyond the Program’s scope and will help to inform and/or further detail the countries long 
term mobility strategies and their NDCs. 
 
 
Output 1.1.1a: A national sustainable and inclusive e-mobility strategy and implementation plan established / 
complemented – Activities: Undertake a comprehensive assessment of the economic, environmental and social 
viability of fleet electrification, renewable energy capacity penetration and electrical distribution grid stabilization. 
This includes to conduct a fleet electrification feasibility analysis, a study to evaluate changes in the planning of 
public transport systems, a study to assess renewable energy generation capacities, by addressing the implication 
of increased deployment of renewable power generation and e-mobility charging in the energy system, and an 
impact analysis on the electricity sector and deployment of charging points. On this basis a national e-mobility 
strategy, consisting of a technology and policy roadmap and implementation plan (incl. deployment targets until 
2030, 2035 and 2050) will be drafted for submission for adoption by the government. 
 
Output 1.1.2a: Key public and private stakeholders are trained (including on gender policies) – Activities:  Train 
civil servants, municipalities and public and private decision-makers on sustainable transport and e-mobility 
policies, standards and regulations. Furthermore, private and public stakeholder participate in E-Motion’s regional 
trainings activities, incl. design, operation & maintenance of e-fleets – Business models and financial instruments.  
Also, 6 trainings per country will be provided to public and private fleet operators, incl. bus drivers, maintenance 
personnel, first response staff and insurance companies on EV and charger operations and maintenance, safety 
trainings gender and gender-based-violence awareness and optimal fleet management, as well as EV-related 
hazards. Participants must fulfil the following eligibility criteria: 
o should be located in one of the key cities in the target countries, (PA (Panama City, San Miguelito, Tocumen, 
Colon, Herrera, Santiago de Veraguas); UY (Montevideo, Salto, Ciudad de la Costa, Paysandú, Maldonado, 
Canelones); PY (Asunción, Ciudad del Este, San Lorenzo, Luque, Encarnación)

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
69 Such Analysis and knowledge will be shared among the three Program countries throughout the whole program 
cycle. This is likewise the case for any following review/analysis of best practices. 
o operation in the public transport sector for at least 3 years 
o appropriate gender balance among participants is envisaged 
 
 
 
Output 1.1.3a: Public and private stakeholders’ awareness enhanced – Activities: Design a communication 
campaign and outreach plan on low-carbon and climate-resilient electric mobility and a communication campaign 
on low-carbon and climate-resilient electric mobility, as well as develop (or use) the public information platform for 
electric mobility to disseminate communication material and knowledge products.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1b – Enhancing governance and stakeholder through institutionalization of electric mobility (PA): 
Establishment of an e-mobility conducive national ecosystem with sub-activities on a multi-stakeholder consultation 
strategy and recommendations for a long-term coordination mechanism to key government actors, and capacity 
development at national level. In the three countries the national electromobility committees were identified and 
interviewed. E-motion will enhance governance and stakeholder ecosystem by supporting the existing CIME in 
Panama, GIEET in Uruguay and the Electromobility Strategic Table in Paraguay; all these 3 groups will be the strategic 
connection node to articulate public sector in this sub-component 1.1b. 
 
 
Output 1.1.1b: A multi-stakeholder and gender inclusive consultation strategy is implemented and 
recommendations for a long-term coordination mechanism are delivered to key government actors – Activities: 
activities include to develop a stakeholder consultation strategy, recommendations on long term coordination, and 
a public-private strategy on transition. 
 
Output 1.1.2b: Key public and private stakeholders are trained (including on gender policies) – Activities: Train 
civil servants, municipalities and public and private decision-makers on sustainable transport and e-mobility 
policies, standards and regulations. Furthermore, private and public stakeholder participate in E-Motion’s regional 
trainings activities, incl. design, operation & maintenance of e-fleets - Business models and financial instruments. 
Also, 6 trainings will be provided to public and private fleet operators, incl. bus drivers, maintenance personnel, 
first response staff and insurance companies on EV and charger operations and maintenance, safety trainings 
gender and gender-based-violence awareness and optimal fleet management, as well as EV-related hazards. 
Participants must fulfil the following eligibility criteria: 
o 
should be located in one of the key cities in the target countries, (PA (Panama City, San Miguelito, Tocumen, 
Colon, Herrera, Santiago de Veraguas); UY (Montevideo, Salto, Ciudad de la Costa, Paysandú, Maldonado, 
Canelones); PY (Asunción, Ciudad del Este, San Lorenzo, Luque, Encarnación) 
o 
operation in the public transport sector for at least 3 years 
o 
appropriate gender balance among participants is envisaged 
 
Output 1.1.3b: Public and private stakeholders’ awareness enhanced – Activities: Design a communication 
campaign and outreach plan on low-carbon and climate-resilient electric mobility and a communication campaign 
on low-carbon and climate-resilient electric mobility, as well as develop (or use) the public information platform for 
electric mobility to disseminate communication material and knowledge products. 
 
Outcome 1.2: The Government takes actions towards required regulatory standard and implementing policy 
frameworks for electric mobility.   
Sub-Component 1.2 - Enhancing vehicle and charging standards: Technical support will be provided to the relevant 
national and local authorities in the countries and cities where the Program will support investments in order to set-up, 
improve and/or enforce enabling public policies and legal, regulatory and/or normative frameworks for e-mobility. 
 
TA is used to ensure delivery of adequate training from equipment suppliers or third parties for EV and charger 
operations and maintenance, safety trainings, gender and gender-based-violence (including SEAH) awareness 
trainings and capacity building in optimal management of EV fleets. 
 
 
Output 1.2.1: Regulatory standard reform proposal that includes gender-equality policy issues for electric vehicles 
delivered – Activities: First, review reporting on global good practices on standards for vehicles energy efficiency, 
EV charging infrastructure and RE grid integration, and recommendations to update national regulation.69 Second, 
prepare a regulatory proposal on electric vehicle imports specification, licencing and periodic technical inspection 
requirements, developed and presented to Ministry of Transport for adoption. Third, present the proposal on 
technical approval and installation, incl. standards and technical specifications, of public and private charging 
stations.

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
Outcome 1.3: The Government takes action towards implementing appropriate emission standards and mandates (PY 
only) 
Sub-Component 1.3 - Introducing appropriate emission standards and mandates: The activities under the component 
will support the development of standards and a policy framework for regulating the eligible emissions of road vehicles. 
This will include an analysis of regional and global good practices for standards and laws for regulating emissions of 
road vehicles and recommendations for such regulation in the national context. As a deliverable, proposals on emission 
policy, regulations and standards are developed and drafted for adoption by government ministries. 
 
 Output 1.3.1: Standards and policy framework for regulating eligible emissions developed – Activities: Analyse 
regional and global good practices for standards and laws for regulating emissions of road vehicles and 
recommendations for such regulation in the national context and prepare a proposal of emission policy, regulations 
and standards submitted to the government for adoption. 
 Output 1.3.2: An appropriate monitoring system for air pollutants developed – Activities: Develop and implement an 
appropriate monitoring system for air pollutants for the Metropolitan Area of Asunción, and train personnel on its 
application. 
 
Outcome 1.4: The Government takes action towards implementing policy frameworks for ensuring the long-term 
sustainability of low-carbon electric mobility. 
Sub-Component 1.4 - Long-term environmental and social sustainability of electric mobility: The activities under the 
component will provide policy advice on the end-of-life vehicle management (ELV) of EVs, particularly on battery re-
usage, recycling and disposal, and related capacity development at a national level.  
 
 
Output 1.4.1: Standards and a policy framework for regulating the disposal of electric vehicles developed – 
Activities: Analyse regional and global good practices for standards and laws for regulating the ELV disposal 
(including reuse and recycling) of electric vehicles and recommendations for such regulation in the national context 
and prepare a proposal of policy and regulations for ELV management (including re-use and recycling) submitted 
to the government for adoption. 
 
Output 1.4.2: New business models, including the responsibility of vehicle distributors delivered – Activities:  Analyse 
global good practice on international successful financial and commercially viable business models on managing 
ELV components for all vehicles and second-life battery use, including cost benefit analysis estimating investment 
needs and financing schemes and develop a roadmap on sustainable and commercially viable ELV and battery 
management. 
 
Output 1.4.3: Waste management stakeholders are trained on ELV management – Activities: Provide a Gender-
sensitive training course on reusing, recycling and disposing of used vehicles, with modules on each of the key 
disposal areas (General aspects of end-of-life vehicle disposal (conventional and electric), Vehicle spent battery 
management and battery reuse, Hazardous waste management, Lithium-ion recycling technology) and identify and 
develop business models for reuse and disposal of vehicles and their components in local, regional and international 
markets as well as catalysing finance for such business models. Targeted training participants are waste 
management stakeholders, i.e., public representatives and private sector waste management operators, which fulfil 
the following eligibility criteria: 
• 
should be located in one of the key cities in the target countries, (PA (Panama City, San Miguelito, Tocumen, 
Colon, Herrera, Santiago de Veraguas); UY (Montevideo, Salto, Ciudad de la Costa, Paysandú, Maldonado, 
Canelones); PY (Asunción, Ciudad del Este, San Lorenzo, Luque, Encarnación) 
• 
operation in the waste management sector for at least 3 years 
• 
appropriate gender balance among participants is envisaged 
 
The Establishment of an e-mobility conducive local ecosystem is addressed in sub-components 1.5: 
 
Outcome 1.5:  Preparing for scale-up and replication of electric mobility through fiscal incentives 
Sub-Component 1.5 - Preparing for scale-up and replication of electric mobility through fiscal incentives: Establishment 
of an e-mobility conducive local ecosystem with sub-activities related to the local environment such as business model 
design and development, local policy advice (e.g. preferential downtown access for e-LCVs), advice on concession 
contracts for bus services (e.g. concerning concession length as this is important for e-bus deployment, implementation 
of gender equality policies), capacity building and training of operators, safety staff, maintenance staff etc. and the 
realization of knowledge materials related to the local policy environment and the investment sub-projects.  
 
The activities comprise the development and advisory services on optimal business models and financial structuring 
which relate to the peculiarities of EVs. This is targeted for public transport to identify business models e.g., for atomized 
urban transport providers, models which allow for increased influx of private capital and which lower financing costs

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
and risks for operators, leasing models, inclusion of electric utilities etc. The activities will be coordinated with 
corresponding the national electromobility committees in each country to steer the implementation.  
 
In addition, the TA in policy also includes advice on concession contract issues, electricity pricing (e.g., demand charge 
for public charging networks) or diversion of fossil fuel subsidies.   
 
Project sourcing and preparation including technical, financial, economic, environmental, social, gender and legal 
feasibility / due diligence. The Program will provide direct technical assistance to sub-projects that will potentially 
receive financial assistance. TA includes pre- and full feasibility assessment, legal, institutional, financial and technical 
advisory as well as advisory on possible business models and financial structuring. This activity will contribute to a 
proper structuring of the sub-projects, an adequate risk allocation and bankability and to the deployment of innovative 
business models. This also includes the optimal design of e-mobility ecosystems including charging networks and the 
interface between vehicle, charging, and the grid.  
 
The activities under outputs 1.5.1, 1.5.2 and 1.5.3 also include performance monitoring of EVs in technical (energy 
usage, emissions) and financial terms (operational expenditures, vehicle availability rates), which is core to reduce the 
perceived performance risk of EVs and to create a solid base of actual costs and benefits of EVs in the country. 
 
 
Output 1.5.1: Proposal for regulatory subsidy and tax reforms for the uptake of electric vehicles developed – 
Activities:  Develop a regulatory tax, subsidy and incentive reform proposal to facilitate fiscal incentives and stability 
for the transitions towards e-mobility. 
 
Output 1.5.2: Business models, financial schemes and procurement guidelines delivered – Activities: Prepare an 
analysis for enhancing existing financial products and risk mitigation products to promote EVs, analyse global good 
practice on electric vehicle incentives, such as tax and duty reduction, propose suitable electric vehicle incentives, 
and provide recommendation on procurement of EVS. 
 
Output 1.5.3: Project sourcing and preparation delivered for project pipeline – Activities: Project sourcing, project 
preparation, and prepare and regular update EV project pipeline. Public or private companies which fulfil the 
following eligibility criteria (EC) will be eligible when: 
-They propose sub projects within the 3 countries (PA, PY, UY) with pre or feasibility studies meeting basic EC for 
components 2, 3 or 4.  
- 
E&S category B or C (category A is not eligible)  
- 
The technology must comply with the current national regulation 
- 
The operational solution must be proven by the promoters for each Sub-project, according to the characteristics 
of the beneficiaries  
- 
Satisfactory controls against money laundering, integrity, and credit rating assessment    
 
All TA sub-components will take into account gender aspects. The following table indicated the suggested provision of 
TA to the Sub-Program 2 countries based on the need assessments per country performed during the preparation of 
the Feasibility Study. The TA components will be addressed by national or international consultants. The estimate costs 
are detailed broken down in Annex 4 and the Annex 10.  
     
Table 9: Expected TA activities by country 
Country 
TA Component 
Panama 
Paraguay 
Uruguay 
National 
Sub-Component 1.1a - Enhancing policies and strategies on 
gender-aware electric mobility 
 
x 
x 
Sub-Component 1.1b - Enhancing governance and stakeholder 
though institutionalization of electric mobility: 
x 
 
 
Sub-Component 1.2 - Enhancing vehicle and charging standards 
(considering among other dimensions gender interests) 
x 
x 
x 
Sub-Component 1.3 - Introducing appropriate emission standards 
and mandates 
 
x 
 
Sub-Component 1.4 - Long-term environmental and social 
sustainability of electric mobility 
x 
x 
x 
local 
Sub-Component 1.5 - Preparing for scale-up and replication of 
electric mobility through fiscal incentives 
x 
x 
x 
 
The regional sub-component related to the E-Motion Program is provided through Sub-Program 1 lead by AFD and 
GIZ: Establishment of an e-mobility conducive regional ecosystem which is core for learning and experience exchange 
between Latin American countries with sub-activities such as the realization of different knowledge materials including 
publications, webinars, benchmark and best-practice studies, dialogue with EV suppliers and outreach events including 
trainings and workshops.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
70 Fleets of 100 or more units are far more cost effective and allow for efficient usage of charging infrastructure and grid 
upgrades. They also result in more reliable operations due to availability of technicians from the manufacturer on-site and 
sufficient spare parts. 
71 The existence of a scrapping program is irrelevant for the determination of emission reductions as in the baseline case the 
old bus is being replaced with a diesel unit and in the project case with an electric unit i.e. in both cases an old diesel unit is 
either replaced or continues to operate. Emission reductions are not calculated against the old, replaced unit but by comparing 
the emissions of a new baseline bus with a new e-bus. Scrapping Programs in any case have limited merits as old municipal 
buses could still be used to replace even older rural or private transport buses with low mileage. Monitoring experience of 
CDM mass transport projects also shows that old municipal buses are discontinued to be used due to pure financial reasons 
after some time and that average bus occupation rates are not negatively affected by countries which introduce new mass 
transport systems without scrapping Programs.  
72 A detailed business models is presented in B.3 “Delivery Channels and new business model”. 
 
Output 1.5.3: Sub-projects sourced and prepared with activities of project sourcing and preparation including technical, 
financial, economic, environmental, social, gender and legal feasibility. This activity will contribute to a proper structuring 
of the sub-projects, an adequate risk allocation and bankability and to the deployment of innovative business models. 
Output 1.1 to 1.5 will be undertaken partially concurrently and in sequences over 5 years. (see Annex 5). 
 
Component 2: Deployment of e-bus fleets and enhancement of public transport  
It is expected that this component will be applied in all involved countries. Component 2 addresses in Output 2.1 the 
barrier of higher up-front procurement costs of e-buses as well as the barrier of lower financial profitability compared to 
fossil units (see section B.2.). The goal is to deploy large-scale fleets of electric buses to showcase their technical and 
commercial viability to operators. Public urban transport buses are the target. This includes different e-bus technologies 
(slow-, fast-, opportunity and ultra-fast charged buses), bus sizes of 12 m and different operational structures (mixed 
traffic buses as well as units operating on bus-only routes). The targeted e-bus fleet size is 100 or more units but for 
smaller cities also smaller fleets can be financed as well70. The Program will not finance pilot sub-projects. Buses are 
operated by municipal transport operators or private parties (see above for pre-identified business models). E-buses 
are purchased instead of new conventional fossil buses i.e., the old, replaced bus is the same in the baseline case or 
in the project case71. E-bus sub-projects can be embedded in urban transport sub-projects e.g., a new bus fleet within 
a Bus Rapid Transit project (incl. “green routes” based on BEB). Table 10 shows indicative sub-projects to be financed. 
This includes 6 sub-projects for 650 e-buses in 3 countries. Only urban public transport buses and no pilot fleets with 
less than 20 buses are financed. E-mobility is combined with PT measures to foster mode shift to low-carbon transport 
to strengthen attractiveness and convenience of PT including measures such as exclusive bus lanes, improved 
pedestrianization and public transport accessibility, transit-oriented development, fostering of electric micro-mobility 
and gender sensitive interventions under Output 2.2. 
 
Outcome 2.1: Finance of e-buses kick-start the mass deployment and provide evidence of technical, financial and 
environmental sustainability 
Output 2.1. Financing of e-bus sub-projects is provided, and e-bus fleets are deployed by bus operators. This includes 
the sub-activities project preparation, financing and deployment. The Sub-Program 2 envisages to finance the 
deployment of up to 650 e-buses. Finance covers the entire e-bus system of buses, charging infrastructure, grid 
connection and bus depot upgrades to accommodate e-buses. This needs to be designed individually per project as 
the optimal technology choice (e.g., overnight charging, fast/opportunity/at boarding station ultra-fast charging) is 
dependent on route and operational characteristics as well as local costs. 
 
Activities of Output 2.1 are preparation, financing and deployment of e-bus sub-projects. 
 
Table 10: Number of BEB expected to be financed by country 
Country 
Fleet 
Number 
EV 
Potential financing implementing 
partners (among others) 
E-Motion financing model72 
Panama 
BEB 
(12m) 
150 
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas 
(MEF), METRO (owns MiBus), MiBus 
(operator), Banco Nacional de 
Panamá (BNP), Caja de Ahorro (CA) 
MEF and Metro deals with concessional loan to 
operator MiBus, through operational leasing 
model.  
BNP or CA deals with concessional loan for bus 
depot electrification, in PA potential entities can 
be Naturgy or Evergo.  
MiBus has 3 phases, E-Motion supports finance 
phase 2 
Para-
guay 
BEB 
(12m) 
300 
Ministerio de Hacienda (MH) and 
Banco Nacional de Fomento (BNF) 
MH deals with concessional loans to operators, 
BNF deals concessional Loan to private bus

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
73 https://www.lanacion.com.py/negocios/2022/03/17/analizan-impulsar-uso-de-buses-electricos-en-el-pais-mediante-una-
inversion-de-us-20-millones/ 
operators (bus and depot electrification). In PY, 
ANDE deal with depot electrification. 
Uruguay 
BEB 
(12m) 
200 
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas 
(MEF) and Banco República Uruguay 
(BROU) 
MEF deals with concessional loans to operators  
BROU deals concessional loans to private bus 
operators (bus and depot electrification). In UY, 
UTE deals with depot electrification. 
Source: Annex 2 
 
Table 11: Indicative eBus sub-projects to be financed 
Country, city 
Program e-buses  
(12 m) 
CAPEX Finance in USD million of Program Buses 
Total 
CAPEX 
GCF 
loan 
CAF 
National 
finance / 
equity 
Transport 
Operator 
Panama, Panama City 
130 
38.6 
12.1 
22.6 
3.9 
MiBus 
Panama, Santiago City 
20 
5.9 
1.8 
3.5 
0.6 
Utrapsa 
Paraguay, Asunción 
23 
6.3 
2 
3.7 
0.6 
Municipality of 
Asuncion 
Paraguay, Asunción 
77 
21.2 
6.7 
12.4 
2.1 
MAGNO 
Paraguay, Asunción 
200 
55.1 
17.4 
32.2 
5.5 
CETRAPAM 
Uruguay, Montevideo 
200 
40.8 
12.8 
23.9 
4.1 
CUTCSA. 
COETC, UTOC, 
COME, 
CODELESTE 
TOTAL 
650 
168.2 
53 
98.4 
16.8 
 
 
Outcome 2.2: Ridership of public transport and e-buses is increased through smart infrastructure measures  
Output 2.2. Smart facilities for enhanced public transport access, improved inter-modality and non-motorised transport 
are implemented and in operation. Output 2.2 is linked with Output 2.1. E-mobility is combined with public transport 
measures to foster mode shift to low-carbon transport. 
 
Declining public transport shares are a fact in many countries. If the trend towards more motorised individual transport 
(MIT) cannot be countered by leading the migration towards sustainable transportation, e. g. high quality public and 
non-motorised transport, the trend of rapidly growing MIT will unavoidably lead to cities sinking into traffic congestion, 
with the result of declined air quality and strongly rising health care costs as well as other externalities. One of the 
reasons is the lack of attractiveness, connectivity, accessibility and convenience of public transport. The program will 
work in the involved cities (see Table 11) to increase public transport attractiveness through measures such as 
integrated ticketing systems and bus only lanes thereby reducing travel time and making public transport faster than 
private means of transport. In addition, route restructuring, tariff and mode integration, transport policies (in coordination 
and based on the TA work under Component 1), which favour public transport and de-incentivize private means of 
transport e.g., through parking policies. E-bus sub-projects are embedded in urban transport sub-projects, which 
include measures such as bus route restructuring, exclusive bus lanes, integrated fare systems, or inter-modal 
integration and change stations to increase the attractiveness and usage rate of public transport. Sub-projects are also 
integrated with measures to increase the usage of NMT including segregated cycling lanes and bicycle parking lots at 
bus stations, walking areas for increased pedestrianization and improved accessibility, and improved last-mile mobility 
services including (electric) micro-mobility. Common urban spaces and new urban mobility services facilitate the 
independence and mobility of all residents and are key to promote sustainable, competitive cities while increasing the 
quality of life of citizens taking into account the different mobility patterns in women and men.  
 
Table 12: Indicative smart facilities project to be financed 
Country, city 
Intervention type 
Total Investment by National 
finance / equity (USD million) 
Description 
Paraguay, Asunción 
Public transport 
infrastructure and smart 
facilities 
8.9 
Sustainable Mobility Project, 
Investment fund to promote BEB73 
Uruguay, Montevideo 
1.1 
Ministry of Energy and Mining 
(MIEM) programs to promote

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
74 https://www.gub.uy/ministerio-industria-energia-mineria/comunicacion/noticias/miem-anuncio-medidas-para-promover-
movilidad-electrica-uruguay 
75 https://www.lanacion.com.py/negocios/2022/03/17/analizan-impulsar-uso-de-buses-electricos-en-el-pais-mediante-una-
inversion-de-us-20-millones/  
electromobility in the 2nd energy 
transition framework74 
TOTAL 
10 
 
For the advancement of low-carbon sustainable mobility, this component will be supported by government projects in 
Paraguay (Sustainable Mobility Project, Investment fund to promote BEB75) and Uruguay (Ministry of Energy and 
Mining (MIEM) programs to promote electromobility in the 2nd energy transition framework) to finance (i) the allocation 
and improvement of supporting urban spaces and infrastructure for public e-transport and (ii) public transport 
improvements. The output supports the programs and the successful implementation in different ways: 1) the projects 
will benefit from the introduced ecosystem for e-mobility under Component 1, being embedded in an broader strategy 
for an enhanced enabling framework for the deployment of alternative transportation modes and its interlinkage 
between modes; and 2) the aims of the projects – enhancing mobility and promoting low-carbon transport – will be 
supplemented and accelerated through activities under Component 1 addressing route restructuring, tariff and mode 
integration, transport policies Hence, the impact of the government projects will be leveraged and upscaled through the 
GCF support. The Program will prioritize solutions that integrate into the urban fabric, are compatible and conducive to 
modes of sustainable mobility guaranteeing universal access. This can include the infrastructure connecting public 
transport systems to alternative modes of urban mobility (electric and non-motorized) such as cycling lanes, pedestrian 
streets, etc., and/or providing the infrastructure conditions to facilitate these alternative modes of urban mobility as 
bicycle parking, park and ride, waiting areas, charging areas etc.  
 
Component 3: Deployment of e-public fleets and e-LCVs  
LCVs (public and private) sub-projects are expected for all countries. Component 3 addresses the barrier of higher up-
front procurement costs of e-LCVs as well as the barrier of lower financial profitability compared to fossil units (see 
section B.2.). LCVs (public / private) sub-projects have been identified for most countries. At a later stage, countries 
where currently no such sub-projects have been identified, might enter, if framework conditions prove to be more 
favourable. The goal is to deploy large-scale fleets of e-LCVs to make a fast-charging infrastructure (see Component 
4) viable. The following table shows indicative sub-projects to be financed. This includes 6 sub-projects for 1,150 e-
LCVs (public and private) in 3 countries (see Table 13). 
 
Outcome 3: Finance of commercial EVs kick-start mass deployment and provide evidence of technical, financial and 
environmental sustainability. 
 
Output 3.1. LCVs (public and private) are financed and deployed. The Sub-Program 2 envisages to finance the 
deployment of 1,150 electric LCVs (public and private fleets) in cities.   
 
Activities of Output 3.1 are preparation, financing, and deployment of e-LCV. 
 
Table 13: Number of e-LCV expected to be financed by country 
Country 
Fleet 
Number 
EV 
Financing implementing 
partners 
E-Motion financing model 
Panama 
Public 
Fleets 
400 
Ministerio de Economía y 
Finanzas (MEF) 
MEF deal with concessional loans to promote EVs 
as PA has targets on electrification of its public fleet 
to 2030 (ENME). 
LCVs 
50 
BNP, CA 
MEF deal with consessional Loan to promote EVs 
as PA has targets on electrification of its public fleet 
to 2030 (ENME). NDC last version scenarios states 
that 400 to 700 VEs should be purchased by 2025 
Paraguay 
Public 
Fleets 
300 
Ministerio de Hacienda (MH) 
MH deal with concessional loan to promote EVs 
LCVs 
100 
BNF 
BNF deals concessional Loan to private LCVs 
operators. 
Uruguay 
Public 
Fleets 
200 
MEF 
MEF deal with concessional Loan to promote EVs  
LCVs 
100 
BROU 
BROU deals concessional loans to private LCVs 
operators. Private operators will come from MOVEs 
ongoing pilot program as first 
Source: Annex 2

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 14: Indicative e-public fleets expected to be financed by country 
Country, city 
e-Public Fleets 
CAPEX Finance in USD million of Program Buses 
Total 
CAPEX 
GCF 
loan 
CAF 
National 
finance / 
equity 
Transport 
Operator 
Panama, City 
400 
14.0 
4.41 
8.19 
1.4 
MOP, ETESA, 
others 
Asuncion, Paraguay 
50 
1.78 
0.61 
1 
0.17 
Mun. Asuncion 
Asuncion, Paraguay 
250 
8.92 
2.82 
5.2 
0.9 
ANDE, BCP, 
COPACO, 
PETROPAR, 
others 
Montevideo, Uruguay 
200 
4.1 
1.3 
2.4 
0.4 
Mun. 
Canelones, 
several 
ministries 
pointed by GIZ 
TOTAL 
900 
28.80 
9.1 
16.8 
2.9 
 
 
Table 15 Indicative eLCV Sub-projects to be financed 
Country 
E-LCVs 
CAPEX Finance in USD million of Program Buses 
Transport 
Operator 
Total 
CAPEX 
GCF 
loan 
GCF FA 
grant 
CAF 
National 
finance / 
equity 
Panama 
50 
1.8 
0.57 
 
1.1 
0.18 
Private 
companies 
like Riba 
Smith 
Paraguay 
100 
3.6 
1.1 
 
2.1 
0.4 
Private 
companies 
Uruguay 
100 
2.1 
0.7 
 
1.2 
0.21 
MOVEs 
ecosystem 
TOTAL 
250 
7.5 
2.35 
 
4.4 
0.75 
 
 
Component 4: Fast-charging infrastructure 
The deployment of commercial EV fleets require the establishment of fast-charging infrastructure. This infrastructure is 
also precondition for the further promotion and spill-over to other vehicle segments. A fast-charging infrastructure is a 
key element to enable deployment of commercial EVs. This faces a typical chicken-egg dilemma with insufficient clients 
to make a charging system commercially viable and vehicle owners not purchasing an EV due to absence of the 
charging infrastructure. The barrier analysis identified the lack of a low-emission infrastructure investments for 
enhancing deployment of e-mobility as a key technical barrier. The barrier will be addressed by Component 4 and work 
within country context stakeholder as it was described in Figure 12, Figure 13, and Figure 14 for PA, PY and UY 
respectively. Against the background of common climate change impacts such as heavy rains, floods, and storms, the 
charging infrastructure need to account for present and future climate hazards, to ensure a stable and long-term 
operation. For instance, bus depot locations needs to be resilient in terms of providing infrastructure to mitigate flooding. 
In the three countries, public entities will lead the fast charger deployment: 
 
 
In Panama, SNE will lead the implementing phase, working with the main cities government/municipalities that have 
been part of the work within Emotion feasibility study: Panama City, Colon, Hererra. In the case of Panama, private 
entities like Naturgy, ENSA, Casa de las Baterías.

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
76 Charging infrastructure cost structure has: cost of chargers (in this case DC 150 kW), cost of electric works (all the 
adequations and engineering to connect high voltage point in the middle of urban area), civil works (these consider that in 
historic and strategic points, civil works can be quite expensive). 
 
In Paraguay, ANDE will lead the implementing phase working with Municipality of Asunción government. ANDE is 
the National Electricity Administration (Administración Nacional de Electricidad). 
 
In Uruguay, UTE will lead the implementing phase working with Municipality of Montevideo government. UTE is the 
National Administration of Power Plants and Transmission (Administración Nacional de Usinas y Transmisiones 
Eléctricas). 
Outcome 4:  Investment in low-emission (fast) charging infrastructure lays the foundation for the deployment EVs in 
the commercial fleets and facilitate further spill-over to other vehicle segments 
Output 4.1. Technical preparations for fast charging infrastructure investments finalised, incl. engineering and 
procurement process. Activities under Output 4.1 will facilitate the construction of the charging infrastructure through 
preparing necessary steps, including the formulation of requirements and the selecting process for eligible construction 
companies. The envisaged 20 chargers per country will have a capacity of 150 kW each allowing fast charging. The 
output is linked to TA for project sourcing and structuring, TA for design of charging infrastructure including the business 
model for future commercial operations. 
 
Output 4.2. Low-emission fast-charging infrastructure financed and construction of in relevant municipalities completed. 
The Sub-Program 2 envisages to finance and construct up to 60 fast charging station networks in, at least, 3 cities. The 
costs for the infrastructure are mainly related to the chargers (50%) and installation76 (50%) and will supported with 
loans to public entities / utilities. Involved municipality will provide and dedicate corresponding public space and land 
free of charge. The electricity supply will be delivered by the respective utility, which will be involved in the planning 
and construction. In addition, the interplay between the utilities and the electricity customers will be addressed, i.e., 
support the establishment of adequate power supply tariffs offered by the utilities (addressed in coordination with 
Component 1). The Sub-Program and the AE, respectively, will be responsible for coordination among different 
stakeholders under Outcome 4. The fast-charging infrastructure established under Component 4 could be used for 
Component 3 and other vehicles like taxis or private vehicles (not bus fleets under Component 2). 
 
Program Management Unit (PMU) 
The PMU will be in charge of: 
 the general coordination and management of the Program; 
 the management of the Technical Assistance for the sub-projects’ preparation;  
 the preparation of the reporting and monitoring reports due to the GCF and the supervision of the evaluation 
process; 
 the implementation and the follow up the E-Motion Sub-Program communication plan; 
 the implementation and maintenance of a knowledge and records management system; 
 the implementation of activities as per Gender Action Plan 
 
Knowledge management: The Program will develop knowledge products and share experiences and cases through 
channels such as webinar, electronic reports, case-studies, and workshops to disseminate experiences and build a 
base for replication thereby accelerating EV uptake on a regional scale. The Sub-Program 2 will not create own 
platforms or channels for information dissemination but use existing channels, such as the one created by UNEP/MOVE 
or by GIZ in Paraguay under its project to support the Master Plan for Public Transport. An interchange of experience 
shall also take place where experiences can be shared from countries more advanced in specific issues, e.g., Colombia 
on bus systems. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Partnership arrangement under the E-Motion Program:  
 
An IDFC Alliance: working together for a stronger impact for E-motion Program 
The Program will be implemented by three IDFC development banks: CAF, AFD group (including PROPARCO), KFW, 
and a bilateral technical cooperation agency (GIZ). The partnership proposed for the Program allows combining 
complementary and diverse range of assets of the different entities, to maximize impacts and pave the way for a real 
paradigm shift. All partners have a very strong commitment in the region promoting sustainable and low-carbon mobility. 
Moreover, they have a very strong local presence in Latin American countries and experience working with political 
institutions (territorial entities and countries) and transport operators through technical and/or financial assistance. The 
partnership will allow the Program proposing innovative financial instruments at a regional scale reaching a large 
number of countries and benefitting to a higher number and diversity of actors. Indeed, CAF can finance the private 
sector and AFD group can reach the private sector through its private subsidiary PROPARCO. CAF and AFD can offer

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
non-sovereign loans to public banks, public companies, cities and regions without asking State guarantee. GIZ is a 
major actor worldwide in designing and developing large technical assistance programs. Finally, CAF, AFD group, KfW, 
and GIZ are used to co-finance development sub-projects together and each institution is GCF accredited and knows 
well the GCF guidelines and requirements, having already several GCF sub-projects under implementation. KfW and 
AFD have an existing institutional arrangement (Mutual Reliance Initiative) that provides a straightforward framework 
for AFD and KfW co-financing. That will guarantee a proper use of the funds but also a maximization of impacts and 
enhanced cooperation between those agencies to strengthen and harmonize the ongoing parallel local actions towards 
e-mobility in Latin America.  
 
A partnership model with AFD and CAF as leaders 
The E-Motion Program will be implemented through two Funding Proposals: one by AFD as an Accredited Entity to 
cover 8 countries (Sub-Program 1), and one by CAF to cover the following 3 countries: Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay 
(Sub-Program 2). 
Figure 15: Partnership model of E-Motion 
 
 
Sub-Program 2 (Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay), 2 institutions with strong experiences in e-mobility in Latin 
America and with GCF 
CAF has four GCF funded projects/programs under implementation, totalling more than USD 549 MM, and has already 
led this kind of multi-country programs with GCF (e.g., FP 149: Green Climate Financing Facility for Local Financial 
Institutions in Latin-America). In addition, CAF has a high-level political dialogue in the region and knowledge and has 
produced a very comprehensive report analysing possible regulatory and financing alternatives that exist in order to 
replace the conventional fleet of buses that run on fossil fuels and integrate electric vehicles into the urban public 
transport system. CAF financed the Measurement, Reporting, Verification (MRV) of a pilot for 2 electric buses in Buenos 
Aires. These buses operated in commercial conditions for a year in one of the routes of a private operator. The study 
was conducted for the Municipality of Buenos Aires in order to evaluate the technical performance of the technology. 
As a result of that pilot, CAF/ AFD have developed pre-feasibility study for Buenos Aires with the Latin America 
Investment Facility (LAIF) aiming to support the potential conversion of one of the largest bus fleet of Latin America 
(18,000 buses) into electric buses. Likewise, CAF has received in the past year growing demands to support financially 
the renewal of fleets in Uruguay, especially Montevideo, Ecuador in Guayaquil, Panama and Panama City and Brazil 
in the state of Espirito Santo. In order to attend these demands, CAF is working very closely with every local government 
providing TA and support. Recently CAF has started a project as an accredited entity of GEF for supporting the National 
strategy on low carbon Transportation of the Government in Chile, the project main objective is to develop through 
lessons learned in Santiago and from 4 pilots in intermediate cities, new financial mechanism involving public and 
private incentives to enhance e-mobility adoption in the country. Moreover, CAF has a strong track record in the 
transport sector, in the past 10 years has financed over 2.200 MM in massive and integrated public transport rail sub-
projects such as Metro of Panamá - Panamá (line 1); Metro of Lima - Perú (lines 1 and 2); Metro of Quito - Ecuador  
(line 1); Metro of Sao Paulo – Brazil (line 17 and extension of line 2). The Bank has also financed infrastructure for Bus 
Rapid Transit (BRT) systems such as Transmilenio in Bogotá (phases II and III); Metrobus – Quito; Niteroi 
Transoceanica, Contagem and Sao Bernardo do Campo in Brazil. 
 
GIZ has a strong technical expertise in the development of large TA programs and in the E-Mobility sector. GIZ finances 
together with AFD the National Urban Mobility Policy (NUMPs) of Ecuador, Chile and Uruguay (Euroclima+ program). 
Moreover, GIZ is particularly active in the promotion of e-Mobility in the region and supports the design and 
implementation of e-Mobility policies through several grant-funded sub-projects: support to introduce specific criteria 
for electric buses within the renewal fleet program REFROTA, integration of bus systems and electrification in 
Florianopolis (FELICITY program with EIB) and technical assistance to strengthen conditions to consolidate electrical 
mobility in Brazil (PROMOB-E program), development of a National E-Bus Promotion Program in Colombia, and 
support to the operationalization of e-buses in Costa Rica (MiTransporte program). Through the Cities Finance Facility 
(CFF) program, GIZ is also developing two bankable sub-projects for new electric buses on 2 routes in Quito and

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
77 Due Diligence start at eligibility criteria evaluation, and it is fully completed during CAF’s credit evaluation process.    
 
providing assistance for new electric bus corridor and bicycle lanes in Mexico City. In Chile GIZ is working to set-up a 
financing mechanism to strengthen private sector investments in electric mobility and to accelerate the deployment of 
electric buses outside of Santiago.   
 
The current regional Program aims at completing these multiple initiatives, which are currently being implemented 
across Latin America, with a common ambitious financing and technical assistance proposal specifically targeted 
towards the commercial EV segments, which are now able to reach the scale and become commercially viable in the 
short to medium term. 
 
Implementation Arrangement for Sub-program 2 
 
With regards to the Funding Proposal led by CAF, E-Motion will be implemented jointly by the following two institutions:  
 CAF, as accredited entity, executing entity and co-financier for the financial assistance targeting public and private 
sector project owners (Component 2, 3, and 4), and to support the technical assistance dedicated to sub-projects’ 
preparation (Component 1, Output 1.5.3). 
 GIZ, as executing entity for technical assistance (outputs under all sub-component under Component 1).  
 
The proposed implementation structure takes into account executing entities’ expertise: technical assistance to public 
bodies for GIZ, financing solutions and technical and public and private sector expertise for CAF. Both entities will be 
part of the PMU. 
 
CAF will be responsible for providing governance, oversight, and quality assurance in accordance with its policies, 
procedures, and with the FAA and AMA. Moreover, CAF project teams will be responsible for the identification, 
appraisal, implementation and evaluation of eligible investments of the E-MOTION Sub-program 2. The sub-projects’ 
appraisal process will follow CAF’s procedures. In particular, business and technical teams will carry out due diligence77 
and appraisals on each project in accordance with CAF standards and procedures.  
 
GIZ will be responsible for the implementation of activities within the technical assistance Component 1. GIZ will ensure 
the implementation of activities using a combination of own technical staff based in respective partner countries as well 
as independent consultants. The TA activities will be addressed by national or international consultants. The estimate 
costs and the procurement are detailed broken down in Annex 4 and the Annex 10. During the implementation of the 
contracting process, 1 or more consultancy bids may be considered per activity, and will be awarded to qualified firms 
or individual. Per country one bid / assignment envisaged, where deemed efficient activities could be consolidated per 
country. GIZ will report to the E-Motion Steering Committee and to the CAF Programme Manager. 
 
Figure 16: Illustration of implementation arrangements

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
Contractual arrangements 
 
The GCF and CAF will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) for the Program in the framework of the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). The FAA will outline the sectorial, technological, and geographical scope 
(the “Mandate”) of the proposed CAF/GCF Program. 
 
GCF funds, whether reimbursable or non-reimbursable, will be transferred to CAF according to the provisions set 
in the FAA. GCF proceeds will be held in a Trust Fund. 
 
CAF will sign a subsidiary agreement with GIZ to channel GCF funds to GIZ for the purpose of Component 1 
implementation; 
 
In addition, CAF, AFD, and KFW will sign a Partnership Agreement in order to agree on the common terms of the 
E-Motion Program.  
 
Service contracts between CAF and consultants 
CAF and GIZ will hire consulting companies to implement the TA dedicated to the preparation of the sub-projects and 
to support the PMU activities. In order to implement the sub-projects’ preparation Facility of E-Motion, a call for tenders 
will be launched to hire a pool of consulting firms that shall be mobilised to meet the specific needs of each project. 
This will allow flexibility in the TA activities and speed in the mobilisation of consultants for the sub-projects.  
 
Finance  
For the Sub-Program 2, CAF will blend its finance with resources from GCF for the investment Component 2, 3 and 4. 
The financing amount will be defined based on the specific requirements of each project. CAF will finance sub-projects 
implemented by both public and private bodies and potentially channel the funds to the beneficiaries through country-
specific and financial intermediaries. According to the market study (see Annex 2), the following institutions have shown 
their interest and deem the finance approach feasible: 
 
Panama 
Component 2: Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas (MEF), METRO (owns MiBus), MiBus (operator), Banco Nacional 
de Panamá (BNP), Caja de Ahorro (CA). 
Component 3 and 4: Banco Central, Caja de Ahorro, Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas (MEF). 
 
Paraguay 
Component 2, 3 and 4: Ministerio de Hacienda (MH) and Banco Nacional de Fomento (BNF). 
 
Uruguay 
Component 2: Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas (MEF) and Banco República Uruguay (BROU). 
Component 3 and 4: Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas (MEF), Intendencia Montevideo (IM), Administración Nacional 
de Usinas y Trasmisiones Eléctricas (UTE, national energy utility) and Banco República Uruguay (BROU).

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
For the technical assistance component, a co-financing by the German Government (of up to EUR 1 MM) is intended 
to be included in Component 1 of E-Motion and subject to a separate bilateral contractual arrangement between GIZ 
and the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Protection and Nuclear Safety. The co-financing will enable GIZ 
to support the program management unit and link to other German Government funded sub-projects. 
 
CAF will enter into loan agreements or amend existing loan agreements with each of the Financial Intermediaries or 
individual projects participating in the program. It will be a requirement in the eligibility criteria and credit rules that 
refinancing is not allowed. These loan agreements will make available CAF financing and GCF co-financing for 
investments consistent with the Mandate of the program. CAF as per the loan agreement will have the ability to reject 
a sub-loan. No project may be financed with GCF’s resources if it does not meet the conditions required by the GCF 
according to the FAA. 
 
For the Program Management Unit, CAF and GIZ will mobilize USD 2 MM (86.78% of the total cost of the PMU) with 
an in-kind contribution of staff of each institution. The PMU costs will be financed by the GCF in proportion to its 
financing of the programme (13.22%, i.e., USD 302 M).   
 
Governance and Program management 
An E-Motion Steering Committee (SC) will be constituted for the whole E-Motion Program. It will meet at least on a 
quarterly basis and be responsible for making the strategic decisions required for the execution of the programme. Its 
members are representatives of the executing entities (CAF, AFD, GIZ, KFW and PROPARCO). The SC shall notably 
review and approve programme annual budget and work plans, discuss implementation issues and identify solutions, 
and ensure coordination and communication between implementing entities. 
 
The following additional committees will be constituted to ensure a proper implementation of the Program:  
 
 
A Technical Assistance coordination committee to ensure the consistence of the TA activities implemented at 
local, national and regional level; 
 
For each Sub-program (driven respectively by AFD and CAF): 
 An investment committee to pre-validate the level Concessional GCF loans proposed to be mobilized on the 
Financed sub-projects. Its members are CAF’s representatives. 
 A Project Preparation Committee to coordinate and validate the mobilization of the TA dedicated to sub-
projects’ preparation. Its members are CAF’s representatives.  
 
CAF investment approval process entails two Investment and Credit Committees (CCI). In each instance different 
aspects of the transaction are assessed. In the first Committee, main elements to consider are: 1. Impact, 2. 
Additionality, 3. Risk-return profile, 4. Adequacy of financial/commercial indicative terms, 5. Overall strategic. The 
second Committee takes place when the project’s due diligence has been completed, reports from advisors have been 
received and risks and associated mitigants have duly identified. CCI are composed as following: Executive Vice-
president, Vice-president Corporate Programming, Vice-president Private Sector, Vice-President Finance and Risk 
Management. By exception other teams may be invited to opine (without voting) such as Representative of the 
Executive President, legal teams, HR-knowledge. Projects need to be approved in both instances.    
 
Considering the large geographical scope targeted by E-Motion and the diversity of financial and technical assistance 
tools managed by the Program, it is essential to have a strong Program management Unit (PMU) for each Sub-Program 
to ensure the coordination between the partners and a proper implementation of the Program.  
 
The PMU staff for the Sub-Program 2 will be composed of professionals from CAF and GIZ that will be in charge of 
handling the respective components of the Sub-Program. In addition, the PMU will be composed of external 
consultants: an e-mobility expert, an Environmental, Social and Gender expert, a communication Expert and a Project 
Management support officer. CAF will be in charge of contracting the PMU consultant team.  
 
The PMU will be in charge of: 
 
The general coordination and management of the Program, which will include the animation of the governance 
bodies of the Sub-Program 2, the technical coordination and animation, and the administrative and financial follow-
up for structuring; 
 
The management of the Technical Assistance for the sub-projects’ preparation; 
 
The preparation of the reporting and monitoring reports due to the GCF and the supervision of the evaluation 
process;

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
The implementation and the follow up the E-Motion communication plan for Sub-Program 2 in accordance with 
GCF communication obligations, supporting the organization and implementing of events, seminars and 
conference related to the program and preparing all the communication support (web content, press release etc.); 
 
The implementation and maintenance of a knowledge and records management system; 
 
The implementation of activities as per Gender Action Plan. 
 
Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Accredited Entity) 
CAF is a multilateral development bank created in 1970, and owned by 19 countries, 17 of which are in Latin America, 
and the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal, as well as 13 private banks in the region. CAF promotes a sustainable 
development model through credit operations, non-reimbursable resources, and support in the technical and financial 
structuring of sub-projects in the public and private sectors of Latin America. 
 
With headquarters in Caracas, Venezuela, CAF has offices in Buenos Aires, La Paz, Brasilia, Bogota, Quito, Madrid, 
Mexico D.F, Panama City, Asuncion, Lima, Montevideo and Port of Spain. CAF’s mission is to provide sustainable 
development and regional integration through an efficient mobilization of resources for a timely provision of multiple 
financial services, with high value added, to clients in the public and private sectors of the shareholder countries. CAF 
is a competitive financial institution, client-oriented, sensitive to the social needs, and supported by a highly specialized 
staff. 
 
In 2019 CAF’s actions have focused on supporting countries’ efforts to improve their productive and social 
infrastructure, as well as institutions for better attention to citizens and more transparent and efficient public action. 
CAF financed the construction, improvement, or rehabilitation of 1,294 km of roads; contributed to increased 
productivity of 23,213 SMEs; financed energy infrastructure benefiting more than 7 million people; established 3,000 
new sewerage connections and 52 km of pipelines for drinking water for nearly 3 million beneficiaries; rehabilitated or 
built 128,164 m2 of educational infrastructure that will benefit 22,680 students; and contributed to a 40,000-ton 
reduction in carbon emissions. In the financial field, we also made great strides. CAF approved 133 operations with a 
combined total of USD 13.0 billion. It is also worth noting that the operating profit reached USD 460 MM in 2019, the 
highest in the past decade, and a 48% increase over 2018. CAF actions continue to make a significant difference in 
the lives of millions of Latin Americans, who can see CAF as a tireless champion of their well-being and the realization 
of their hopes for a better future.  
 
CAF’s credit ratings are among the highest of Latin American debt issuers. CAF’s long-term credit rating is AA-1 (Fitch 
Ratings), A+ Standard & Poor’s, AA Japan Credit Rating Agency, and Aa3 Moody’s Investor Service. CAF’s 
partnerships with public and private sector organizations have allowed it to play an active role in the promotion of sub-
projects and programmes that generate environmental benefits and to address climate change impacts. 
 
CAF’s Green Agenda fosters the incorporation of development solutions based on nature, credit facilities for low-carbon 
growth resilient to climate change, and processes supporting virtuous cycles of green financing. Over 28% of CAF's 
portfolio includes green finance. Such sub-projects have focused on energy efficiency, renewable energy solutions, 
sustainable transport and climate change adaptation through disaster risk reduction and ecosystem services. CAF is 
part of the International Development Finance Club (IDFC) through which its members have adopted green finance 
commitments. CAF has an aspirational target to reach 40% of its portfolio for green finance. In November 2019, CAF 
completed its first public Green Bonds issuance, EUR 750 million bonds due 2026. This transaction added to the USD 
132 MM private placements of green bonds completed during 2018. In 2020, as experience of working directly with 
private sector, CAF contributes in the development of a Solar PV plant in Chile, called Atacama Solar. 
 
CAF is a Regional Direct Access accredited entity to the GCF. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Rationale for Additionality of GCF Funding 
The Program introduces a concessional financing mechanism that addresses barriers to the uptake of innovative public 
transport business models with EVs and supports a transformative shift to low-emission transportation. Currently fossil 
vehicles dominate the market and the fleet renewal. In all involved countries no large fleets of commercial EVs operate. 
The paradigm shift towards electric mobility not only entails new vehicles but a new fuelling/charging infrastructure, 
changes in vehicle maintenance and operations and frequently also requires changes in the business model. Actors in 
the commercial vehicle sector fear such disruptive changes as it can affect their core business. Governments on the 
other hand are keen on promoting e-mobility as this can reduce emissions and dependence on (often imported) fossil 
fuels whilst also creating long-term sustainable jobs. They therefore often announce political targets or objectives to 
promote e-mobility coupled with stand-alone EV pilots. The missing link is however to kick-start EV massification with 
a first batch of at-scale implementation sub-projects. Such initiatives are dependent on concessional funding to make

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
them financially and from a risk perspective feasible. These sub-projects are the foundation for meaningful, practical, 
realistic and action-oriented roadmaps and for developing policies which are cost-effective and reduce barriers towards 
e-mobility. Stand-alone pilots or technical assistance has proven to be insufficient to kick-start mass deployment of 
EVs. GCF concessional financing is critical to ensure this comprehensive e-mobility approach – in absence of 
concessional GCF finance, such sub-projects will not materialize in the short or medium term.    
 
The major financial barriers for the potential beneficiaries which prevent alternative financing options are (i) the low 
financial profitability of EV investments reflected in a low FIRR and very long payback times; (ii) the high risk profile of 
EV investments due to performance risks, asset risks (e.g. unclear resale value of assets), and replacement 
investments (batteries); and (iii) high capital and investor’s capital demand resulting in high debt and risk exposure 
levels of the investing entity. Commercial funding is thus not willing to enter this market. Alternative funding vehicles 
with a higher risk appetite are potentially interested but are critical of the lack of profitability and/or the high-risk profile. 
A good example for this case is Chile where traditional banks were reluctant to finance commercial EVs and private 
electric utilities entered the market with a leasing scheme for buses thus creating a new business approach (see 
Benchmark Report from Sub-Program 1 in Annex 22). However, also these entities were only willing to kick-start the 
process when the government recognized and paid for the incremental investment cost of e-buses plus guaranteed 
payment of the leasing fees i.e., without concessional finance and risk mitigation instruments the deal would not have 
taken place.  
 
The main barriers for investors, cities or PTOs to purchase e-buses are the lack of profitability as a result of regulated 
tariffs to amortize capital intensive assets within existing concessional tenors and the higher upfront CAPEX resulting 
in higher financial costs. Hereby mainly three developments are decisive: 
 
(i) EV market prices decrease: EV prices are decreasing in all vehicle segments due to decreasing battery prices 
and increasing competition and supply of EVs. Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) parity with fossil vehicles is expected 
in the targeted vehicle categories between 2025 and 2030. Price tags of EVs will get close to fossil models by 2030. 
TCO alone will in many cases however not be a sufficient argument to move towards EVs if the upfront incremental 
investment is still significantly higher and the risks are still perceived to be higher. However, decreasing vehicle 
costs are a very important element to make EVs commercially viable without need for subsidies and further financial 
assistance in the mid-term.  
(ii) Reduced risks and costs for 2nd and 3rd generation sub-projects due to showcasing of successful 
implementation sub-projects and innovative business models. Risks which are reduced by large fleet 
applications are (a) vehicle reliability and vehicle performance risks; (b) improved information and therefore lower 
risk on assessing the re-sale value of used EVs important for introducing business models based on leasing; (c) 
less risk concerning maintenance & repair capabilities and availability of spare parts including secondary spare 
parts markets; (d) reduced risk on the workability of new business models in practice. The Program assists in this 
process by designing and implementing business models and by enabling with concessional finance the uptake of 
large fleets which are critical to reduce these risks.  
(iii) Policies which are more conducive for e-mobility and restrict fossil vehicle usage. This allows EVs to be 
more competitive. Lower costs, reduced risks, and improved framework conditions all create favorable conditions 
for investors to pour capital into this market as profit rates improve and risks get down. This will allow for widespread 
replication based on commercial terms in 5-10 years if the country has gained experience with initial fleet 
deployment.  
 
Traditional commercial financial institutions are also hesitant to enter the market due to the novelty of the technology. 
A pilot project will not dispel their concerns as these are associated basically to the lifespan of the technology including 
batteries, associated replacement costs, the quality and reliability of vehicle providers (basically Chinese bus 
manufacturers which are not all well known in the market), resale value of vehicles, and potential savings in terms of 
maintenance and repair costs. These financial institutions perceive these risks as complex and difficult to mitigate and 
are often reluctant to finance EVs. The establishment of new technologies and new business models also entails 
significant additional transaction costs. Concessional GCF finance can provide for technical assistance to design and 
structure e-mobility investments with a reduced performance risk whilst the financial instruments of the Program reduce 
risk exposure and increase profitability of the investment. 
 
Finally, also public resources for financing the envisaged activities are not sufficiently available in Panamá, Paraguay, 
and Uruguay due to the country’s debt position. In recent years, Panamá’s debt position has increased significantly 
and is currently at about 60% of GDP. In 2020 the government’s net lending/borrowing was at -9% of GDP. The most 
recent financial difficulties of Panamá are mainly driven by impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Panama experienced 
a drop in international trade, transportation, and finance, while necessary health and social spending increased largely. 
To cope with the crisis, Panama asked for a precautionary credit line of USD 2.7 billion from IMF, as an insurance

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
78 https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2021/01/19/na012021-precautionary-credit-line-provides-panama-with-crisis-
insurance 
79 https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/07/01/na0701220-paraguay-beats-the-pandemic-and-seeks-new-growth 
80 http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/510831593396031201/pdf/Uruguay-COVID-19-and-Economic-Recovery-
Emergency-Development-Policy-Financing.pdf 
policy against crisis risk.78 The country recently had to abandon its fiscal rule which is to limit net fiscal spending to a 
maximum of 3% of GDP. Paraguay currently has a government gross debt of 35.7% with a rising tendency. Recent net 
lending/borrowing has been -5%. Paraguay managed to succeed in containing the pandemic with comparably few 
cases and casualties. However, the economic impact has been harsh. Paraguay’s GDP shrank by 4% in 2020. In order 
to finance its increased fiscal deficit, a USD 274 MM loan was approved in 2020 under the IMF’s Rapid Financing 
Instrument (RFI), complemented by help from other international organizations.79 According to the IMF, Paraguay is 
urged to return to the country’s Fiscal Responsibility Law ceiling of 1.5% of GDP, once the economic recovery has 
strengthened. Lastly, Uruguay inherits a rising government gross debt of almost 70%. Also, in Uruguay, recent net 
lending/borrowing has been negative at -4%. According to the World Bank, the COVID-19 pandemic is pushing 
Uruguay’s economy into a recession.80 In 2020 Uruguay’s GDP shrank by 4%. Thus, in all three countries, fiscal 
restrictions, current liabilities and crisis management obligations impede large government investment programmes 
into electromobility. Investments in deploying EVs to mitigate CO2 emissions from the transport sector relies on 
international support and concessional finance.  
 
The multi-country approach is critical for a transformative and accelerated shift towards e-mobility which is again 
required to achieve the target of limiting the global temperature increase to below 2 degrees Celsius. Multi-country 
approaches are critical for learning and experience exchange between Latin American countries with activities such as 
the development of different knowledge materials including publications, webinars, benchmark and best-practice 
studies, preparation of capacity building guidelines, dialogue with EV suppliers and outreach events including trainings 
and workshops. The exchange of experience is included in component 1 and is realized within the program. Through 
participation of various countries with a similar context the learning effect can be much larger helping to achieve 
replication activities. Therefore, outreach and learning from experiences of other countries is critical. If the program is 
realized only in one country the replication will be basically on a national level. National programs are always important 
but experiences from other countries can be brought in much easier if the Program covers multiple countries. Thus, a 
multi-country programmatic approach is necessary given the scale of climate change challenges facing countries and 
the critical need to deliver transformative change at scale as quickly as positive as vehicle replacement rates are low 
thus resulting in long lock-in times of investments. The GCF involvement is critical to support low-carbon transport 
investments across multiple countries and vehicle sectors. With a multi-country programmatic approach resources can 
be used efficiently to highest priority investment sub-projects – this cannot be achieved with a piecemeal, project-by-
project approach. Individual sub-projects are in most cases too small to warrant a Funding Proposal to the GCF with 
all transaction costs involved. CAF would thus refrain from financing electric mobility in most cases and not integrate it 
into its transport investments. The Program will also capitalize on synergies and lessons learned across countries and 
vehicle sectors and can effectively ensure transfer of knowledge and capacity building between stakeholders.  
 
The E-Motion Program will benefit from technical assistance that will be made available to accompany each project 
and will ultimately serve to enhance the viability of the sub-projects. A total of USD 5.4 MM are required for national 
and local TA activities in the three countries of Sub-program 2. A TA package has been designed for each country 
individually based on the FA interventions, a demand analysis and an assessment of other actors in this area in the 
same country and other regional readiness programs to avoid duplication of effort. 
 
Concessionality of GCF Funding 
GCF concessional finance are used for TA and for FA. The Sub-Program 2 will provide project financing worth USD 
231 MM. The concessional finance from the GCF is USD 66.8 MM in concessional loans, USD 5.4 MM in grants for 
TA, and USD 4.2 MM in grants for project management unit and M&E. GCF assistance enables linking finance with 
technical and policy assistance. Investments alone are insufficient to achieve the transformation in climate action 
needed by the transport sector. Strategic sectoral planning and policy reform are critical aspects to enable the 
transformation towards electric mobility. The GCF, with the goal of supporting paradigm shifts in climate action, is 
critical for sufficient funding of the policy and technical assistance component of the Program. The Program and 
involved countries also depend on technical assistance that serves to enhance the viability of the sub-projects and 
leads to long-term transformational impacts. The program countries would not be able to source the required public 
funds by its own, due to current fiscal situation in the countries (e.g., economic situation coping with the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and high global inflation rate, which required extensive policy support deployed by the authorities. 
These included historical cuts to monetary policy rates to help support economic activity and a sharp expansion of

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
81 IMF, 2022, 05 July; https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2022/06/29/CF-Central-America-resilient-growth 
social support and health spending81). Thus, the GCF grants are essential for successful implementation of the required 
TA activities. The Program involves private transport operators, national FIs, and potentially SPVs of PPPs for vehicle 
ownership. For LCVs (public and private) predominantly private companies are involved and for buses private operators 
are involved in the majority of countries. National FIs will be co-financing the investments in many cases. The private 
involvement is stimulated by involving national FIs in sub-projects and by having PPPs as the major delivery agent for 
sub-projects. SPVs for private led delivery in a separation of ownership and operation of assets are private companies. 
In some countries however public sector led SPVs might be more appropriate depending on country circumstances.  
 
FA concessional finance is critical to make investments commercially viable and to compensate for risks from initiating 
climate investments in a new technology and business models. GCF’s ability to offer concessional terms in investments 
enables prospective clients to invest in e-mobility which would otherwise not be able to do with CAF finance alone. The 
initial concessional terms are key for the private market to scale up technology deployment as well as new business 
and financial models. Meanwhile, regulatory reforms, introducing new business models, and procurement guidelines 
for electric vehicle fleets and charging stations can stimulate private market long-term economic sustainability for 
operators, OEMs, distributors or maintenance service providers. Furthermore, the TA elements help local banks to 
understand better the EV technologies in order to perform appropriate risk assessments and innovate their products 
and services finally leading to lower costs of financing EVs and associated infrastructure. GCF concessional finance is 
critical for sustainable market uptake linking initial pilot sub-projects with commercial EV viability by inserting the missing 
part of initial large-scale fleets combined with business models, policy advice and technical designs which reduce risks 
related to EV investments and allow to close the gap between political aspirations and commercial EV uptake. 
 
The total Program’s Sub-Program 2 volume of USD 231 MM is based on the investment need, TA requirements, and 
other co-financers contribution expectations in the Program countries over the fiver year availability period. The 
Program value estimate is based on a combination of (i) an analysis of the market potential in commercial e-mobility in 
the respective countries including scoping and costing studies; (ii) discussions with core stakeholders in each country 
including governments, regulators, transport operators and financiers; (iii) an assessment of the forthcoming investment 
project pipeline based on discussions with possible investors; (iv) the level of scaling-up expected as a result of 
concessional GCF co-finance thereby reducing barriers to investment and increasing investment appetite. The analysis 
was discussed with all major stakeholders, with expert judgement applied to ensure robustness of the estimated 
volume. CAF therefore considers the Sub-Program 2 size of USD 231 MM, including USD 76.6 MM of CGF funding, 
to be realistic and achievable. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Exit Strategy 
Repayments under concessional loans provided with GCF funds under the Program will be channelled through the 
CAF-GCF Special Account in accordance with repayment schedules set forth in CAF’s loan agreement. It is envisaged 
that tenors will not exceed 15 years. All loans will be monitored by CAF. GCF resources will be reflowed back to the 
GCF in accordance with the terms of the FAA. 
 
Sub-projects involved in the proposed Program will not be dependent on a continuous flow of GCF funds. Rather, the 
Program aims to achieve substantial reduction in the need for concessional financing in future sub-projects. It is 
expected that, over the course of implementation of the Program, commercial e-mobility will gradually move towards 
commercial viability in countries which have kick-started the process. This process has clearly been validated in the 
market studies realized in all countries and the Program will only engage in vehicle segments and in countries or regions 
where this condition of mid-term (by end of Program) commercial viability is given and can be achieved with the 
interventions of the Program. The Program therefore acts clearly as accelerator and massively reduces GHG emissions 
which is fully in-line with the global climate targets and the urgency to achieve earliest possible a change in greening 
long-term assets. The use of GCF funds de-risks future investments and demonstrates the viability of e-mobility 
investments on a commercial scale. It closes the gap between initial stand-alone initial pilot ventures and mass market 
deployment.  
 
At the end of the Program (based on an implementation period of 5 years this would be 2030) there are operational 
large fleets of e-buses in all Program countries and in multiple countries also large LCVs fleets (public and private) 
including urban fast charging infrastructure. This forms the base for a large-scale commercial replication. The 
projections of dropping EV prices point to cost-based parity (of TCO) between 2025 and 2030 for the involved vehicle 
segments and strongly decreasing upfront price tags. The market analysis performed per country shows that a 
significant share of investors would then be willing to purchase electric buses and LCVs (public and private) at standard 
national financial conditions without subsidies. In addition to price/costs parity, it is important to highlight that as with

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
any new technology cost will lower and stabilize long term, especially because the entry costs of the technology are 
high due to the installation of new infrastructure which will not be as representative on posterior investments. It is 
important to mention here also, that the lifespan of electric vehicles- especially e-buses is estimated to be longer that 
those of ICE, leading to longer periods between investment cycles. Procuring ICEs will result on technology anchoring 
and longer cycles to have a technological upgrade.  
 
Hence, the withdrawal of Program resources after the implementation period is not expected to risk the further 
deployment of e-mobility in the Program countries. The built infrastructure (charging infrastructure and public transport 
infrastructure) will be operated and maintained by the fleet operators, utilities and municipalities. In the long-term this 
will be ensured by the commercial business models that will guarantee the utilisation of the assets even after the 
Program ends. In addition, the TA component will enhance the capacity and ownership of the municipalities and fleet 
operators involved, which is expected to continue also after the Program implementation.  
 
At the end of the program, the electromobility ecosystem will be strengthened and the ecosystem will be more 
consolidated to scaling up, as the target countries have a framework towards energy transition giving more relevance 
to renewable energy, climate change and reduced CO2 contributions from transport sector (Figure 1). E-motion is a 
transformational program to effectively mitigate GHG from transport sector at urban level that focuses on commercial 
and intensive vehicle segments. Moreover, E-motion will contribute to develop innovative business models to bring new 
and clean technologies to one of the most important transport modes in terms of social impact: electric buses for public 
transport. According to the sustainable urban mobility pyramid, after active modes such as walking and biking, cities 
need to prioritize and give best conditions to deploy high standard public transport systems and with that, uses cities 
efficiently, promote equity, increase modal shift among other social benefits. Beside this, new climate change requires 
the use of zero emissions technologies to accelerate benefits in terms of CO2 and improve air quality. Stakeholders 
consultations and detailed work performed in the three countries (see the 4 reports as an appendix in Feasibility Study 
presented , Annex 2) there are clear visions (from policy framework) to promote zero emissions technologies and 
prioritizing bus transport system: PA, starting with MiBus (public operator) and supported by its Electromobility strategy 
to deploy at least 50 BEB, also PA has the Sustainable Mobility Plan (PIMUS); PY promotes electromobility in transport 
sector and in public fleets/public sector; and UY has launched in 2021 and early 2022 its National Policy of Sustainable 
Mobility and two guides for local government that give tools to promote sustainable transport modes. These guides are 
very recent: (I) Sustainable Urban Mobility Planning Guide and (II) Urban Electromobility Guide. This framework will be 
strengthened by TA to contribute to sustainable transition.   
 
As final exit strategy key point, from local banks long term support in EVs, Emotion will contribute to them in giving 
better understanding in the technology from a technical, economic and practical point of view, with real sub-projects 
deployed in PA, PY and UY. The foregoing will put them in a new condition to continue promoting these new 
technologies, autonomously and in line with the energy transition policies of each country and also. This is an important 
point, as stakeholder consultation revealed that there is an asymmetry of information around electromobility and 
therefore local banks consider it to be a high-risk sub-projects when it comes to generating financial support 
instruments. E-motion will work together with local and public banks, managing financial risk by providing concessional 
sources of funds. From the interviews carried out, it is stated that from the role of the banks it is also important to 
contribute to combating climate change, they have guidelines that come from the managerial levels within the entities, 
and therefore, E-motion has good reception as it will help them to accelerate these processes that they must develop 
around the VEs.

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
76.6 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
66.8 
15 years 
3 years 
0.75% – 1.10% 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
9.8  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
154.4 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
CAF 
Senior 
Loans 
122 
million USD 
($)  
15 years 
3 years 
Enter% 
pari passu 
Others (Public 
and/or Private 
Sponsor) 
Equity 
30.4 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
CAF/GIZ 
In kind 
2 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
231 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
 
C.2. Financing by component

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
  
 
The indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country is provided in Annex 17.

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Capacity Building 
 
Capacity Building and development is delivered under Component 1. This includes specifically: 
 Project specific training during design and planning stage specifically the transfer of skills for optimal technology 
choice, design of charging infrastructure and preparation of tender documents, design of relevant business 
models, financing plans, risk sharing mechanisms.  
 
Training and capacity building per implemented project on knowledge in operation and technology related 
issues such as maintenance of EVs and charging infrastructure, ecological driving skills with EVs, optimal 
vehicle dispatch, planning and design as well as technology choice of EVs, safety and risk avoidance with 
EVs, battery management and disposal policies and regulations etc. As outlined in Output 1.1.2 the training 
measures will be for key public and private stakeholders are trained – Activities include training of civil 
servants, municipalities and public and private decision-makers on sustainable transport and e-mobility 
policies, standards and regulations. Furthermore, private and public stakeholder participate in E-Motion’s 
regional trainings activities, incl. design, operation & maintenance of e-fleets as well as on business models 
and financial instruments. Also, training will be provided to bus drivers, maintenance personnel, first response 
staff and insurance companies on how to cope with EV-related hazards. 
 Capacity building and policy advice specifically for the establishment of sub-sectoral roadmaps for electric mobility 
in the fields of public transportation and LCVs (public and private).  
 Capacity building with knowledge products and their dissemination based on the best global practices and the 
experiences in the different sub-projects. This is realized through different products and channels to reach a wider 
audience in Latin America. 
 Capacity building on gender mainstreaming.  
 
Technology Transfer 
 
Technology Transfer be facilitated through identification and design of appropriate e-mobility technologies and sub-
projects and their subsequent funding.

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s 
Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
GHG emission calculations have been made per vehicle category (buses and light commercial vehicles) and per 
country. Whilst baseline emissions per vehicle category are comparable for different countries (variations are due to 
vehicle mileage, fuel type used and to a lesser extent due to different specific fuel consumption values), the grid 
emission factor per country influences the emissions of the EVs and therefore the emission reductions.  
 
The GHG impact is determined based on a well-to-wheel (WTW) approach. This includes for EVs the carbon emissions 
from the grid including production, as well as transmission and distribution losses. With the average grid emission 
factors of the countries included in the Program electric vehicles targeted by the report reduce GHG emissions by 70-
90%. The table below shows the carbon intensity of electricity generated of Sub-Program 2 countries. With these grid 
factors EVs can reduce GHG emissions on a well-to-wheel (cradle-to-grave) base by 80-100% (50-90%) compared to 
fossil units82. 
Table 16: Grid Emission Factor of Sub-Program 2 Countries  
Country 
Grid Emission Factor 
Electricity83  
Panama 
0.230 tCO2/MWhel 
Paraguay 
0.000 tCO2/MWhel 
Uruguay 
0.065 tCO2/MWhel 
World average 
0.475 tCO2/MWh (2019) 
Source: Grid emission factor based on CO2 emissions from electricity generation in relation to net generated electricity based on country 
diagnostics in Annex 2; world average based on IEA84 
 
The methodology report on GHG reductions of the Program also includes a lifecycle or cradle-to-grave approach to 
determine emission reductions to assess the magnitude of leakage (see Annex 23). Inclusion of upstream emissions 
(vehicle manufacturing including batteries) only changes the picture marginally. The following graphs show average 
life-cycle emission reductions of the most important commercial EVs (buses and LCVs) included in the Program. 
 
Figure 17: GHG Impact of Electric Urban Buses (example Uruguay) 
 
Source: Annex 2, Quantitative Analysis; TTW = Tank to wheel, WTT = well to tank; Main assumptions: energy consumption based on values for 
Uruguay; annual mileage 64,500 km; Urban standard bus (diesel) 40 l/100km and BEB 1.3 kWh/km; 16-year lifespan diesel and BEB; 8-year lifespan 
of battery; battery set of average 300 kWh; 145kg CO2/kWh battery (assumed average, IFEU, 2019); grid emission factor for Uruguay 0.065 
tCO2/MWh 
 
 
82 See Annex 2 
83 Source: Harmonized IFI Default Grid Factors 2021 (v3.1, January 2022, "Combined Margin Grid Emission  
Factor, gCO2/kWh”, Electricity Consumption)   
84 Emissions – Global Energy & CO2 Status Report 2019 – Analysis - IEA

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
BEBs on average in the Sub-Program 2 countries Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama reduce WTW GHG emissions by 
approx. 95% and cradle to grave emissions by approx. 85%. 
 
Figure 18: GHG Impact of Electric LCV (example of Paraguay) 
 
Source: Annex 2, Quantitative Analysis; Main assumptions: energy consumption based on values for Paraguay; annual mileage 17,000 km; 
gasoline LCV 12 l/100km and e-LCV 0.175 kWh/km; 10-year lifespan gasoline and e-LCV; 10-year lifespan of battery; battery set of average 35 
kWh; 145kg CO2/kWh battery (IFEU, 2019); grid emission factor for Paraguay 0.0 tCO2/MWh 
 
E-LCVs on average in the three Program countries reduce WTW GHG emissions by 95% and cradle to grave emissions 
by 77%. 
 
Direct mitigation potential from EV investments 
 
The total projected GHG direct impact of the Sub-Program 2 in Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama due to EVs investments 
is estimated to 0.78 MtCO2e over the lifetime of the EVs financed by the program based on the initial pipeline of sub-
projects. Actual emission reductions will depend on which sub-projects are actually implemented and will be monitored 
by the Sub-Program 2. 
 
Table 17: Direct emission reduction potential from Program financing of EVs 
Country 
Parameter 
Unit 
e-buses 
e-LCVs 
Total 
public 
public 
private 
Panama 
No. of EVs 
no. 
150 
400 
50 
600 
ER lifespan per EV 
tCO2/EV 
1,250 
39.4 
39.4 
ER (WTW) 
tCO2 
 187,500  
 15,760  
 1,970  
 205,000  
Paraguay 
No. of EVs 
no. 
300 
300 
100 
700 
ER lifespan per EV 
tCO2/EV 
984 
63 
63 
ER (WTW) 
tCO2 
 295,200  
 18,900  
 6,300  
 320,000  
Uruguay 
No. of EVs 
no. 
200 
200 
100 
500 
ER lifespan per EV 
tCO2/EV 
1,176 
57 
57 
ER (WTW) 
tCO2 
 235,200  
 11,400  
 5,700  
 252,300  
Total 
No. of EVs 
no. 
650 
900 
250 
1,800 
Emission 
reduction (WTW) 
tCO2 
718,000 
46,000 
14,000 
778,000 
 
Major environmental co-benefits are reduced emissions of pollutants and reduced noise emissions. The major concern 
for air pollution in the cities is PM2.5 and NOx emissions. The projected reduction of pollutants of the Program in 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is 80 tPM2.5 and 4,080 tNOx. 
 
Direct mitigation potential from mode shift to public transport 
Mode shift is triggered through program investments and technical assistance from modes with high levels of carbon 
emissions per passenger-km to low carbon transport modes. The projected GHG impact of the Sub-Program 2 in 
Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama due to modal shift is estimated to 2.5 MtCO2e over the lifetime of the EVs financed by 
the program based on the initial pipeline of sub-projects.

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
  
PY 
UY 
  
Projected additional ridership due to multiple 
measures 
20% 
  
Additional patronage from cars 
100% 
  
Assumed lifespan 
25 
years 
Average occupancy rate PT 
 
13 
16 
passengers 
Average occupancy rate cars 
 
1.4 
1.4 
passengers 
EF per km diesel buses WTW 
 
1,062 
1,359 
gCO2/km 
EF per km electric buses WTW 
 
115 
220 
gCO2/km 
EF per km cars WTW 
 
330 
230 
gCO2/km 
EF per pkm public transport  
 
36 
46 
gCO2/pkm 
EF per pkm cars 
 
236 
164 
gCO2/pkm 
Energy usage diesel bus per pkm 
 
0.85 
0.92 
MJ/pkm 
Energy usage electric bus per pkm 
 
0.35 
0.30 
MJ/pkm 
Energy usage car per pkm 
 
2.6 
1.9 
MJ/pkm 
Average trip distance 
 
8 
6 
km 
Share of electric vehicles on PT (Share of electric 
buses on bus / PT fleet in the respective city (with 
the implementation of the projects)  
 
10% 
10% 
PT impact 
PY 
UY 
PT current patronage per annum 
 
    198,000,000  
          243,821,376  
passengers 
GHG impact per annum of PT measures 
 
             63,325  
                   36,304  
tCO2 
GHG impact cumulative PT measures 
 
        1,583,116  
                 907,597  
tCO2 
Energy savings per annum 
 
                  547  
                        287  
TJ 
Energy savings cumulative 
 
             13,671  
                     7,184  
TJ 
 
Total programme 
 
GHG impact per annum of PT measures 
 99,600  tCO2 
GHG impact cumulative PT measures 
 2,490,700  tCO2 
Source: Calculation based on Khan, 2021 and booz&co, 2009, Hinicio, baseline model, 2021, Feasibility Study Task 
3, See Annex 24 and Excel Sheet tgw_ER_FP_v1.4_2022-06-07 with all sources. 
 
The total GHG impact of the programme amount to 3.3 MtCO2 over the lifetime of the EVs and infrastructure 
financed. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The paradigm shift of the proposed Program is achieved by having as long-term impact through its outcomes on 
creating a EV conducive ecosystem, which results in investors purchasing EVs on a commercial base (scale). Barriers 
towards mass EV deployment have been successfully eliminated or significantly reduced through the Program 
interventions including FA and TA. Accelerated EV investments take place due to experiences made, business models 
established, reduced entry barriers, lower risks and costs and new market players. The transformative shift is possible 
through the uptake of commercial EVs and the improved ecosystem for EVs resultant of the concrete interventions as 
well as of policy assistance and capacity building. The transportation sector is transformed to a sustainable low-
emission system with a dominance of public transportation and NMT. Multiple countries in the region are establishing 
Green Recovery Plans due to the COVID-19 crisis as a vehicle to transform the society by investing in profitable 
infrastructure which creates economic, environmental and social benefits, short-term jobs and a long-term greening of 
the economy. Electrified and sustainable public transportation systems are thereby a core feature. 
 
The potential for scaling up and replication is ensured at the national and the international level through capacity 
created in the E-mobility ecosystem, proven cases of successful business models, improved profitability and reduced 
risks of EV investments and knowledge products. The experience of various countries shows that, once fleets of EVs 
are operational and not only pilot sub-projects, the technology is taken up quickly, if the business environment is 
conducive. The sub-projects financed under this Program function as trigger sub-projects demonstrating the 
commercial viability of EVs85. Performance risks are reduced greatly, and business models have been introduced, 
which make the uptake of EVs on a purely commercial base viable. This is linked with decreasing investment costs of 
 
85 A second phase of the Program is not planned as we consider that after the successful implementation of the projects, EVs 
will be financially viable, and the electrification of buses and LCV will not need of further concessionality.

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
EVs reaching cost-parity to fossil units in the medium term. Scaling up and replication is also enabled through TA at 
policy level including the development of sectoral roadmaps, design and establishment of appropriate policy incentives 
and knowledge management instruments as well as capacity development. 
 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning: The TA Component at regional, national and local level includes 
capacity development, training and monitoring. Technical assistance is used to ensure delivery of adequate training 
from equipment suppliers or third parties for EV and charger operations and maintenance, safety trainings and capacity 
building in optimal management of EV fleets. Training materials, reports and knowledge products elaborated under 
this header in the different countries will be shared through multiple channels under the knowledge management 
activity. This will be realized at a national level thus removing one of the barriers to more widespread deployment of 
EVs in each country and also on an international level by sharing documents and experiences between countries and 
also with countries outside the Program. The Program will also develop professional knowledge products and share 
experiences and cases through channels such as webinar, electronic reports, case-studies, and workshops to 
disseminate experiences and build a base for replication. The Program will use existing channels within CAF, GIZ and 
AFD as well as those of other platforms for information dissemination. The program will ensure the transfer of the 
lessons learned during the execution of the E-motion, as well as taking as a basis all those lessons learned that have 
already taken place to a greater or lesser degree, within each country regarding electromobility86. 
 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling framework: The TA Component includes the support of enabling 
policies for EV deployment. Technical support will be provided to the relevant national and local authorities in order to 
set-up, improve and/or enforce enabling public policies and legal, regulatory, fiscal and/or normative frameworks for 
e-mobility. One of the main instruments used thereby are sector roadmaps for electrification of public transport and 
roadmaps for electrification of LCVs, if not existing yet. Whilst various countries have general EV roadmaps or targets 
these remain at a macro-level. Sectoral roadmaps combined with investment sub-projects perform a base for more 
specific targets, intervention instruments and actions allowing to take steps towards actual implementation. Sectorial 
and specific roadmaps are a tool to steer climate investments and initiatives beyond the Program’s scope and will help 
to inform and/or further detail the countries long term mobility strategies and their NDCs. 
 
Another focus of Component 1 aims on the establishment of an e-mobility conducive local ecosystem focusing on the 
financial landscape. With sub-activities related to the local environment such as business model design and 
development of financial institutions capacity building. Material presented to the financial sector, incl. the national bank, 
car distributors and leasing companies contains for instance an analysis of national experiences, client needs and 
global good practices on local financial institution financing of electric vehicles, recommendations for enhancing 
existing financial products and risk mitigation products, such as special transport loans for e-vehicles, presented to 
local financial institutions, car distributors, leasing companies and rental companies for application. Those activities 
will prepare the local private sector, including the local financial institutions, for the mid-term establishment and 
operation of a functional e-mobility market. 
 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies: The TA Component includes activities such as roadmaps 
(see above) which outline an agreed-upon set of pragmatic and realistic measures to achieve EV sectoral targets. 
Regulatory activities realized by the Program will also include aspects such as technical standards (e.g., emission, 
efficiencies), battery management and disposal regulations, charging infrastructure standards, pricing policies for EV 
charging, public transport regulatory aspects including aspects such as concession contracts (concession length, 
vehicle turnover guarantees), separation of vehicle ownership and vehicle operations, tariff structure etc. Technical 
assistance in this area is linked up with investment sub-projects making it more credible and pragmatic.  
 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans: The programme will lead to significant GHG reductions in the transportation 
sector. Without this contribution the target countries will not be able to achieve their decarbonization plans. Fostering 
e-mobility and kick-starting EV deployment is thus consistent with relevant national climate -resilient development 
pathways. Regarding adaptation strategies and plans the programme does not specifically aim on contributions but 
guarantees compliance with the national plans. For instance, the charging infrastructure will be deployed in a climate 
resilient way, taking into account future climate hazards such as heavy rains, floods, and storms, to ensure a stable 
and long-term operation.  
 
86 From sub program 2, in Uruguay only there are electric fleets in commercial operation. Paraguay and Panama have very 
small or singular units (pilot projects). In Uruguay initial deployment of 30 e-buses is less than 18 months old and UTE has 
about 90 eLCV. From UY lesson have been learnt regarding charging infrastructure (capacity building, site selection, 
interoperability in electric bus depot, public infrastructure) and driving patterns and the impact on efficiency. In Paraguay 
electricity supply needs to be with better quality for high voltage demand. In PA they aware that electricity prices are high for 
emobility projects.

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Sustainable Development Goal alignment 
The Program has as main target to reduce GHG emissions. It contributes significantly to sustainable development 
goals (SDG) 3 (“good health and well-being”), SDG goal 7 (“affordable and clean energy”), SDG goal 9 (“industry, 
innovation and infrastructure”), SDG goal 11 (“sustainable cities and communities”), and SDG 13 (“climate action”). 
 
Environmental co-benefits 
Major environmental co-benefits are reduced emissions of pollutants and reduced noise emissions. The major concern 
for air pollution in the cities is PM2.5 and NOx emissions. The impact of the Program on these pollutants has been 
quantified based on combustion emissions of new fossil baseline vehicles (compliant with vehicle emission standards 
of the country) using the EU COPERT model data i.e., this is a conservative approach as emission reductions are not 
based on comparing the old replaced with the new EV but on comparing a new (BAU) fossil with a new EV. For the 
methodology used, the database as well as calculations see Annex 23. The projected direct reduction of pollutants of 
the Program in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is 80 tPM2.5 and 4,080 tNOx. The following figure shows the projected 
long-term reduction potential of pollutants under the high potential scenario (100% market share of EV in the targeted 
commercial vehicle segment for Panama to which the Program ambition will contribute). 
 
Figure 19: Emission reduction of pollutants – High Potential Scenario in Panama 
 
Source: Annex 2 
 
Social co-benefits including health impacts 
The major social benefit is improved air quality and reduced noise in urban areas. Air pollution is a major problem in 
most cities in the LAC region. Approximately 100 million people are exposed to poor air quality, exceeding WHO 
guidelines and affecting seriously human health. Latest data from the WHO indicate that in 2016 almost 700 people in 
Panama, over 1300 people in Paraguay and almost 1000 people in Uruguay died as a result of excessive exposure to 
fine particulate matter87. The poor are disproportionately affected by air pollution as they tend to live and work closer 
to its sources88. Children and the elderly are particularly vulnerable. Recent studies show that women are more affected 
by poor air quality than men89. The transportation sector is thereby a major source of urban air pollution. Commercial 
fossil vehicles are a major source of air pollution in cities. Although they do not represent a majority of vehicles they 
are extensively used (large mileage), have high emission factors and are basically diesel powered. The diagnostic 
reports realized in all Program countries shows that the targeted commercial vehicles contribute in general more to air 
pollution than private passenger cars or motorcycles (see Annex 2). Replacing such vehicles with EVs thus has a 
significant impact on air quality and health of people.  
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has created an unprecedented challenge for many Latin American countries, from the health 
and economic perspectives, but it is also opening new opportunities for an accelerated sustainable transformation of 
its energy, transport, and urban landscapes while contributing to economic recovery. A recent report prepared by the 
 
87 See: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/indicators/indicator-details/GHO/ambient-air-pollution-attributable-deaths 
88 (Mitchell, 2013) Mitchell, G. and Dorling, D., 2013: An environmental justice analysis of British air quality. In Environment 
and Planning A 2003, vol. 35, 909-929 
89 Clougherty, J., 2010: A Growing Role for Gender Analysis. In Air Pollution Epidemiology, Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 2010 Feb., 118(2), 167-176

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
ILO shows that fostering of electric mobility can have a significant positive job impact primarily due to the induced 
impact of savings of consumers on petrol and maintenance resulting in increased spending on goods with a high-
income elasticity which tend to be labour intensive service-goods90. A report of McKinsey also reveals that with the 
COVID pandemic the interest in EVs has risen amongst customers due to the fact seemingly that the pandemic has 
raised the awareness among people of the negative impact of fossil transport modes being suddenly being able to 
experience clean air during lockdowns91. 
 
Economic co-benefits 
The monetary value of reduced air emissions (GHG and air pollutants) has been calculated (see Annex 23 for the 
methodology, dataset and results). The economic cost of pollution is calculated by assigning a monetary value to 
emissions of PM2.5 and NOx for each country based on local levels of pollution at the ground level and the impact on 
health and costs caused by this type of pollution per country. This is based on the exposure of the population to 
contamination and how increased pollution increases mortality risks using the World Health Organization's dose 
response functions to concentration. The greater risk of mortality or, more precisely, the cost of premature death is 
valued economically on the basis of stated preference studies as performed by the OECD. The global warming 
externality cost is expressed through the social cost of carbon (SCC). Latter is an estimate of the economic damages 
associated with an increase in CO2 emissions. A review of empirical estimates of the global social cost of carbon 
reported by the IPCC reports a unit value of USD 36 per ton of CO2e in 2016 prices for 2016 emissions, to be increased 
by 2% annually in real terms to allow for the potential of increasing marginal damage of global warming over time 
(ADB, 2017). This results in around 40 USD per ton CO2e for 2020. 
 
EVs are more energy efficient than fossil vehicles. The direct energy savings resulting from the Program are estimated 
at more than 10,500 TJ over the lifetime of vehicles (using the same methodological approach as for GHG emissions). 
The economic benefits directly from the investment sub-projects due to reduced emissions are estimated at nearly 
USD 40.0 million (USD 31.1 million related to CO2, USD 8.9 million related to NOx and PM2.5). 
  
Gender-sensitive development impact 
Gender issues and development impact will be described in the gender-disaggregated targets in sub-projects’ targets. 
Each Program will be required to meet CAF’s policy on gender equality. Individual sub-projects will also be guided by 
the Gender Action Plan (GAP) as included in Annex 8. The GAP includes actions and targets (i) on improved access 
for women to public transportation; (ii) improved sex-disaggregated data collection on urban transport; (iii) Improved 
women’s access to jobs; (iv) interventions including awareness raising and infrastructure to reduce sexual harassment 
in public transport; and (v) trainings and workshops to disseminate best practices for reducing sexual harassment in 
public transport. 
 
On a cross-sectoral level the GAP has as target to integrate gender considerations in transport sector activities. This 
includes (i) the usage of a gender lens when designing the roadmap for different EV segments and EV support policies; 
(ii) Increased awareness about gender equality gaps and opportunities in transport through capacity buildings and 
training; and (iii) Increased knowledge in how to include gender equality in Urban Transport sub-projects through 
specific training materials. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The market study (Annex 2) identified the following barriers hindering a take-up of EVs in the countries involved: 
 
 
High investment costs: The initial key barrier limiting an upscale of e-vehicles represent the high initial costs. 
Currently the purchase price for a 100% electric vehicle in the local market is approximately one third higher than 
for a comparable conventional vehicle (CRECE, 2019). 
 
Limited supply of e-vehicles: Besides high initial costs for the purchase of e-vehicles, limited supply in the 
national market represents an important barrier.  
 
Lack of effective incentive mechanisms: Existing incentives are limited to the imports of e-vehicles. Thus, this 
benefit does not result in an increase in demand by buyers because, the importer does not necessarily transfer 
the discount to the final price and because the attractiveness of the incentive is blurred by not being explicit.  
 
Limited pollution control: There is limited pollution control of vehicles that circulate, including old, second-hand 
combustion engine operated ones.  
 
Lack of credit facilities: Contrary to conventional vehicles, there are no credit facilities from banks available that 
allow the user to acquire loans to purchase alternative vehicles. 
 
90 ILO, 2020: Jobs in green and healthy transport: Making the green shift 
91 Mobility investments in the next normal | McKinsey

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
Insufficient charging infrastructure: With respect to charging infrastructure, there exist several identified 
drawbacks, e.g.:  
 
the unavailability of easy-to-install chargers in homes and in workplaces or companies, a negative perception 
of the quality of electric power service by residential and commercial consumers  
 
for public charging stations, there is no incentives to stimulate 3rd party investment. In addition, technical 
assistant is requested for technical planning and defining business models92.   
 
national charging networks (intercity): Initial sub-projects are at pilot stage and limited in scope93. 
 
Lack of qualified labour and technical expertise: Due to the scarce market for electric vehicles and the 
insufficient charging infrastructure installed at the national level, there is a lack of qualified labour and technical 
expertise regarding electromobility. 
 
Inappropriate public transport subsidies: Public transport subsidies specifically aim at covering the costs of 
fossil fuels for public passenger buses. 
 
Inappropriate public bus system design: The bus system needs to be strengthened and modernized. Hereby 
it is necessary to include complementary measures so that e-buses operate efficiently such as restricting private 
vehicles and motorcycles in specific areas or improving the streets, that are often in very bad condition. 
 
Lack of public awareness: Citizens often do not have an approach to new technology and its benefits, thus 
advantages of electromobility need to be better communicated. 
 
CAF has also realized market costing studies on the different vehicle segments for different price ranges and countries 
(see Annex 2). The commercial attractiveness of EVs versus fossil vehicles has been assessed based on parameters 
such as the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO), capital and equity requirements, cash flow and risks. This again serves 
as base to structure the financial instruments required to resolve the barriers to commercial viability of EVs in the 
selected vehicle segments.  
 
Contrary to renewable energy generation that is increasingly cost competitive, EVs are not yet commercially viable 
and remain largely underfunded. The market and benchmark studies show that, if unaddressed, commercial EV 
deployment on a mass scale will take place in a delayed manner. This will delay the transformation towards low carbon 
transport systems in the Program countries.  
 
The EV sectors targeted have (i) limited access to commercial funding; (ii) early-mover costs and disadvantages 
including high performance risks; and (iii) lack of sufficient commercial viability including profitability and acceptable 
risk levels. Therefore, financiers are not in a position to fund such activities with commercial loans at the current stage. 
However, from market study E-motion had great receptivity as the program will enhance national EV ecosystem, policy 
framework, incentives and regulations with the TA component. These TA component makes very attractive to national 
banks94 to participate as a financial executing entity as they also want to contribute with national climate goals. The 
Program and involved countries also depend on technical assistance that serves to enhance the viability of the sub-
projects and leads to long-term transformational impacts. The program countries would not be able to source the 
required public funds by its own, due to current fiscal situation in the countries (e.g., economic situation coping with 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and high global inflation rate, which required extensive policy support deployed 
by the authorities. These included historical cuts to monetary policy rates to help support economic activity and a sharp 
expansion of social support and health spending95). Thus, the GCF grants are essential for successful implementation 
of the required TA activities. 
 
Governments and transport operators also lack capacity and know-how on the appropriate technology choices and the 
most appropriate and conducive policies and business models to foster in a cost-effective manner EV deployment. 
This is clearly evident from public statements in favour of electric mobility which is however not followed up with 
concrete actions and implementations. Moreover, public resources for financing the envisaged activities are not 
sufficiently available in Panamá, Paraguay, and Uruguay due to the countries debt position. In recent years, Panamá’s 
 
92 In Panamá just private distribution companies can sell electricity and they do not have any incentive to “get into this 
business”. During the market interviews some utilities indicated their interest in EV fleet projects (e.g., for buses or private 
companies, hence larger projects) but not in public chargers. In Paraguay and Uruguay, distribution is a “national monopoly” 
and UTE (UY) declared they need TA for planning a DC fast charging network. In PY, ANDE is about to deliver its proposal 
to authorities to allow 3rd party to install chargers and get paid through a service model (e.g., by time, no “selling energy”), in 
order to stimulate public charging deployment (e.g., for residential, public/industrial, medium voltage (buses)).  
93 In Paraguay a 2nd green route to Yacyretá (4 station with 50 kW chargers) is proposed, but funding is not yet allocated. The 
first green route goes to Itaipu, which is about to be launched in 2021. In Panamá exist no planning in the short term. In 
Uruguay initial activities on interconnection have been started. 
94 Public financial institutions: in PA would be Caja de Ahorro and Banco Nacional; in PY would be Banco Nacional de Fomento 
(BNF); in UY would be Banco de la República de Uruguay (BROU). All of them were interviewed 
95 IMF, 2022, 05 July; https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2022/06/29/CF-Central-America-resilient-growth

=== PAGE 76 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
debt position has increased significantly and is currently at about 60% of GDP. In 2020 the government’s net 
lending/borrowing was at -9% of GDP. The most recent financial difficulties of Panamá are mainly driven by impacts 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. The country recently had to abandon its fiscal rule which is to limit net fiscal spending to 
a maximum of 3% of GDP. Paraguay currently has a government gross debt of 35.7% with a rising tendency. Recent 
net lending/borrowing has been -5%. Paraguay’s economic losses from COVID-19 have been harsh. It’s GDP shrank 
by 4% in 2020. Lastly, Uruguay inherits a rising government gross debt of almost 70%. Also, in Uruguay, recent net 
lending/borrowing has been negative at -4%. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Uruguay’s GDP shrank by 4% in 2020.  
Thus, in all three countries, fiscal restrictions, current liabilities and crisis management obligations impede large 
government investment programmes into electromobility. Thus, investments (Financial and Technical Assistance) in 
deploying EVs to mitigate CO2 emissions from the transport sector relies on international support and concessional 
finance.  
 
In addition, the Program addresses bad air quality levels in cities of the program countries as a co-benefit. Latest data 
from the WHO indicate that in 2016 almost 700 people in Panama, over 1,300 people in Paraguay and almost 1000 
people in Uruguay died as a result of excessive exposure to fine particulate matter. Air pollution has significantly 
increased in cities within Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) due to the rapid increase in urban population, higher 
traffic and vehicle use, and industrialized zones. This development and condition can get even worse with social 
pressure and climate change impacts on local ecosystems. Such vulnerabilities can be addressed by the Program by 
shifting towards low-emissions mobility. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Section B1 already includes a short overview of countries including the grid emission factor, population and vehicle 
data, energy prices and major EV policies. This section therefore focuses on the climate policies of the involved 
countries (see also Figure 1 presented in B.1). All NDAs of the countries included in the Program are committed to the 
development of GHG mitigation policies, decarbonization of the transport sector and the development of electric 
mobility and all of them, or direct professional on behalf, were interviewed at least 2 times by country in the E-motion 
feasibility study framework. 
 
In the framework of the elaboration of the E-Motion Concept Note until today, CAF and its partners (AFD, PROPARCO, 
KfW, GIZ) have hold meetings with the NDAs of the countries concerned by the Program and key actors of the e-
mobility sector to ensure that the FP answers to the countries’ needs (See Annex 7). These actors include development 
banks, private banks, municipalities and regional states, power utilities, transport operators etc.   
 
Panamá 
According to Panamá’s NDC, the country’s strategy is focused on mitigating particularly the energy and land use 
change sectors, through the implementation of measures to increase the use of renewable energies such as solar and 
wind, as well as reforestation and forest recovery. Taking into account the Energy Transition Agenda 2020-2030, 
strategies like rational and efficient use of energy, electric mobility and distributed generation strategy are proposed. 
 
Regarding public transportation sector policies for climate change mitigation, efforts for Panama today are aimed at 
electrifying public transportation through the expansion of the Panama Metro network, the introduction of vehicles that 
use alternative energy sources that help reduce GHG emissions is also proposed, as well as guaranteeing the 
integration of the public transport system to encourage their use and promote non-motorized modes as walking and 
cycling. Among the most relevant national policies are the following: 
 
 
Panamá’s NDC has set a target of reducing at least 11.5% of total emissions from the energy sector in 2030, and 
24% in 2050 with transportation accounting for about 50% of the sector’s emissions.  
 
National Strategy for Electric Mobility: 10-20% of the total fleet of private vehicles will be electric; 25-40% of private 
vehicle sales will be electric vehicle sales; 15-35% of the buses in the authorized concession fleets will be electric; 
25-50% of the public fleets will be made up of electric vehicles by 2030. 
 
National Energy Plan 2015-2050 that promotes higher share of non-conventional renewable energy (39%) towards 
2050 versus 4% penetration in a baseline scenario. 
 
Energy Transition Agenda 2020-2030 proposes, among others, to decarbonize transport sector through 
electromobility. 
 
National Electromobility Strategy sets different goals, e.g., buses will be electric between 15% to 35% of their total 
stock; public fleets will be electric between 25% to 50% of their total stock.  
 
“Plan integral de movilidad urbana sustentable para el área metropolitana de Panamá” (PIMUS). Promotes, 
among others, clean and more efficient sources of energy for urban transport system. 
 
Anteproyecto de Ley 194 (Draft Law 194), Incentives to electric mobility in on road transportation for PANAMA.

=== PAGE 77 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
Preferential tax rate for hybrid and electric vehicles. Preferential rate of the selective consumption tax for electric 
or hybrid motor vehicles, for the land transport of people, applied as follows: 0% until December 31, 2017 and 5 % 
as of January 1 of 2018 for electric vehicles, 10% applies for other types of vehicles (combustion). For E-motion 
would apply to passenger public fleet until 10 passengers / commercial fleet (not parcels or freight). 
 
With support from CAF, Panamá submitted a readiness proposal to GCF in 2017, including establishing its GCF 
country programming96. Also, Panama is part of 4 multiple country sub-projects with GCF in the field of mitigation (3) 
and adaptation (1). The country’s National Designated Authority is the Ministry of Environment. 
National and public banks see electromobility adoption requires incentives. As part of market study, banks have been 
interviewed in Panama and they are very interested in participating, at least, in the ebus component. Caja de Ahorro 
participated in the latest renewal MiBus process (diesel units, 2009) and now are following this new process with BEB.  
Banco General also was interested in developing special EV financial products within E-motion framework. 
 
Paraguay 
As expressed in section B1. Paraguay`s NDC, based on the National Development Plan 2030, targets to achieve GHG 
emission reductions and aims at reducing fossil fuel consumption by 20% by 2030. The NDC is currently being updated, 
expected to be published soon. According to information received from the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable 
Development (MADES), the mitigation goals would remain identical to the NDC's as defined above. 
 
The legal framework in Paraguay is based on the National Climate Change Law, which establishes the National Climate 
Change Policy (PNCC) as the main instrument to define and achieve national climate change objectives. Also, 
Paraguay established a National Climate Change Commission (CNCC), the National Directorate of Climate Change 
(DNCC), and the Climate Change Fund for executing climate actions. Main strategic directives for combating climate 
change in Paraguay are the National Development Plan 2030 (updated in 2020), which encourages the use of 
electricity in the transport sector and reduces the consumption of fossil fuels, and the National Mitigation Plan, that 
includes encouraging the transformation of public transport powered by fossil fuel to an electrical system and/or 
biofuels. Other relevant policies in Paraguay are the following: 
 
 
Paraguay’s NDC targets 10-20% emission reductions compared to the baseline scenario, including to reduce 20% 
of fossil fuel consumption by 2030. NDCs were updated in March 2021, transport sector would increase 
electromobility in on-road vehicles as a key mitigation action97. 
 
The National Energy Policy “Paraguay 2040”, which includes, among other action plans, the Electric Mobility 
Program in the public sector that aims to encourage the conversion of the public sector vehicle fleet. Paraguay 
has great potential in public fleets as this country has set targets (National Energy Policy) to ANDE and to public 
fleets in general. To 2021, 10% of renewal with EVs; to 2030, 20% of renewal with EVs and ANDE 50%; to 2040, 
50% of renewal with EVs and ANDE 100%. ANDE owns 1300 vehicles. 
 
The Agenda for the Transition of Technology towards Electromobility is structured around five fundamental axes 
under a common vision of promoting the adoption of electric vehicles and 21 strategic lines that will allow the 
achievement of the objectives. 
 
The Guide for the Standardization of Electric Mobility in Paraguay, published in 2020, is intended to provide the 
basis to be able to legislate regulations and standards related to electric mobility. 
 
In the framework of "Asuncion Green City of the Americas", Municipality of Asuncion they want to implement 
municipal services with BEB to complement actual services (cover additional areas and overnight services) and 
operates with EVs its municipal fleet. 
 
Law N 5.183/2014 exempts new electric and hybrid vehicles from the payment of import customs tax and VAT.  
 
Decree for the creation of a Strategic Roundtable for Electric Mobility, Creation of a Strategic Roundtable for 
Electric Mobility with the power to coordinate all initiatives related to the matter and direct actions for the 
development of the EM. 
 
Green Route 1 to Ciudad del Este, construction and implementation of the green route to connect Asunción and 
Ciudad del Este. This project is already in operation since early 2021. 
 
Municipal Ordinance No. 227/19 Referring to public charging points for Electric Mobility, Regulate the charge 
centre facilities in public spaces in the city of Asunción. 
 
ANDE will publish a list of incentives for electric cost to different electromobility applications and user (end of 
2021). 
 
 
96 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/nda-strengthening-and-country-programming-support-panama-through-caf  
97 Updated NDCs focused on including Adaptation component as previous version didn’t develop

=== PAGE 78 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
With support from CAF, Paraguay submitted a readiness proposal to GCF in 2017, including establishing its GCF 
country programming98. Also, Paraguay is part of 3 sub-projects with GCF in the field of mitigation and 1 cross-cutting 
project. The country’s National Designated Authority is the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development 
(MADES). 
 
National and public banks see electromobility adoption requires incentives. As part of market study, banks have been 
interviewed in Paraguay and they are very interested in participating as a financial executing entity. Banco Nacional 
de Fomento (BNF) was interested in developing special EV financial products within E-motion framework, they do have 
experience in the development of mobility financial products for different segments. 
 
Uruguay 
As expressed in B1. Uruguay’s NDC target certain goals towards 2025 for E-motion categories. Also, Uruguay aims at 
establishing a network of electric vehicle charging stations throughout the main roads across Uruguay, of which 52% 
have been completed in 2020 and a fast-charging network, which has not progressed yet. Most relevant policies for 
the country’s climate change agenda are the following:  
 
 
In its NDC, Uruguay’s specifically target to attain 110 units e-Buses and 900 units e-LCVs, conditional to additional 
means of implementation. 
 
The National Climate Change Policy promotes several initiatives to mitigate transport sector GHG emissions, 
among others, the increase share of electric vehicles, hybrids and other, in the different transport subsectors. 
 
The National Environmental Plan for Sustainable Development, established in 2019, brings together the main 
environmental strategies and lines of action in the country.  
 
The National Sustainable Mobility Plan is an outcome of the National Environmental Plan for Sustainable 
Development. The plan promotes a transition towards transport technologies with better energy efficiency, lower 
emissions through several initiatives (incentives, regulation, among others) until 2030. Also, it has a strategic line 
to improve public fleets in their renewal process and the development of a scrapping program to remove older 
vehicles, published in 2019. 
 
The Energy Policy and the approved Energy Efficiency Law establishes the need to reduce fossil fuel consumption 
in the transport sector. 
 
Decree 246/012 reduces the specific internal tax for hybrid and electric vehicles.  
 
Decree 325/017 reduces import tariffs from 23% to 0% for electric vehicles. 
 
Decree 219/019 also exempts lithium batteries for vehicle use and charging systems for electric vehicles.  
 
Salient points from the Strategic Transport, Logistic and Infrastructure vision 2030. 
 
COMAP benefits99. From 2018, electric passenger cars are included in COMAP benefits (before that, only LCV 
were). Car rental included as COMAP beneficiaries, when investing in electric vehicles. 
 
Energy Efficiency Certificates (CEE). Monetary income to energy efficiency investments (in buses and the facilities 
necessary for loading batteries). In 2020, grant was about USD 24/toe, based on energy savings during project 
lifespan. 
 
Batteries handling and final disposal. Regulation for batteries, extending responsibility not only to end users, but 
also to manufacturers and importers (in progress at 2nd term, 2021). 
 
Connector standard. Regulation on charger system connector standards (in progress at 2nd term, 2021). 
 
Insurance conditions. Reduction on insurance fees of Banco de Seguros del Estado (BSE). 15% discount on 
electric passenger cars and LCV fee. 20% discount on electric bus fee. 
 
Technical Guide for Urban Electric Mobility Planning. A guide for local governments that are interested to develop 
a EV plan. The guide will include the state of the art in electric urban mobility for freight and passenger transport, 
and recommendations for an adequate promotion and implementation at a city level (in execution, delivered by 
February 2022). 
 
Specific tariff for public charging network. Time-of-use 100 electricity rates for charging vehicles in the public 
network. Price of electricity: i) Punta: USD 0,37/kWh; ii) Llano: USD 0,14/kWh; and iii) Valle: USD 0,07/kWh. 
Additional discounts: i) All EVs: 50% for charges made in Valle time. 
  
 
98 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/nda-strengthening-and-country-programming-support-paraguay-through-caf  
99 COMAP is a government agency that administrates tax exemptions granted to investments made by companies (Ley 
16.906). The core benefit derived from COMAP is a corporate revenue tax credit. 
100 Punta time from 18:00 to 22:00 hrs, Llano time from 07:00 to 18:00 and from 22:00 to 24:00 hrs, Valle time from 00:00 to 
07:00 hrs.

=== PAGE 79 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
Uruguay submitted a readiness proposal to GCF in 2017 and its second phase in 2019, including establishing its GCF 
country programming101. Also, Uruguay is part of 2 sub-projects with GCF in the field of mitigation. The country’s 
National Designated Authority is the Ministry of Environment. 
 
National and private banks see electromobility adoption requires incentives. As part of market study, banks have been 
interviewed in Uruguay and they are very interested in participating as a financial executing entity. Banco de la 
República de Uruguay (BROU) was interested in developing special EV financial products within E-motion framework. 
Private banks like HSBC and Santander have participated in the ebus subsidy (first call) by giving more years for 
credits and less interest rate versus conventional diesel credit lines102. 
 
Regional Initiatives 
As mentioned previously, GCF approved a readiness proposal (first submission in May 2019) for Panama, Paraguay, 
Uruguay, and 11 other countries across Latin America103. The readiness programme focuses at outlining the benefits 
of coordinating national e-mobility efforts through regional cooperation, including building capacities for technology 
assessment, the establishment of enabling policies and relevant climate finance strategies. Complementarity will be 
ensured through close coordination with the existing programs and initiatives. The proposed Program is focused on 
investment sub-projects and market transformation whilst existing initiatives are more for creating readiness for electric 
mobility in general.   
 
Engagement with civil society 
In each country of the Sub-Program 2, CAF has performed country diagnostics and market studies study with multiple 
interviews and meetings realized with all major stakeholders including national and local governmental bodies, energy 
utilities, transport operators and civil society, such as universities. Consultations have also been carried out with 
stakeholders during the formulation of the Funding Proposal (see Annex 7 for details).  
 
In the case of Panama, the community has been involved in carrying out the pilot tests of electric buses in Panama 
City and Colón, since these buses were tested on different routes so that users could move around on these buses 
and give them to know the benefits of electric mobility in terms of environment and sustainability.  
 
In the case of Paraguay, the community in general welcomes the different electromobility initiatives, understanding 
that at the national level, the fact of having an obsolete vehicle fleet leads to health problems. In addition, counting on 
a deficient transportation system, citizens support this technological migration to an efficient and environmentally 
friendly transportation system. 
 
In case of relevant NGOs will be consulted during the implementation, such Mesa de Movilidad Eléctrica (like GIEET, 
but private members); AUDER (Asociación Uruguaya de Energías Renovables) that started with renewables, and now 
includes EV in their scope; Automóvil Club del Uruguay; and Coordinadora de Usuarios y Usuarias del Transporte 
Colectivo (Coordinator of Public Transport Users). 
 
Also, having the surpluses of electricity generation, the support for electromobility, can generate an important field of 
training and employment for the population in general. 
 
Public Transport System 
In Panama, The Autoridad del Tránsito y Transporte Terrestre (ATTT) is the one who has the power to administer and 
supervise transportation, preparing and enforcing regulations, in addition to assuming road safety competencies. It is 
also in charge of assigning operating permits and public transport concessions. However, this entity is not a ministry 
but an autonomous state entity and coordinates directly with Presidency. The largest and the only transport operator 
is MiBus with 1,400 buses (approx.) and is a public company. Payment method for MiBus is by card and is integrated 
with METRO. The rest of public transport is more informal and E-motion will start transition with MiBus as a 
consolidated public operator that already has pilot eBuses (2 BYD) in 2018 and was interviewed in order to understand 
targets of EV adoption where eMotion should contribute in phase 2 and 3 (150 eBuses). 
 
In the case of Paraguay, all operators in the transport sector are private. For the Asunción area, the Metropolitan Area 
Passenger Transport Entrepreneurs Center was created (CETRAPAM) and also interviewed where they have declared 
 
101 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/nda-strengthening-and-country-programming-2nd-phase-support-uruguay-
through-undp  
102 Santander bank reduce 1/6 the interest rate in BEB vs Diesel Bus. In HSBC bank, interest rate was 3 points lower for BEB 
tan Diesel Bus. 
103 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/advancing-regional-approach-e-mobility-latin-america

=== PAGE 80 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
to have 10% of its fleet with eBuses by 2030 (about 200 buses). Transportation companies at the metropolitan level 
are private and their routes are regulated by the National Transportation System (SNT). The SNT also determines, 
through the agencies created, comprehensive transit and transportation policies and regulations at the metropolitan, 
municipal, inter-municipal, departmental, national and international levels. PY has a pilot at the private level with the 
company Magno SA (Line 12), in 2019, incorporated the first two fully electric buses (Zhongtong), both to its fleet and 
to the passenger transport system in Paraguay. MAGNO was interviewed and declared to be 100% electric by 2030, 
targeting to 100 eBuses. 
 
In Uruguay, Departmental Government (DG) is responsible for service conditions, lines, routes, and service 
supervision. Bus fare is set in a negotiation process involving companies and DG, regarding that bus fare should 
represent real transport conditions, preserving business balance for the operators. The operation of bus services is 
reserved to legal entities who have obtained a permit from the DG. The permits are revocable, and are granted in 
concession by public tender (in practice, no operator was deprived of its permit, unless business balance of the 
company was no longer financially sustainable). Montevideo has the largest public transport system in the country, 
operating 1.514 buses where CUTCSA is the largest operator of the Metropolitan Transport System (STM), with up to 
70% of the marketshare, and the rest is shared by COECT (15%), UCOT (11%), and COME (9%). Together they 
operate 144 lines, with 4.835 bus stops in Montevideo and the metropolitan area. In 2018, the Electric Bus Subsidy 
was approved by Law 19.670, whose beneficiaries are all bus operators of the country (if they apply for the subsidy, 
of course). The subsidy covers the price gap between a conventional bus and an electric bus. As the government is 
also compelled to subsidize diesel fuel consumption for conventional buses through de Bus Fare Subsidy, the Electric 
Bus Subsidy is financed, in a way, from the future savings in Bus Fare Subsidy. In 2019, the first round of the subsidy 
called for 50 electric buses. The Technical Committee received 34 proposals from the operators and 33 of them were 
accepted. Finally, 32 operators continued with the process under the conditions stablished by the public tender. 
CUTCSA was granted with 20 eBuses (BYD) from the subsidy and from interviews performed by E-motion, CUTCSA 
clared to increase up to 100 eBuses. COETC, UCOT, COME and CODELEST also where granted (10 Yutong and 3 
Ankai). 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Program introduces a concessional financing mechanism that addresses barriers to the uptake of commercial EVs 
and supports a transformative shift to low carbon transportation. GCF concessional financing is critical – in absence 
of concessional GCF finance, such sub-projects will not materialize in the short or medium term. The benchmark report 
(Annex 22) clearly shows that all countries with large fleets of commercial EVs (>100 units) have used, at least initially, 
financial support instruments. The market studies conducted in all countries also show that EVs are currently 
commercially non-viable (with different degrees of non-viability). The market studies however also reveal that in the 
medium term due to price decreases, particularly dropping battery prices, a commercial uptake of EVs is viable. 
Countries can take advantage of this circumstance from an early stage if they invest early-on in fleets of EVs to reduce 
prevalent risk factors associated with EV deployment. 
 
The major financial barriers for the potential beneficiaries which prevent alternative financing options are (i) the low 
financial profitability of EV investments reflected in high total costs of ownership and very long payback times; (ii) the 
high-risk profile of EV investments due to performance risks, asset risks (e.g., re-sale value of assets), and replacement 
investments (batteries); and (iii) high capital and investor’s capital demand resulting in high debt and risk exposure 
levels of the investing entity. Commercial funding is thus not willing to enter this market. Conventional financial 
institutions are also not willing to enter the market due to the novelty of the technology, however, from market study 
(see Annex 2, T4 country reports), public and national banks in PA, PY and UY would be interested in support E-
motion program as a financial executing entity as they foresee and understand that E-motion would promote EV 
adoption integrally through FA and TA that will reduce risk and will make this transition sustainable. Concessional GCF 
finance can provide for technical assistance to design and structure in an optimal manner e-mobility investment and 
reduce design and performance risks whilst the financial instruments reduce risk exposure and increase profitability of 
the investment. The financial viability and efficiency of individual sub-projects will be determined during preparation 
and the due diligence phase for each project. CAF will assess the financial soundness and economic viability as well 
as bankability of each project (see Annex 2, section 2.3 for “key criteria for E-motion implementation phase). 
 
The total capital investment is USD 231 MM with a requested GCF finance of USD 76.6 MM and a direct GHG 
reduction of 3.3 MtCO2 resulting in an effectiveness of the GCF investment in direct terms of 23 USD/tCO2. This 
value is lower than applying the subsidy finance from other countries with significant EV numbers for buses which

=== PAGE 81 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
result in average costs per tCO2 of 140-180 USD104. GHG marginal abatement costs of transport sub-projects tend to 
be higher than of other interventions as they are associated with high incremental costs. However, e-mobility 
programmes are also linked to substantial spill-over and long-term benefits, once a conducive ecosystem is in place 
and the market kicked-off. Hereby, the comprehensive TA component of the Program will accelerate the transition to 
a fully electrified vehicle market significantly, impacting not only the electrification of new vehicles but also the used-
car market. Consequently, the indirect GHG impact potential, as outlined in section D.1., is much higher. According to 
the high potential scenario (not including decreasing emission grid factors), a total GHG reduction of the Program of 
16 MtCO2e can be achieved, resulting in an effectiveness of the Sub-Program 2 of only 4.6 USD/tCO2. The co-finance 
ratio of the total investment equalizes 67%. In addition, it is well known that abatement cost in transport sector is 
challenging as less carbon-intensive and zero emission technologies are expensive, however, very effective in 
mitigating not only GHG but local pollutants and reduce noise pollution (these last are not accounted but are very 
strategic at urban level as well). The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) on its “green 
economy transition approach” also points that from its experience, transport sub-projects delivered by EBRD have a 
higher abatement cost of 145 Euros/tCO2 (170 USD/tCO2), but those are very important for their significant co-benefits 
at urban level. 
 
Table 17 below presents the preliminary calculations of Economic Internal Rates of Return (EIRR) and Financial 
Internal Rates of Return (FIRR) based on the comparison of savings on a Total Cost of Ownership approach based 
on cost flow calculations. The methodology compares the impact of introducing electric vehicles: buses and light 
commercial vehicles for intensive use.   
 
Table 18: Economic and Financial Internal Rates of Return 
 
BATTERY ELECTRIC BUSES (BEB) 
without GCF 
with GCF 
Country 
CAPEX MUSD 
FIRR 
EIRR 
FIRR 
EIRR 
Panama 
44,500 
1.15% 
3.84% 
11.42% 
14.39% 
Paraguay 
82,700 
3.09% 
4.91% 
9.85% 
11.80% 
Uruguay 
40,960 
-4.80% 
2.42% 
8.91% 
16.27% 
Average rate 
  
0% 
4% 
10% 
14% 
 
LIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES (LCV) 
 
 
without GCF 
with GCF 
Country 
CAPEX MUSD 
FIRR 
EIRR 
FIRR 
EIRR 
Panama 
15,800 
-0.99% 
0.63% 
14.21% 
15.90% 
Paraguay 
14,300 
-3.11% 
1.44% 
10.70% 
16.10% 
Uruguay 
6,170 
2.32% 
0.05% 
10.28% 
13.11% 
Average rate 
  
-1% 
1% 
12% 
15% 
 
The methodology used intents to capture two key variables: (i) the EIRR computes positive externalities from replacing 
high usage vehicles from an environmental perspective utilizing reasonable costs of carbon and (ii) FIRR which intends 
to capture the additionality for using concessional funds. 
 
As shown in the table above, there is an importance impact in all segments and countries comprising the program from 
both and economic and financial perspectives. From an EIRR standpoint replacing conventional buses for BEBs could 
lead to an increase in returns ranging from 2% to 6%. In respect to LCV the increase in return rages from 1.5% to 
4.5%. Please refer to Annex 3: Economic and financial analyses for detailed calculations for each country and type of 
vehicle.   
 
 
 
 
104 See Grütter Consulting, 2021, Program: E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation, GHG and SD Emission 
Reduction Methodology and Calculations (attached to FP Sub-Program 1 as Annex 23; based on average incremental CAPEX 
of e-bus system versus diesel bus of USD 196,000 and average GHG lifetime reductions of 1,113 tCO2e with a subsidy rate 
given by countries of 80-100% of incremental investment.

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☐ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of 
change).        
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
In all Program countries 
the electrification of the 
vehicle stock is at an 
infant stage. Most public 
transport opportunities 
rely on fossil fuels and 
show atomized 
ownership structures, 
financially weak 
transport operators. 
Low 
The country studies show that depending 
on respective scenarios the Sub-Program 
2 will have significant spill-over effects 
that lead to an uptake and acceleration of 
EVs in all major vehicle segments. The 
high-potential scenarios show that spill 
over effects can lead to 100% of newly 
registered vehicles being electric in 2030. 
Accelerated EV investments take place 
due to an e-mobility conducive policy 
environment, innovative business 
models, lower performance and income 
risks and the entrance of new market 
players. The Program involves the local 
banking sector to accustom it’s risk and 
opportunity perception and develop 
appropriate business models for electric 
mobility deployment finally leading to 
lower costs of financing EVs. Also, by 
supporting the development of EVs 
regulatory framework and EV acquisition, 
the program will reduce the acquisition of 
fossil fuel vehicles. The transformative 
shift is possible through the accelerated 
uptake of commercial EVs and electric

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
public transport thanks to an improved 
ecosystem for EVs with (i) financial 
assistance (FA) made available for EV 
investments as well as (ii) a equate 
technical assistance (TA) on each pre-
identified scalable EV segments in each 
country. The use of GCF funds de-risks 
future investments and demonstrates the 
viability of e-mobility investments on a 
commercial scale. It closes the gap 
between stand-alone initial pilot ventures 
and mass market deployment. 
Replicability 
No financial models and 
regulatory frameworks 
have been developed 
that demonstrate an 
significant EV uptake for 
major private and public 
vehicle segments. Only 
Uruguay has started to 
push for E-buses on a 
small scale. 
Low 
1. EV prices are decreasing in all vehicle 
segments due to decreasing battery 
prices and increasing competition and 
supply of EVs. 
2. Risks associated with vehicle reliability 
and performance, information and re-sale 
uncertainty, maintenance and repair 
capabilities, and the workability of new 
business models are substantially 
reduced.  
3. Policies are more conducive for e-
mobility and allow EVs to be more 
competitive.  
The Program creates the required 
information for reducing risks and 
showcasing successful implementation. 
Furthermore. The Program will improve 
the framework conditions for EVs through 
Technical Assistance, lays the foundation 
for an EV conducive ecosystem, such 
that investors purchase EVs on a 
commercial base, and eliminates or 
significantly reduces barriers towards 
mass EV deployment, such that 
replicability of proposed business models 
and financing structures can be 
maintained in the long-term without 
concessional support from GCF. On a 
regional level the knowledge products 
and outreach events assist other 
countries in implementing e-mobility sub-
projects and contributes towards the 
creation of a non-reversible dynamic 
towards electrification of the transport 
sector.

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability 
Initial steps have been 
taken by all countries 
and some have 
developed 
comprehensive EV 
targets and roadmaps. 
However, policies have 
not yet boiled down to 
the implementation level 
and require more clarity 
and a higher level of 
detail to foster mass 
change. As example, 
targets on numbers of 
EVs on the road in 2030 
are a visible signal. 
However, if they are not 
followed up with 
incentives, activities and 
measures to actually get 
there, they will remain a 
paper tiger. 
Medium 
At the end of the Program (based on an 
implementation period of 8 years this 
would be 2030) there are operational 
large fleets of e-buses in all Program 
countries and in multiple countries also 
large LCVs fleets (public and private) 
including urban fast charging 
infrastructure. The projections of 
dropping EV prices point to cost-based 
parity (of TCO) between 2025 and 2030 
for the involved vehicle segments and 
strongly decreasing upfront price tags. 
The market analysis performed per 
country shows that a significant share of 
investors would then be willing to 
purchase electric buses and LCVs (public 
and private) at standard national financial 
conditions without subsidies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The magnitude and time of commercial 
uptake of EVs is accelerated in a 
decisive manner by the Program through 
the operations of large fleets and through 
risk reduction measures making 
investment in EVs feasible for investors. 
Lower risk profiles of EV investments are 
attained directly due to FA investments 
for example due to better information of 
performance and operational costs of 
EVs, improved maintenance and 
management of EVs, through the 
establishment of fast charging 
infrastructure and through TA due to 
improved regulatory and enabling 
conditions (including concession 
contracts) for EVs, due to proven 
business models more in accordance 
with the financial profile of EVs and due 
to policy roadmaps which create a 
conducive e-mobility surrounding. The 
roadmaps guide policymakers in creating 
a long-term enabling policy environment 
conducive towards increased 
investments in e-mobility.

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final105 
 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses by third-part 
consultancy firm 
0 
300,000 tCO2e 
 
 
Annual: 
160,000 tCO2e 
 
End of 
implementation
period: 
600,000 tCO2e 
 
Lifetime: 
3,300,000 
tCO2e 
Values are dependent on 
sub-projects actually 
implemented per country106.  
1. EVs have lower 
emissions than fossil units 
2. Investments in EVs take 
place 
3. Funding is available 
4. Political willingness to 
promote EVs 
5. Technical know-how is 
available 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
 
Supplementary 1.5 
Improved low-emission 
vehicle fuel economy 
Ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses by third-part 
consultancy firm 
0 TJ 
1,800 TJ 
Annual: 
1,250 TJ 
 
End of 
implementation
period: 6,250 
TJ 
Refers to energy savings 
(baseline- project activity 
energy consumption) 
Values dependent on sub-
projects implemented per 
country107: 
1. EVs have lower 
emissions than fossil units 
2. Investments in EVs take 
place 
3. Funding is available 
4. Political willingness to 
promote EVs 
 
105 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective. 
106 See Annex 23, sheet “direct ER” 
107 See Annex 23, sheet “direct ER”

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
5. Technical know-how is 
available 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more able to reduce 
GHG emissions 
Third-part consultancy 
firm 
USD 0  
USD 125 
million108 
USD 209 
million 
Values are dependent on 
sub-projects actually 
implemented per country109.  
1. EVs have lower 
emissions than fossil units 
2. Investments in EVs take 
place 
3. Funding is available 
4. Political willingness to 
promote EVs 
5. Technical know-how is 
available 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
Initial steps have been 
taken by all countries 
and some have 
developed 
comprehensive EV 
targets and roadmaps. 
However, policies have 
not yet boiled down to 
the implementation level 
and require more clarity 
and a higher level of 
medium 
Set clear targets on 
numbers of EVs on the 
road in 2030 as a visible 
signal. 
Sector-specific roadmap 
for electrification of 
public transport which 
identifies short-, 
medium- and long-term 
actions to be taken, 
funding options and 
responsibilities, will be 
developed. 
Business models for 
commercial fleets will be 
Multi-countries 
 
108 Assumed asset value based on CAPEX for electric vehicles and charging infrastructure according to implementation plan. 
109 See Annex 5: Implementation timetable

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
detail to foster mass 
change. 
developed and 
introduced. 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Large charging 
infrastructure in the 
cities is missing.  
Perceived performance 
risks and related 
perception of EVs 
low 
Foster the large 
charging infrastructure in 
cities and the large-
scale operations of EVs 
that generates trust in 
these new technologies. 
The investment sub-
projects will allow to 
gather real data on EV 
performance thus 
reducing performance 
risks of investing in EVs. 
Multi-countries 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
There is a lack of know-
how on optimal EV 
ecosystem design 
(identification of type of 
EVs to use, 
fast/slow/opportunity 
charging etc.), 
maintenance & 
operations, as well as on 
used battery 
management policies 
including options of 2nd-
life usage, recycling and 
disposal 
low 
Effective enabling 
political and financial 
frameworks are in place 
that promote a vibrant 
commercial EV market 
throughout every vehicle 
category. There is a 
rising demand for public 
transport driven by the 
successful operation of 
e-buses.  
Country and sector 
specific regulatory 
support, capacity 
developing and training 
efforts as well as 
knowledge materials 
Multi-countries 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators to 
monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should correspond 
to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
110 All final targets are set at the end of the implementation period. 
111 Tool 18: Methodological tool - Baseline emissions for modal shift measures in urban passenger transport, Version 01.0, 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-18-v1.pdf 
112 Proportion of e-vehicles financed by the E-Motion programme compared to replacements and new additions to the national vehicles stocks of the three target countries. 
113 Observatorio de Movilidad Montevideo, retrieved from: http://www.montevideo.gub.uy/observatorio-de-movilidad 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final110 
Outcome 2.1: Finance of 
e-buses kick-start the 
mass deployment and 
provide evidence of 
technical, financial and 
environmental 
sustainability (Output 2.1) 
Number of e-buses 
financed by Program 
CAF monitoring reports 
Finance agreements  
Records of operators 
National vehicle statistics 
 
 
 
 
PT operators data 
Surveys to be conducted 
in accordance with CDM 
Methodological Tool 18111 
37 e-buses 
300 e-buses, 
650 e-buses, 
1. Investors willing to 
purchase e-buses 
2. Funding is available 
3. Technical know-how is 
available 
Data source: 1) Finance 
agreements and 
operation records of 
operators; 2) national 
vehicle statistics  
% penetration of 
BEBs as a proportion 
of total new buses, 
financed by 
Program112 
0% 
10% 
11% 
New business 
models implemented 
by PT operators 
0 
1 
3 
Outcome 2.2: Ridership of 
public transport and e-
buses is increased 
through smart 
infrastructure measures 
Total patronage / 
ridership  
 
% of enhanced 
ridership of public 
transportation 
UY (Montevideo): 
243,800,00 
pax/year 
(ridership) 
 
PY (Asuncion):  
198,000,000 
pax/year 
(ridership) 
Projected 
additional 
patronage due 
to multiple 
measures: 10% 
Projected 
additional 
patronage due 
to multiple 
measures: 20% 
1. Overall willingness of 
people to increase the 
use PT  
2. Perception of 
population of PT can be 
changed 
 
Data source:  
UY - Indicator VIA0301 
Number of public 
transport trips (historical 
series)113 
PY:  National public 
passenger transport 
service statistic for the 
Metropolitan Area of 
Asunción.

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
Applying the CDM 
Methodological Tool 18 - 
Baseline emissions for 
modal shift measures in 
urban passenger 
transport, providing a list 
of data and parameters to 
be measured to be 
specific procedures incl. 
surveys in year 1 and 
year 4 for determining the 
share of additional PT 
passengers (“Si”) which 
would have used vehicle 
category “I” in the non-
project scenario.  
Outcome 3: Finance of 
commercial EVs kick-start 
mass deployment and 
provide evidence of 
technical, financial and 
environmental 
sustainability (Output 3.1) 
Number of e-LCVs 
financed by Program 
CAF monitoring reports 
Finance agreements  
Records of operators 
National vehicle statistics 
135 e-LCVs 
390 e-LCVs 
1,150 e-LCVs 
1. Investors willing to 
purchase e-buses 
2. Funding is available 
3. Technical know how is 
available 
 
Data source: 1) Finance 
agreements and 
operation records of 
operators / project 
owners; 2) national 
vehicle statistics 
% penetration of e-
LCVs as a proportion 
of total new LCVs, 
financed by Program 
0% 
0.2% 
0.3%

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 4:  Investment 
in low-emission (fast) 
charging infrastructure 
lays the foundation for the 
deployment EVs in the 
commercial fleets and 
facilitate further spill-over 
to other vehicle segments 
(Output 4.2) 
Number of fast-
charging 
infrastructure 
financed by Program 
CAF monitoring reports 
Finance agreements  
Records of operators 
National vehicle statistics 
6 
30 
60 
1. Political willingness to 
promote EVs 
2. Funding is available 
3. Technical know-how is 
available  
 
Data source: 1) Finance 
agreements and 
operation records of 
operators; 2) national / 
local infrastructure 
statistics 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1: Improved air 
quality and health 
Reduction of PM2.5 
and NOx 
Government data/records 
0 
40t PM2.5; 
2000t NOx 
80t PM2.5; 
4,080t NOx 
1. Political willingness to 
promote EV 
2. Public willingness for 
switch to EV and shift of 
mode of transportation 
 
Data source: 1) National / 
local air quality data; 2) 
estimation based on 
vehicle number and 
baseline emission factor  
Co-benefit 2: 
Socioeconomic benefits  
Costs reductions due 
to emission and 
pollution reductions 
Government data/records 
/  Public expenditure 
reporting  
0 
15 MUSD 
40.0 MUSD 
1. Valid emission and 
pollution reduction 
estimates 
 
Data source: 1) National / 
local air quality data; 2) 
estimation based on 
emission reduced and 
cost per tonne (using 
IPCC estimations)

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
114 The potential of newly created jobs along the broader value chain of EV deployment is probably much larger. However, this is a conservative target for jobs 
directly related to improve the local public transport system (probably additional employments at the municipal authority). 
Number of newly 
created job 
opportunities related 
to public transport 
system in the three 
target cities 
Government data/records 
Operator records 
0 
5 
15114 
1. Political willingness to 
promote EV 
2. Public willingness for 
switch to EV and shift of 
mode of transportation 
 
Data source: 1) National / 
local employment 
statistics; 2) Operator 
records 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as shown 
below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Component 1:  Establishment of a conducive e-mobility ecosystem 
Sub-Component 1.1a - Enhancing policies and strategies on electric mobility and Sub-Component 1.1b - Enhancing governance and stakeholder though institutionalization 
of electric mobility 
1.1.1a: Develop national sustainable e-
mobility strategy and implementation plan  
 
Establishment of an e-mobility conducive 
national ecosystem with sub-activities on 
design and divulgation of sectoral 
roadmaps (electrification of public 
transport, electrification of urban freight), 
support of national enabling policies for EV 
deployment, and capacity development at 
national level. 
Undertake a comprehensive assessment 
of the economic, environmental and social 
viability of fleet electrification, renewable 
energy capacity penetration and electrical 
distribution grid stabilization  
Fleet electrification feasibility analysis: 
public and private fleets, public transport, 
incl. baseline assessment, national + 
conditions, charging infrastructure by 
public buildings etc. 
Study to evaluate changes in planning of 
public transport system in a very 
comprehensive approach 
Renewable energy generation capacity 
study addressing the implication of 
increased deployment of renewable power 
generation and e-mobility charging in the 
energy system

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
National charging network analysis: 
Impact analysis on the electricity sector 
and deployment of charging points. 
Develop draft national e-mobility strategy 
Draft national e-mobility strategy, 
consisting of a technology and policy 
roadmap and implementation plan (incl. 
deployment targets until 2030, 2035 and 
2050) submitted for adoption by the 
Government. 
1.1.1b: Implement multi-stakeholder 
consultation strategy and provide 
recommendations for a long-term 
coordination mechanism  
Establishment of a gender-responsive e-
mobility conducive national ecosystem 
with sub-activities on a multi-stakeholder 
consultation strategy and 
recommendations for a long-term 
coordination mechanism to key 
government actors.  
Develop gender sensitive stakeholder 
consultation strategy 
Stakeholder consultation strategy 
developed and implemented 
Develop recommendation on long-term 
coordination 
Report with recommendations for a long-
term coordination mechanism 
Develop public-private strategy on 
transition 
Public-private strategy and action plan to 
enable a just-transition of the local work 
force. 
1.1.2 Training of key public and private 
stakeholders 
Gender sensitive capacity development at 
national level 
Train civil servants, municipalities and 
public and private decision-makers 
Training activities on sustainable transport 
and e-mobility policies, standards and 
regulations, addressing civil servants, 
municipalities and public and private 
decision-makers  
Participation of private and public 
stakeholder at activities of the regional E-
Motion activities 
Participation of public and private 
representative in E-Motion’s regional 
trainings activities, incl. design, operation 
& maintenance of e-fleets - Business 
models and financial instruments. 
Conduct technical trainings on operators 
on EV and charger operations and 
maintenance, safety trainings and optimal 
fleet management   
6 training workshops per country for public 
and private fleet operators on EV and 
charger operations and maintenance, 
safety trainings and optimal fleet 
management 
1.1.3 Enhance public and private 
stakeholders’ awareness  
Public and private stakeholders’ 
awareness on the benefits (including 
gender effects) of low-carbon and climate-
resilient electric mobility enhanced through 
a communication campaign and the 
provision of a public information platform 
Prepare communication campaign design 
Design of communication campaign and 
outreach plan on low-carbon and climate-
resilient electric mobility.  
Implement communication campaign 
design 
Communication campaign on low-carbon 
and climate-resilient electric mobility. 
Develop or use existing public information 
platform for information dissemination 
Deployment of the public information 
platform for electric mobility (to 
disseminate communication material and 
knowledge products)

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Component 1.2 - Enhancing vehicle and charging standards 
1.2.1 Prepare regulatory standard reform 
proposal for electric vehicles  
Technical support will be provided to the 
relevant national and local authorities in 
the countries and cities where the 
Program will support investments in order 
to set-up, improve and/or enforce enabling 
public policies and legal, regulatory and/or 
normative frameworks for e-mobility. 
Analyse global good practice on standards 
for vehicles energy efficiency, EV charging 
infrastructure and RE grid integration 
Report reviewing global good practices on 
standards for vehicles energy efficiency, 
EV charging infrastructure and RE grid 
integration and recommendations to 
update national regulation 
Prepare proposal on electric vehicle 
imports specification, licencing and 
periodic technical inspection requirements, 
Regulatory proposal on electric vehicle 
imports specification, licencing and 
periodic technical inspection requirements, 
developed and presented to Ministry of 
Transport for adoption.  
Present regulatory proposal on technical 
approval and installation 
Regulatory proposal on technical approval 
and installation, incl. standards and 
technical specifications, of public and 
private charging stations, developed and 
presented for adoption. 
Sub-Component 1.3 - Introducing appropriate emission standards and mandates 
1.3.1: Develop standards and policy 
framework for regulating eligible emissions  
The activities under the component will 
support the development of standards and 
a (gender -responsive) policy framework 
for regulating the eligible emissions of 
road vehicles 
Analyse global good practice for standards 
and laws for regulating emissions of road 
vehicles 
Report of regional and global good 
practices for standards and laws for 
regulating emissions of road vehicles and 
recommendations for such regulation in 
the national context  
Prepare proposal on emission policy, 
regulations and standards 
Proposal of emission policy, regulations 
and standards submitted to the 
government for adoption  
1.3.2: Establish an appropriate monitoring 
system for air pollutants for the Metropolitan 
Area of Asunción 
In order to support the development of 
standards and a policy framework for the 
Metropolitan Area of Asunción, effective 
monitoring of air pollutant concentrations 
is a necessity. 
Develop an appropriate monitoring system 
for the region 
Implementation plan for monitoring system 
Implement air pollutants monitoring 
system in the Metropolitan Area of 
Asunción 
Implemented air pollutants monitoring 
system  
Train relevant personnel on its application 
At least 3 training with relevant personnel 
Sub-Component 1.4 - Long-term environmental sustainability of electric mobility 
1.4.1: Preparation of proposal for standards 
and policy framework for regulating the 
disposal of electric vehicles 
Standards and a policy framework for 
regulating the disposal of electric and 
conventional vehicles are developed and 
Analyse global good practice for standards 
and laws for regulating the ELV disposal 
Report of regional and global good 
practices for standards and laws for 
regulating the ELV disposal (including 
reuse and recycling) of electric vehicles

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
115 Incl. availability payments etc. 
drafted for adoption by government 
ministries 
and recommendations for such regulation 
in the national context  
Prepare proposal on policy and 
regulations for ELV management 
Proposal of policy and regulations for ELV 
management (including re-use and 
recycling) submitted to the government for 
adoption  
 1.4.2: Develop new business models, 
including the responsibility of vehicle 
distributors, on end-of-life vehicle (EVL) 
management  
New business models, including the 
responsibility of vehicle distributors, 
delivered to the government and ELV 
management companies 
Analyse global good practice on 
international successful financial and 
commercially viable business models on 
managing ELV components 
Report on international successful 
financial and commercially viable business 
models on managing ELV components for 
all vehicles and second-life battery use, 
including cost benefit analysis estimating 
investment needs and financing schemes 
Development of a roadmap on sustainable 
and commercially viable ELV and battery 
management 
Roadmap on sustainable and 
commercially viable ELV and battery 
management submitted for adoption. 
1.4.3 Training of Waste management 
stakeholders on ELV management 
Waste management stakeholders are 
trained on ELV management (for both 
conventional and electric) and electric 
vehicle batteries as well as related 
business models 
Provide specific technical training on ELV 
management 
Gender-sensitive training course on 
reusing, recycling and disposing of used 
vehicles, with modules on each of the key 
disposal areas: 
− General aspects of end-of-life vehicle 
disposal (conventional and electric); 
− Vehicle spent battery management 
and battery reuse; 
− Hazardous waste management; 
− Lithium-ion recycling technology; 
Identifying and developing business 
models for reuse and disposal of vehicles 
and their components in local, regional 
and international markets; and catalysing 
finance for such business models. 
Sub-Component 1.5 - Preparing for scale-up and replication of electric mobility through fiscal incentives 
1.5.1 Development of regulatory subsidy 
and tax reforms proposals for the uptake of 
electric vehicles  
Establishment of an e-mobility conducive 
local ecosystem with sub-activities related 
to the local environment such as business 
Develop proposal for regulatory subsidy, 
incentives and tax reforms for the uptake 
of electric vehicles  
Regulatory tax, subsidy and incentive115 
reform proposal to facilitate fiscal

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
model design and development, local 
policy advice (e.g., preferential downtown 
access for e-LCVs), advice on concession 
contracts for bus services (e.g. concerning 
concession length as this is important for 
e-bus deployment), capacity building and 
training of operators. 
incentives and stability for the transitions 
towards e-mobility. 
1.5.2 Preparation of business models, 
financial schemes and procurement 
guidelines  
Prepare analysis for enhancing existing 
financial products and risk mitigation 
products to promote EVs 
Report presented to the financial sector, 
incl. the national bank, car distributors and 
leasing companies containing: 
- Analysis of national experiences, client 
needs and global good practices on local 
financial institution financing of electric 
vehicles  
Recommendations for enhancing existing 
financial products and risk mitigation 
products, such as special transport loans 
for e-vehicles, presented to local financial 
institutions, car distributors, leasing 
companies and rental companies for 
application. 
Analyse global good practice on electric 
vehicle incentives, such as tax and duty 
reduction 
Report analysing regional and global good 
practices on electric vehicle incentives, 
such as tax and duty reduction, for private 
sector vehicles and private consumers, 
and recommendations for updating laws 
on such incentives in the local context 
Propose suitable electric vehicle 
incentives 
Recommendation and proposal for 
updating legislation on electric vehicle 
incentives presented to Ministry of Finance 
and relevant line ministries for adoption  
Provide recommendation on procurement 
of EVs 
Recommendations and procurement 
guidelines for e-mobility, based on 
regional and global good practices 
1.5.3 Delivering of project sourcing and 
preparation for pipeline sub-projects 
Source and prepare sub-projects under 
components 2 and 3 
Project sourcing, preparation, and regular 
update of EV project pipeline 
Project pipeline for each country 
Component 2:  Deployment of e-bus fleets and enhancement of public transport 
2.1.1 Preparation, financing and 
implementation of e-bus project 
Deployment of large-scale fleets of electric 
buses to showcase their technical and 
commercial viability to operators. Public 
urban transport buses are the target. This 
includes different e-bus technologies 
Preparation, financing, and 
implementation of e-bus fleets in 3 
program countries 
Sub-project with at least 150 e-buses in 
Panama structured and financed

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
(slow-, fast-, opportunity and ultra-fast 
charged buses Finance covers the entire 
e-bus system of buses, charging 
infrastructure, grid connection and bus 
depot upgrades to accommodate e-buses. 
Sub-project with at least 300 e-buses in 
Paraguay structured and financed 
Sub-project with at least 200 e-buses in 
Uruguay structured and financed 
2.2.1 Implement and operate smart facilities 
that enhance public transport access and 
improve inter-modality and non-motorised 
transport  
This activity aims at increasing public 
transport attractiveness through measures 
such as integrated ticketing systems and 
bus only lanes, thereby reducing travel 
time and making public transport faster 
than private means of transport. The 
activity is interlinked with the 2.1.1, as E-
bus sub-projects are embedded in urban 
transport sub-projects, which include 
measures such as bus route restructuring, 
exclusive bus lanes, integrated fare 
systems, or inter-modal integration and 
change stations to increase the 
attractiveness and usage rate of public 
transport. 
Implement smart facilities appropriate to 
enhance PT ridership (e.g., urban spaces 
and infrastructure for public e-transport, 
incl. segregated cycling lanes and bicycle 
parking lots at bus stations, walking areas 
for increased pedestrianization and 
improved accessibility) 
Smart infrastructure in up to three program 
cities  
 
Make effective improvements to the public 
transport systems (e.g., integrated 
ticketing systems, bus only lanes, route 
restructuring, tariff and mode integration) 
Integrated ticketing system in up to three 
program cities 
 
Bus only lanes and dedicated routes in up 
to three program cities 
   
Component 3: Deployment of e-LCVs (public and private)  
3.1.1 Finance and deployment of e-LCV 
sub-projects 
LCVs (public / private) sub-projects have 
been identified for the program countries 
to deploy large-scale fleets of e-LCVs 
E-LCV sub-project selection according to 
defined criteria, preparation, Finance, and 
implementation 
At least 1150 e-LCV financed through at 
least 3 sub-projects 
Component 4: Deployment of fast-charging infrastructure 
4.1.1 Technical preparations for fast 
charging infrastructure investments 
Activities will facilitate the construction of 
the charging infrastructure through 
preparing necessary steps, including the 
formulation of requirements and the 
selecting process for eligible construction 
companies. 
 
Technical preparations for fast charging 
infrastructure investments, incl. 
engineering and procurement process 
Technical preparations for up to 60 fast 
charging infrastructure investments 
4.2.1 Finance fast charging infrastructure 
The activity aims at financing and 
constructing up to 60 fast charging station 
networks in, at least, 3 cities. Involved 
municipality will provide and dedicate 
corresponding public space and land free 
of charge. The electricity supply will be 
delivered by the respective utility, which 
Financing and implementation of fast 
charging infrastructure in the Program 
countries 
Up to 60 fast charging infrastructure 
investments structured and financed

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
116 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/evaluation-policy-gcf  
will be involved in the planning and 
construction, therefore the establishment 
of adequate power supply tariffs offered by 
the utilities will be supported  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The programme will apply the standard procedures established and agreed by CAF and GCF for monitoring, reporting and evaluation of operations in the Accreditation 
Master Agreement and the Funded Activity Agreement. A Program Management Unit (PMU) will be set up. The PMU will ensure the day-to-day monitoring by 
overseeing the implementation of the sub-projects, meeting with the beneficiaries on a regular basis, ensuring coordination with TA, exchanging with local government, 
etc. Every semester, they will review sub-projects’ performance and assess any potential risks. In addition, the PMU executives will visit sub-projects and meet the 
Project Owner on average once in a year. Following this mission, a project implementation report will be shared with all the project stakeholders. Furthermore, PMU 
will be responsible for overseeing project implementation and for approving funding disbursements. On a yearly basis, all sub-projects financed by CAF will be 
assessed through an internal quality review process based on several indicators (technical implementation, disbursement, procurement, outcomes, etc.). Red flag 
sub-projects that meet any kind of difficulties are subject to a specific monitoring process before returning to a regular implementation pathway. 
 
During the implementation reporting period (starting from the date of effectiveness of the FAAs until the Programme completion date), CAF will receive regular reports 
from the beneficiaries, in order to track progress and identify potential issues, as well as improvement opportunities. In this document, the beneficiary will report on 
performance indicators, as well as qualitative information, as defined in the Credit Agreement signed with CAF. In addition, CAF will submit to the Secretariat the 
Annual Performance Report (APR) on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within 90 days after the end of the relevant annual period. The first 
APR will be submitted following the end of the calendar year after the Parties have entered the relevant FAA. 
 
The mid-term and final independent evaluation of the Programme will be organized and managed by the PMU, on the same basis as any project funded under the 
Program in accordance with the GCF's evaluation criteria as per the GCF Evaluation Policy116. CAF will appoint a consultant firm to do so. In most cases, CAF would 
prefer to select a local consulting firm based in the country where the project is located. This allows that CAF takes advantage of deep contextual knowledge and to 
help develop local evaluation skills. The consultant firm will be tasked with evaluating the impact of the project (economic, environmental, etc.) and writing a report 
according to GCF’s standards. 
 
At the end of the implementation period, CAF will prepare project completion report summarizing the main events of the implementation phase, the results achieved, 
and the lessons learned. This report will also provide recommendations for future improvement.  
 
Finally, during the implementation and repayment period, a biannual monitoring of the use of funds will be submitted to GCF.

=== PAGE 98 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1: Inability of borrower to service debt  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
High 
Description 
Inability of borrower to service debt 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
CAF’s comprehensive due diligence and technical support are designed to assess the borrower’s ability to service the 
debt. It is envisage that this program’s interventions will not face demand risk and public entities will be the main source 
of repayment.    
Selected Risk Factor 2: Limited market demand for commercial EVs  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Limited demand for commercial EVs. No or limited commercial uptake of EVs after initial investment uptake resulting 
in limited indirect Program impact. The declining EV price is an external factor. Whilst the magnitude and speed of EV 
price decline is disputed, the trend of reduced-price differential between fossil and EVs is undisputed.   
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Project preparation and sourcing as well as TA activities on enhancing the market situation will held to mitigate the risk. 
Successful EV investment sub-projects and well implemented TA are core to reduce the investment risk levels of EVs. 
Investment risk levels are together with the EV price the 2 core factors which result in a commercial uptake of EVs. 
Good design and implementation of investment sub-projects and of TA can thus minimize this risk.    
Selected Risk Factor 3: Technical underperformance  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
High 
Description 
EVs do not perform as expected and the operator cannot realize standard operations. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
CAF’s comprehensive technical design and structuring of sub-projects minimize this risk. All technologies have been 
proven at least in pilot cases in Latin American countries on similar circumstances. Moreover, lease contracts, 
acquisition and maintenance contracts will incorporate customary performance warranties and provisions for liquidate 
damages.  
Selected Risk Factor 4: Failure to comply with national regulations  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Beneficiaries’ failure to comply with national regulations and/or CAF and GCF environmental, social policy, gender 
requirements and compliance with standards, policies and procedures. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 99 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
Each project will be subject to CAF’s Legal, Environmental and Social Management System as well as gender 
assessment. Each Project will be appropriately appraised and structured to meet CAF’s, GCF’s and national 
requirements. Environmental, Social and Gender Action Plans will be developed during project appraisal to achieve 
this. Implementation thereof will be covenanted through financing agreements. Its implementation will be monitored by 
CAF. Moreover, the program envisage the deployment of TA (component 1) to ensure the conditions both commercial 
and regulatory are in place prior to any intervention under subprogram 2. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Limited commercial uptake 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
No or limited commercial uptake of EVs after initial investment uptake resulting in limited indirect Program impact. The 
declining EV price is an external factor. Whilst the magnitude and speed of EV price decline is disputed, the trend of 
reduced price differential between fossil and EVs is undisputed.   
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Successful EV investment sub-projects and well implemented TA are core to reduce the investment risk levels of EVs. 
Investment risk levels are together with the EV price the 2 core factors which result in a commercial uptake of EVs. 
Good design and implementation of investment sub-projects and of TA can thus minimize this risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 6: Money laundering, terrorist financing and prohibited practices risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Prohibited practices 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk of sub-projects being involved in illicit practices. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
CAF has developed an internal framework for the Prevention and Detection of Money Laundering and Terrorism 
Financing (SPDLAFT). CAF’s framework is implemented in all country offices and have the following elements: 
 
 
Compliance Officer appointed by the Executive President 
 
Internal policies and procedures 
 
Risk-based due diligence 
 
ML/FT risk factors assessment 
 
Screening System against sanctions lists such as OFAC, Consolidated United Nations Security Council Sanctions 
List, European Union Consolidated List, etc. 
 
Regular Audit Revisions on AML/CFT Framework 
 
AML/FT Training for all-staff 
https://www.caf.com/en/about-caf/what-we-do/access-to-information/anti-money-laundering-and-countering-terrorism-
financing/ 
 
The contract (legal agreement) signed among CAF and the relevant parties, there are obligations to comply with AML/ 
CFT regulations to prevent prohibited practices. Additionally, the business manager performs due diligence through the 
AML/CFT risk profile and KYC checklist. They also carry out the screening related parties against the international 
sanctions lists. The information is updated according to the risk profile, once a year for low-risk clients and twice a year 
for medium risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 7: COVID-19 impact 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
High

=== PAGE 100 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
Description 
The COVID-19 impact potentially results in a higher risk adversity of investors and therefore lower investment levels. 
Lower demand for public transport services reduces even more the profitability of investing in EVs.  
 
COVID-19 outbreak and related measures taken by the participant countries may impact programme performance. 
Confinement and social distance measures, as well as the economic crisis derived from the economic downturn can 
prevent TA activities from being carried out, may prevent beneficiaries from coming forward to apply for credit, may 
prevent beneficiaries from taking the risk of committing themselves to a credit, may impede providers to comply with 
requests. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In response, CAF has approved a USD 50 MM Emergency Loan to each of its country-members directed towards the 
health sector, USD 2.500 MM Emergency Credit Line, a USD 1.600 MM Countercyclical Regional Facility for Local 
Developments Banks and a USD 1.200 MM Countercyclical Regional Facility for providing liquidity support to public 
service companies (Utilities) which will allow authorities and entities to contribute to the continuity of business 
operations and the recovery of their economies. This decision is of great importance for helping local MSMEs to deal 
with the economic downturn. The GCF funding will come to provide further support and generate synergies through 
this programme, at a key time for fostering post-crisis low-carbon development. 
 
With regard to project activities, in the event of a health crisis CAF will make all means available to ensure that activities 
are carried out under the highest standards of prevention. In times of confinement, ways to continue with the 
implementation of the project will be evaluated, with the help of virtual tools where possible. 
Selected Risk Factor 8: Limited capacity or experience 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Limited capacity or experience to design and implement e-mobility sub-projects by beneficiaries. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Technical assistance will focus on supporting entities to identify, design and structure e-mobility sub-projects. Detailed 
legal and technical due diligence will be carried out by the CAF to develop robust sub-projects. Support will be provided 
under the Program to assist in developing favourable policies for deployment of e-mobilities.

=== PAGE 101 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The E-Mobility Program aims to enable a large-scale regional transition towards electro-mobility in Latin America 
focusing on intensive use vehicles leading to reduce fossil fuel consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and air 
pollutions. The Program will be implemented in two Subprograms and through two GCF Funding Proposals: one by 
AFD (Sub-Program 1) as an Accredited Entity to cover 8 countries, and one by CAF (Sub-Program 2) to cover 3 
countries, all of them located in Latin America.  
 
The E-Motion Sub-Program 2 shall contribute to overcome the barriers to mass deployment of commercial EVs in 
Uruguay, Paraguay and Panama. The potential segments for investment sub-projects in Uruguay, Paraguay and 
Panama that have been identified are: 
 
 
Segment of e-buses: Public / private bus operators with different legal regimes, which could operate 650 e-buses.  
 
Segment of e-LCV: A variety of LCV users, both public and private are interested in investing in this type of EV. 
The potential is 1,150 e-LCV to be financed under the Sub-Program 2.  
 
Overall, it is expected that the Program presents a low to moderate risk, financing only category C and B risk sub-
projects, high risk “category A” sub-projects will be excluded.  
 
The positive impact of EVs comprises reduced GHG emissions, reduced air pollution, reduced noise levels, reduced 
dependence on fossil fuels and increased energy efficiency. The Program expects direct emissions reductions of 
820,000 tCO2e over the assets lifetime of investments co-financed by the Program, as well as 16 MtCO2e of avoided 
GHG emissions as entire indirect Program impact. Major environmental co-benefits are reduced emissions of pollutants 
and reduced noise emissions. The major concern for air pollution in the cities is PM2,5 and NOx emissions. The 
projected reduction of pollutants of the Program in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is 60 tPM2.5 and 3,940 tNOx. The 
Program contributes to sustainable development goals (SDG) 3 (“good health and well-being”), SDG goal 7 (“affordable 
and clean energy”), SDG goal 9 (“industry, innovation and infrastructure”), SDG goal 11 (“sustainable cities and 
communities”), and SDG 13 (“climate action”). 
 
The main adverse impact will only manifest at the end of the EVs battery life when they no longer match the high 
requirements needed for electromobility. Batteries from EVs have an expected lifespan of approximately 8 to 10 years, 
after which they must be replaced by new ones. The disposal of old batteries can generate environmental and health 
hazards. As expended lithium-ion batteries, due to their chemical contents, are harmful to humans and the environment, 
they need to be managed accordingly. The two environmentally sustainable alternatives of recycling and second life of 
out-of-Use EV batteries, due to many shared supply chain elements, present technical, regulatory, and financial 
challenges. 
 
Due to the implementation of activities that are part of the scope of the Program, other less significant adverse impacts 
can potentially occur, which include: (i) minor construction related impacts during the installation of charging stations 
(noise, dust, waste); (ii) soil and water contamination as a result of metal lixiviation and other sources from scrap from 
out-of-use vehicles (replaced vehicles) and other wastes, such as oils, lubricants, lead-acid batteries, tires, etc.; (iii) 
employment loss due to change in job dynamics (labor reconversion); (iv) health and safety risks during charging and 
maintenance operations; (v) decrease of road safety/increased accidentally (EV are less noticeable). 
 
All Program interventions, at a country level, will be required to comply with CAF´s E&S Safeguards as well as GCF´s 
E&S Policies and Performance Standards. In this regard, all sub-projects will be subject to an environmental and social 
due diligence following CAF´s internal policies and procedures. The goals of CAF’s environmental and social due 
diligence are to: 
 
- 
Assess the environmental and social risks and impacts of each project; 
- 
Propose appropriate measures to avoid, minimize, and/or offset these risks and their impacts; 
- 
Monitor the implementation execution of these measures during the implementation phase for the operation; 
 
CAF´s social and environmental safeguards are the following: 
1. S01: Evaluation and management of environmental and social impacts 
2. S02: Utilization of renewable natural resources 
3. S03: Conservation of biological diversity 
4. S04: Pollution prevention and management

=== PAGE 102 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
5. S05: Cultural Heritage 
6. S06: Ethnic Groups 
7. S07: Resettlement 
8. S08: Working Conditions and Training 
9. S09: Gender Equity 
 
The GCF has provisionally adopted the IFC Performance Standards of the International Financial Corporation (IFC). 
IFC Performance Standards are comprised of 8 standards that cover the main environmental and social considerations 
that must be safeguarded when designing and implementing a project or program. During CAF accreditation to the 
GCF, CAF´s environmental and social safeguards were re-viewed by the GCF and it was confirmed that they are fully 
aligned with the ESS of the GCF. 
 
The accelerated uptake of commercial EVs and electric public transport thanks to an improved ecosystem for EVs with 
(i) financial assistance (FA) made available for EV investments as well as (ii) an adequate technical assistance (TA) on 
each pre-identified scalable EV segment in each country. As a result, the following impacts shall be achieved: 
 
 
Reduction of Greenhouse Gases (GHG): EVs in all countries included in the Program have significantly lower 
lifecycle GHG emissions than fossil-fueled vehicles. 
 
Improved air quality: EVs have no combustion emissions and are a crucial instrument to achieve clean air in 
cities. Commercial vehicles are a major source of PM2.5 and NOx emissions in cities. Replacing fossil, diesel 
powered commercial vehicles with EVs improves air quality significantly. 
 
Reduced energy dependency: EVs use domestic resources and reduce reliance on imported fossil fuels. They 
thereby also increase the resilience of the country’s economy to external oil price shocks. 
 
Increased energy efficiency: EVs are up to 4 times more energy efficient than fossil-fueled vehicles. Electricity 
consumption, even if pursuing an ambitious EV penetration level such as proposed by the EV30@30 target 
supported by the International Energy Agency, is marginal compared to national production levels – however, 
localized grid problems need to be addressed. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
In Latin America, including Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay, the gender equality agenda has gained strength from 
converging national agendas at every scale, particularly with social and feminist movements demanding equality and 
non-discrimination, and the inclusion of CEDAW principles 117 in national legislation. However, despite new policy 
frameworks, the implementation and real progress on women’s integration, especially into the labour market and key 
decision- making positions, is weak in reality. 
 
In all 3 countries, the labour force participation of female as a share of the female population at working age is between 
53-60% in 2019, which, respectively, is about 20% lower compared to men. Also, occupational segregation persists 
across countries and women’s careers concentrate on low paid jobs and informality. Despite many laws, gender wage 
gaps persist across sectors and gender roles impede women’s access to better economic opportunities since domestic 
responsibilities are mostly in their hands. While in Panama the proportion of women in managerial positions is above 
42%, Paraguay and Uruguay lag in ensuring equal gender representation. Both countries reach a share of around 35%. 
Political representation of women, in terms of seats in parliaments at the national and local level, shows even poorer 
figures.  
 
Concerning violence against women, according to UN Women, in Uruguay, 2.8% of ever-partnered women and girls at 
the age between 15-49 have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner 
in the previous 12 months. This number is comparably low, as in Paraguay 8% and in Panama 10.1% of women aged 
15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate 
partner in the previous 12 months. 
 
A report by CAF and the FIA Foundation shows that gender-based harassment and violence has many forms and takes 
place in public places, on streets, at the stations and stops used to access public transport, as well as on the vehicles 
themselves.118 All types of harassment, but in particular sexual harassment, is very emotionally distressing for the 
victim. The resulting fear impacts many women’s ability to move freely and influences their mobility and lifestyle 
decisions. This, in turn, affects their access to education, leisure, and job and career opportunities. Gender-based 
violence is endemic in these countries and underreported; the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating the numbers. The 
urban transport system represents an environment where harassment and sexual abuses occur quotidianly in the 
 
117 Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women 
118 See: https://scioteca.caf.com/handle/123456789/1407

=== PAGE 103 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
regular trips women do every day. Incidents will happen in the e-buses while waiting, walking to and from the stops or 
using charging stations; incidents will increase at night, in isolated vehicles and unattended places, but in crowded units 
as well. A highly sensitive issue considering that, women are more likely to rely on public transportation than men and 
to do a high proportion of their trips by foot. Women, on the other hand are underrepresented in the jobs generated by 
the construction and transport sector in the region. The pandemic has worsened this context, complicating the return 
to work for those women who lost their jobs and those whose care responsibilities have increased. 
 
In terms of gender equality and social inclusion, there are two main goals the program should achieve: 
 
1. Impact on the workforce: reduction of sex-segregation in employment while creating new jobs and expertise 
The pandemic hit Latin American women’s employment very hardly: according to the UN Economic Commission for 
Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) the unemployment rate for women in the region is currently 12%. Many of 
them have been pushed out of the market, but that figure rises to 22.2% if we assume the same level of labor 
participation for women as in 2019, which makes sense considering that they have also been pushed out of the 
economically active population, being forced to fully commit to care activities, they plainly aren’t seeking for new jobs. 
Taking also into account that the transportation sector is traditionally very masculinized (e.g. about two out of ten 
workers in the transport sector are women in all the three countries targeted), the project represents an opportunity to 
shorten gender gaps related to job segregation.    
 
2. Impact on the ridership: reduction of gender biases and exclusions from transportation while changing the system to 
a low-emission one. 
 
The project may reduce or broaden (whether gender issues are taken or not into consideration) the current disparities 
in terms of access and usage of transportation means by women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other 
vulnerable collectives. 
 
To ensure that current public transport ridership levels are sustained or even increased they must tackle gender and 
other socially constructed disparities.  
 
There are two main reasons behind the barriers and exclusions regarding women’s mobility:  
a. 
Routes and schedules are designed with an only-commuter universally - male model and do not take into account 
trip-chaining and the different patterns and needs of women and other vulnerable groups. 
b. 
Sexual harassment and other forms of gender- based violence in the vehicles, facilities and, in general, the public 
space. 
 
So, it is expected that for the E-Motion Program, the contribution to reducing the gender gap in e-mobility and low-
carbon transportation and to preventing and minimizing the harm of lacking gender equality and women’s rights is 
three-folded. First, the transport sector is a catalyst to change social norms. For instance, by raising awareness 
on sexual harassment and violence against women and girls, by providing visibility to women working in non-traditional 
roles in the EV (electric vehicle) markets, and by considering the mobility of care when designing transport operations, 
a societal impact can be achieved. Second, this new e-transport paradigm will lever women’s access to green 
jobs in traditionally sex-segregated occupations or improve access to investment loans for female 
entrepreneurs. Third, the capacity building, training, and sharing of know-how to women and men designing 
the investment plans and the sub-projects as part of the program will systematize gender mainstreaming in 
the transport sector. This three-folded approach will be address as part of the implementation of the four Components 
of the Program. 
A gender assessment has been realized for all countries as well as a gender action plan. This serves as a guideline for 
each individual project to be funded under the Program (see Annex 8). Accordingly, the program will promote gender 
equality and women´s empowerment at the project level and support the use of gender-disaggregated indicators. The 
investments sub-projects of the Program need to include a gender strategy with actions to increase women’s mobility, 
promote safety and access to jobs. By establishing actions to increase women’s mobility, safety, and access to jobs, 
this Program can improve women’s agency in mobility if mainstreaming gender equality in its sub-projects becomes 
systematic. 
 
The Gender Action Plan guarantees that these general recommendations are transformed into specific activities at the 
Program and project levels, and that they are measured and adequately monitored, and adjusted when needed. The 
implementation of the gender action plan including sub-activities (a) application of a gender lens when designing the 
roadmap for different EV segments and EV support policies; (b) increased awareness about gender equality gaps and

=== PAGE 104 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
opportunities in transport; (c) Increased knowledge in how to include gender equality in urban transport sub-projects; 
(d) inclusion of gender equality in the investment plans; (e) improved access to public transportation for women; (f) 
improved sex-disaggregated data collection on urban transport; (g) improved women’s access to jobs; (h) interventions 
to reduce sexual harassment in public transport; (i) trainings and workshops to disseminate best practices for reducing 
sexual harassment in public transport. 
 
The activities outlined in the Gender Action Plan (see Appendix of Annex 8: Gender Assessment Report) result in the 
following 3 outputs: 
 
1. 
Sector specific country-level gender assessments undertaken as part of the development of low-carbon electric 
vehicle roadmaps and policies (national level) 
2. 
Successful knowledge exchange and collaboration on gender aspects in transportation (regional level) 
3. 
Gender components integrated in the sub-projects financed by the Program. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Financial Management 
As per the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), CAF, as the Accredited Entity, shall be responsible for the overall 
management, implementation oversight and supervision of the program in line with its own internal rules, policies and 
procedures, including administering and managing the use of GCF Proceeds, as well as the monitoring, evaluation and 
reporting responsibilities. 
 
CAF will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement with the GCF, for the Loan and the Grant, which will describe the 
specific requirements regarding the financial management of GCF´s resources for the program. In addition, CAF will 
sign a subsidiary agreement with GIZ to channel GCF funds for the purpose of Component 1 (TA Component) 
implementation. GIZ will apply its own procurement guidelines119. 
 
For non-sovereign borrowers, a credit risk monitoring will be carried out by CAF through the assessment, among others, 
of the financial statements of borrowers, monitoring of financial covenants, etc.  
 
CAF will ensure absolute transparency in the use of GCF funds. For that purpose, CAF has internal processes and 
procedures that ensure a robust financial control, which were certified in the accreditation process before the GCF. 
According to these internal process and procedures, after the first disbursement of any investment, projects are 
transferred to CAF’s portfolio management team. This team ensures that all conditions and covenants are met 
throughout the duration of the loan/investment by the borrower/investee. Portfolio managers are required to present 
semi-annually/annually to CAF’s management the performance of their transactions undermanagement. Finally, as an 
assurance internal process, certain transactions are selected randomly by the Internal Audit team to assess those 
internal processes and procedures have been followed in accordance with existing guidelines. Portfolio functions are 
governed by two internal guidelines: a) Manual for the Administration of Operations (Manual De Gestión Para 
Operaciones de Estructuración Financiera) and b) Manual for the Revision and Risk Assessment of Operations Under 
Portfolio (Manual para la Revisión y Calificación de la Cartera sin Garantía Soberana). 
 
In addition, CAF will conduct external annual audits to assess the adequate use of the GCF’s funds. These audits will 
be undertaken by international certified auditors. 
 
Disbursement 
At CAF level, disbursement will be related to: 
− Loan disbursements on sub-projects. Disbursement conditions will be defined on a project-by-project basis and will 
be described in the financing agreement signed between CAF and the borrower; 
− Fund transfers to GIZ whose disbursements will be reported to CAF; 
− Payments of the consultants in charge of providing support for sub-projects’ preparation; 
 
Loan resources will be administrated as per CAF´s Manual for the Credit and Equity Investment Process (MN/VPR-080). 
The Manual guides the process for all the phases of the credit, including: (i) Origination; (ii) Evaluation; (iii) Approval; 
(iv) Formalization; and (v) Administration. GCF non-reimbursable resources will be executed by CAF, following its 
Manual for the Management of Technical Cooperation Operations (MN /VPP – 064). 
 
 
 
119 For further details on process for the procurement, please review the annex 10 of the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 105 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
Procurement 
The procurement processes will follow the last version of CAF´s Manual of Procurement of Goods, Consulting Services 
and Works (NM/DFLA-038). The Chapter VIII of this Manual includes all the details and thresholds for the procurements. 
These thresholds for the procurement of goods and services are presented in the table below.  
 
Overview of process thresholds for the procurement of goods and services 
Threshold (Amount in USD) 
Method 
General procedures 
0 – 5,000 
(Only for the purchase of goods) 
Direct contracting 
1. Receive at least one offer. 
5,001 – 10,000 
(Only for the purchase of goods) 
Market 
assessment 
1. Market assessment; 
2. Receive at least two (2) offers 
3. Select the best offer based on the 
completion of an evaluation. 
0-10,000 (Only for the purchase of 
services, consultancy and works) 
Direct contracting 
1. Receive at least one offer. 
10,001 – 50,000 
(For the purchase of goods, 
services, consultancy and 
works) 
Market 
assessment 
1. Market assessment; 
2. Receive at least three (3) offers from 
different providers; and 
3. Select the best offer based on the 
completion of an evaluation. 
50,001 – 150,000 
(For the purchase of goods, 
services, consultancy and 
works) 
Market 
assessment 
1. Prepare Terms of Reference; 
2. Market assessment of potential 
providers; 
3. Receive at least three (3) offers from 
different providers; and 
4. Perform an evaluation based on the 
criteria indicated in the terms of reference 
150,001–Until the next amount indicated 
below, depending on the type of purchase. Private bidding 
Private bidding to select providers – Request 
for Proposal. An evaluation Committee will 
review the offers and select the provider. 
From 250,000 – For Consultancy 
services 
From 500,000 – for the purchase of 
goods and commercial or professional 
services 
From 2,000,000 – for the purchase of 
works 
 
International 
Public bidding 
International Public bidding process for the 
selection of providers – Request for Proposal. 
 
An evaluation Committee will review the 
offers and select the provider. 
Source: CAF 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

=== PAGE 106 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
120 Annex is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒  Others (please specify – e.g. Environmental and Social Management Framework) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking sub-
projects financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Benchmark report prepared for E-motion Sub-Program 1  
☒ 
Annex 23 
 
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-sub-projects)120 -> GHG and SD Calculations: Methodological Approach and Results 
☒ 
Annex 24  Theory of Change diagram

=== PAGE 107 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 109 ===
To: The Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
 Montevideo, 29th April, 2021 
Ref: “E- Motion Programme – sub programme 2” funding proposal to the GCF from CAF, AFD, 
GIZ y KfW  
 
Dear Mr. Yannick Glemarec,  
I refer to “E-Motion programme – subprogramme 2”, submitted as a funding proposal by CAF, 
AFD, GIZ and KfW to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to be considered by the GCF Board. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment to the 
GCF, and the National Designated Authority of Uruguay.  
Persuant to GCF decisión B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
herby communicate our no-objection to E-Motion programme - sub programme 2, as included 
in the funding proposal.  
By communicating our non-objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The Government of Uruguay has no – objection to the Programme, as included in the 
funding proposal  
(b) The Programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Uruguay´s 
national priorities, strategies and plans; and 
(c) In accordance to the GCF´s environmental and social safeguards, the Programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regualtions.  
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the Programme.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
Kind regards 
 
------------------------------ 
Ms. Natalie Pareja 
National Climate Change Director; Ministry of Environment

=== PAGE 110 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 16, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the official language of the countries eligible 
under this programme.  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.caf.com/media/4019070/e-motion_e-
mobility-and-low-carbon-transportation-environmental-
and-social-management-framework.docx 
Spanish: 
https://www.caf.com/media/4019071/programa-de-
movilidad-electrica-y-transporte-bajo-en-carbono-marco-
de-gestion-ambiental-y-social.docx 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Analysis and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 16, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Explanation on language 
Spanish is the official language of the countries eligible 
under this Programme.  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.caf.com/media/4019070/e-motion_e-
mobility-and-low-carbon-transportation-environmental-
and-social-management-framework.docx

=== PAGE 111 ===
Spanish: 
https://www.caf.com/media/4019071/programa-de-
movilidad-electrica-y-transporte-bajo-en-carbono-marco-
de-gestion-ambiental-y-social.docx 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Analysis and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, September 16, 2022 
Place 
Physical copies, upon request, will be available at the 
following CAF country offices:  
 
Panamá 
Mrs. Nara Vargas 
Principal Executive 
Boulevard Pacífica P.H., Oceanía Business, Plaza Torre 2000, 
piso 27, Punta Pacífica, Ciudad de Panamá, Panamá.  
 
Paraguay 
Mr. Hernan Benitez 
Principal Executive 
Avenida Santa Teresa con Herminio Maldonado, Complejo 
Paseo La Galería, Torre 2, piso 25, Asunción, Paraguay.   
 
Uruguay 
Mr. Andres Alcalá 
Principal Executive 
Ciudadela 1235 entre Reconquista y Camacuá, Montevideo, 
Uruguay.

=== PAGE 112 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Friday, December 16, 2022 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, October 17, 2022 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 113 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP195 
Proposal name: 
E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation
Accredited entity: 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) 
Country/(ies) : 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The programme focuses comprehensively on 
technical assistance (TA) and subproject 
origination, structuring and financing in each 
country. 
Greenhouse gas reduction impacts and 
favourable cost efficiency indicators 
attributed to an indicative pipeline that is to 
be finalized. 
Different financing modalities and range of 
local partners proposed, including local 
financial institutions. 
Uncertainties related to macroenvironment 
and impact on lending by participating local 
financial institutions. 
Synergies with ongoing TA and investment 
initiatives for electric vehicle deployment and 
modal shift. 
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and
recommendations”, respectively.
II.
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
The programme will implement interventions to kick-start mass deployment of electric
vehicles (EVs) significantly earlier than under a business-as-usual scenario by reducing the risk
profile of investments and by providing comprehensive technical assistance (TA). The
programme functions as a market accelerator enabling a faster uptake of e-mobility, avoiding a
lock-in of long-lived assets that rely on fossil fuel technology. It fills the gap between initial pilot
schemes and long-term targets by thoroughly addressing TA and financial assistance. These
interventions are made at a point in time where e-mobility is not yet commercially viable and
thus requires initial investment support, as is the case in all countries that have achieved a
significant uptake of e-mobility.
4.
Transport contributes almost a quarter of the current global energy-related greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions and is growing faster than any other energy end-use sector. Latin America
already accounts for 10 per cent of global GHG emissions and transportation-related GHG
emissions from many countries in Latin America represent even a higher proportion than the

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 114 
 
 
global average. Limiting the average global temperature increase to below 2 degrees Celsius 
requires changing the trajectory of transport emissions, which involves the development of an 
integrated electromobility ecosystem encompassing various transport modes, coupled with the 
low-carbon production of electricity and hydrogen (Paris Declaration on Electro-Mobility and 
Climate Change and Call to Action, 2015). Modelling published by the International Energy 
Agency suggests that EVs need to represent 35 per cent of global vehicle sales in 2030. Latin 
America has strong enabling conditions in terms of clean transport and e-mobility. 
5. 
The programme focuses on commercial EVs in intensive use categories (i.e. electric 
buses, light commercial vehicle (LCV) fleets, public fleets and urban freight vehicles) together 
with the required charging infrastructure and grid upgrades. Investments are linked with new 
business models and service delivery structures that will enhance the attractiveness and 
sustainability of the public transport sector. The programme aims to become an important 
contribution towards modal shift in the participating countries. 
6. 
The programme seeks a total investment USD 231 million. GCF investment is USD 76.6 
million of which USD 66.8 million is in loans and USD 9.8. million in grants for TA. Mitigation 
impact over the lifetime of the assets is estimated at 3.3 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO2eq) directly relating to investment subprojects. The programme envisages 
financing at least one project in each participating country. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
7. 
The programme will be implemented in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay, and has the 
following components:  
Component 1: Establishment of an e-mobility conducive ecosystem (technical assistance) (total 
cost: USD 5.36 million; GCF cost: USD 5.36 million) 
8. 
This component will create a policy and business framework conducive to massive 
deployment of EVs at the local (project design, business model design and development, city EV 
policies, training), regional (capacity-building, knowledge materials, outreach and 
dissemination, programme monitoring) and national level (sectoral electrification roadmaps, 
stakeholder coordination, support of national enabling policies for EV deployment, advice on 
battery re-usage, recycling and disposal). 
9. 
This component addresses the barriers of lack policies conducive to EV deployment and 
lack of business models (barriers 1.1 and 1.2, respectively). The component and its associated 
activities provide TA to enable effective financial assistance and to create a (gender-responsive) 
policy and business framework conducive to massive deployment of EVs. Activities are 
coordinated and realized with the relevant national authorities to ensure complementarity of 
different endeavours 
Component 2: Deployment of e-bus fleets and enhancement of public transport (financial 
assistance) (total cost: USD 178.16 million; GCF cost: USD 52.97 million) 
10. 
Component 2, the major investment component will, when possible, be coupled with 
innovative business models based on a separation of asset ownership and operations, thus 
modernizing and increasing the attractiveness of the public transport sector while also making 
it financially more efficient and sustainable. 
11. 
Component 2 addresses the barrier of higher up-front procurement costs of e-buses as 
well as the barrier of lower financial profitability compared with fossil-fuel units. The goal is to 
deploy large-scale fleets of e-buses to showcase their technical and commercial viability to 
operators. Public urban transport buses are the target. This includes different e-bus 
technologies (slow-, fast-, opportunity and ultra-fast charged buses), bus sizes of 12 m and 
different operational structures (mixed traffic buses as well as units operating on bus-only

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 115 
 
 
routes). The targeted e-bus fleet size is 100 or more units, but for smaller cities smaller fleets 
can be financed. Outcome 2.2 increases ridership of public transport and e-buses through smart 
infrastructure measures, and establishes, implements and operationalizes facilities for 
enhanced public transport access, improved inter-modality and non-motorized transport. The 
programme seeks to use TA and investment into public transport measures to foster modal shift 
to low-carbon transport. 
Component 3: Deployment of electric light commercial vehicles (public and private). (total cost: 
USD 36.27 million; GCF cost: USD 11.43 million) 
12. 
Component 3 addresses the barrier of higher up-front procurement costs of e-LCVs as 
well as the barrier of lower financial profitability compared with fossil fuel-powered units. LCV 
(public/private) subprojects have been identified for most countries. The programme’s goal is 
to deploy large-scale fleets of e-LCVs to make fast-charging infrastructure viable. The indicative 
subprojects include six subprojects for 1,150 e-LCVs (public and private) in three countries. The 
main output under this component is financing commercial EVs to kick-start mass deployment 
and provide evidence of technical, financial and environmental sustainability. 
Component 4:  Deployment of large-scale fast-charging and gender-aware infrastructure for the 
countries (total cost: USD 4.8 million; GCF cost: USD 2.4 million) 
13. 
Investment in low-emission (fast) charging infrastructure lays the foundations for 
deploying EVs in commercial fleets and facilitates further spill-over to other vehicle segments. 
Through output 4.1 (Technical preparations for fast-charging infrastructure investments 
finalized, incl. engineering and procurement process) the programme will facilitate the 
construction of the charging infrastructure, including the formulation of requirements and the 
selecting process for eligible construction companies. The envisaged 20 chargers per country 
will have a capacity of 150 kW each, allowing fast charging. The key output under this 
component is linked to TA for project sourcing and structuring, and TA for design of the 
charging infrastructure including the business model for future commercial operations.   
14. 
Further, output 4.2 (Low-emission fast-charging infrastructure financed and 
construction of in relevant municipalities completed) aims to finance and construct up to 60 fast 
charging station networks in at least three cities. The costs for the infrastructure are for the 
chargers (50 per cent) and installation (50 per cent) and will supported with loans to public 
entities/utilities. The municipality involved will provide and dedicate corresponding public 
space and land free of charge. The electricity supply will be delivered by the appropriate utility, 
which will be involved in the planning and construction. 
Project management and evaluation: Establishing a programme management unit for project 
implementation and impact monitoring (total cost: USD 6.4 million; GCF cost: USD 4.46 million) 
15. 
The programme management unit (PMU) will be responsible for the general 
coordination and management of the programme; managing the TA for preparation of the 
subprojects; preparing the reporting and monitoring reports due to the GCF and supervising the 
evaluation process; implementing and following up on the E-Motion subprogramme 
communication plan; and implementing and maintaining a knowledge and records management 
system. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
                       Scale: Medium to high 
16. 
GHG emission reductions amounting to 3.3 MtCO2eq are expected to be achieved 
through the programme. Based on the initial pipeline of subprojects, the projected direct impact

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 116 
 
 
due to investment in EVs is 0.78 MtCO2eq over the lifetime of the EVs financed by the 
programme. Actual emission reductions will depend on which subprojects are implemented. 
Modal shift is triggered through programme investments and TA from transport modes with 
high levels of GHG emissions per passenger-km to low-carbon transport modes. The projected 
GHG impact in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay owing to modal shift is 2.5 MtCO2eq over the 
lifetime of the EVs financed by the programme based on the initial pipeline of subprojects. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
17. 
The programme supports a paradigm shift to low-emission transportation systems. The 
programme aims to overcome the barriers identified to kick-start the mass deployment of 
commercial EVs, and also represents a turning point in how cities can influence users’ mobility 
patterns by setting the foundations of low-emission, reliable, efficient, secure and affordable e-
transportation. The programme will also work to achieve transformation of urban EV transport 
systems and penetration via enabling policies, infrastructure investment, technology and 
knowledge transfer for sustainable EV market development across Latin America. 
18. 
The programme has potential for scaling up and replication at the national and the 
international level through capacity created in the e-mobility ecosystem, proven cases of 
successful business models, improved profitability and reduced risks of EV investments and 
knowledge products. It also has high potential for knowledge-sharing and learning through the 
TA component at the national, regional and local level. The programme also aims to contribute 
to the creation of an enabling framework. The TA includes support for enabling policies for EV 
deployment. Technical support will aim to set up, improve and/or enforce enabling public 
policies and legal, regulatory, fiscal and/or normative frameworks for e-mobility. The 
programme also aims to have an overall contribution to climate-resilient development 
pathways consistent with national climate change adaptation strategies and plans. It will lead to 
significant GHG reductions in the transportation sector. Without this contribution the target 
countries will not be able to achieve their decarbonization plans. Fostering e-mobility and kick-
starting EV deployment is thus consistent with relevant national climate-resilient development 
pathways. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High 
19. 
The programme is well aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and aims to 
reduce GHG emissions. It contributes significantly to SDG 3 (good health and well-being), SDG 7 
(affordable and clean energy), SDG 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), SDG 11 
(sustainable cities and communities) and SDG 13 (climate action). 
20. 
The programme also delivers environmental, social and gender co-benefits. Major 
environmental co-benefits are reduced emissions of pollutants and reduced noise emissions. A 
major concern in cities is air pollution, particularly particulate matter (PM2.5) and emissions of 
nitrogen oxides (NOX), which will be addressed via the shift from fossil-fuelled vehicles to EVs. 
The major social benefit is improved air quality and reduced noise in urban areas through the 
use of EVs. The programme’s economic co-benefits are realized as a result of the monetary value 
of reduced emissions (GHGs and air pollutants). The economic cost of pollution has been 
calculated by assigning a monetary value to emissions of PM2.5 and NOX for each country, based 
on local levels of pollution at the ground level and the impact on health and costs caused by this 
type of pollution per country. Finally, the programme aims to foster gender-sensitive 
transportation systems. The programme’s gender action plan (GAP) and those of each 
subinvestment include actions and targets on (1) improving access for women to public 
transportation; (2) improving sex-disaggregated data collection on urban transport; (3) 
improving women’s access to jobs; (4) interventions including awareness-raising and

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 117 
 
 
infrastructure to reduce sexual harassment in public transport; and (5) training and workshops 
to disseminate best practices for reducing sexual harassment in public transport. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
21. 
GCF concessionality is expected to address financial and technical capacity barriers, de-
risk and leverage public and private capital for the EV sector, support public finance flows and 
incentivize the shift to EVs in an urban context at a time when the governments of the three 
beneficiary countries have severe fiscal constraints and macroeconomic uncertainties. 
22. 
The EV sectors in the targeted countries have limited access to commercial funding; 
early-mover costs and disadvantages including high performance risks; and lack of sufficient 
commercial viability, including profitability and acceptable risk levels. These constraints mean 
financiers are not currently able to fund such activities with commercial loans. The programme 
countries depend on TA to enhance the viability of the subprojects and to achieve long-term 
transformational impacts. The programme countries would not be able to source the required 
public funds on their own, due to the current fiscal situation in the countries. For example, the 
economic situation arising from the need to cope with the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and 
high global inflation rate have required extensive policy support to be deployed by the 
authorities, including historical cuts to monetary policy rates to help support economic activity, 
and a sharp expansion of social support and health spending. Thus, the GCF grants are essential 
for successful implementation of the required TA activities. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                 
        Scale: High 
23. 
The programme supports the governments’ policy objectives on low-emission transport, 
urban development, and climate change commitments in their nationally determined 
contributions and sectoral plans. No-objection letters have been received from all countries. The 
national designated authorities of the countries included in the programme have committed to 
the development of GHG mitigation policies, decarbonization of the transport sector and the 
development of electric mobility. CAF and its partners (AFD, PROPARCO, KfW, GIZ) have held 
meetings with the national designated authorities and key actors from the e-mobility sector 
(including development banks, private banks, municipalities and regional states, power utilities 
and transport operators) to ensure that the programme responds to their needs. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
                       Scale: Medium to high 
24. 
The total capital investment is USD 229.1 million with a requested GCF finance of USD 
74.3 million and an estimated direct GHG reduction of 3.3 MtCO2eq, resulting in an effectiveness 
of the GCF investment in direct terms of USD 23 per tCO2. This value is lower than that 
calculated by applying the subsidy finance from other countries with significant EV numbers for 
buses, which would result in average costs of USD 140–180 per tCO2 eq. GHG marginal abatement 
costs of transport subprojects tend to be higher than for other interventions because they are 
associated with high incremental costs. E-mobility programmes are also linked to substantial 
spill-over and long-term benefits, once a conducive ecosystem is in place and the market has 
been kick-started. This means that the comprehensive TA component of the programme will 
significantly accelerate the transition to a fully electrified vehicle market, impacting not only the 
uptake of new EVs but also the used car market. Consequently, the indirect GHG impact 
potential is much higher. According to the high potential scenario (not including decreasing 
emission grid factors), the programme can achieve a total GHG reduction of 16 MtCO2eq, 
resulting in an effectiveness of subprogramme 2 of USD 4.6 per tCO2 eq. In addition, the 
programme mobilizes significant co-financing, from both public and private sources.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 118 
 
 
25. 
Concessional loans are expected to finance up to 90 per cent of electric buses, LCVs and 
public e-fleets; whereas equity from private sponsors will account for the remaining 10 per cent 
of financing. Concessional loans are expected to finance the total cost of urban fast-charging 
infrastructure. According to the estimated project pipeline, investment grants will not be used 
to finance investment activities for battery electric buses, e-buses, and e-LCVs. Up to 32 per cent 
of the GCF concessional loans are expected to be used for total financing of the three types of EV.  
26. 
The AE estimated financial returns for e-buses and e-LCVs for the three countries. 
Without the GCF intervention the returns are negative, on average, and range from –5 per cent 
to +3 per cent. The GCF concessionality increases the financial returns to an acceptable level of 
11 per cent on average (ranging from 10 to 15 per cent). The analysis shows that the projects 
would not be bankable if financed under a structure that does not include the GCF concessional 
loans. The potential for scaling up the intervention will therefore mostly depend on the 
trajectory of the technology costs. It will need to decrease sufficiently in the future to bring the 
returns to a level similar to that calculated when including the GCF concessionality.  
27. 
In terms of economic returns, the AE calculates a return per technology and per country. 
The average value is 15 per cent with all the interventions above 12 per cent. This economic 
return is above the expected social discount rate for the countries under consideration. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
28. 
Programme Background. The programme is part of the regional efforts that aims to 
accelerate Electric Vehicle (EV) deployment and enable a large-scale transition towards electro-
mobility in Latin America. The programme intends to invest the deployment of electric buses (e-
buses) and electric light commercial vehicles (e-LCVs) and their related infrastructure in 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Main interventions proposed include providing technical 
assistance for establishing a sustainable mobility ecosystem for electrification and shift to public 
transport, financing public transport mode shift measures, and financing 650 e-buses, 1,150 e-
LCVs, and up to 60 fast-charging infrastructure networks both directly and through 
intermediation. Among the key co-benefits of the programme includes the reduction of air 
pollution, noise levels and GHG emissions, and subsequently improving public health. Main 
social co-benefits include increased road safety as non-motorized transport and micro-mobility 
options tend to lower accident rates, lesser road congestion, and improved the quality of life for 
urban dwellers with more resilient urban transport infrastructure.  
29. 
Environmental and Social Risk Category. The AE assigned the programme moderate 
environmental and social risk category that is equivalent to Category B as per the GCF’s 
environmental and social risk categorization. This is rationalised by financing activities with 
potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that are few, generally 
site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures. No 
activities with potential significant adverse environmental and social risks and impacts that 
would fall under Category A will be supported under the programme. The Secretariat confirms 
the environmental and social risk category and that this is within the AE’s environmental and 
social risk accreditation level.  
30. 
Safeguard Instruments. The AE provided an Environmental and Social Analysis and 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that presents the general context of 
the programme for environmental and social risk assessment, an analysis on the potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts likely to be associated with the programme 
components, and mitigation measures to address such risks and impacts with specification of 
roles and responsibilities for appraisal and supervision. The ESMF establishes general

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 119 
 
 
guidelines including indicative outlines of subproject safeguards instruments to help 
implementing partners develop subproject specific environmental and social impact assessment 
(ESIA) and environmental and social management plan (ESMP) in accordance with AE’s 
Environmental and Social Safeguards that are aligned with GCF’s environmental and social 
safeguards standards. 
31. 
Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) Standards. The 
paragraphs below describe the programme’s compliance with GCF’s ESS standards: 
32. 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The ESMF provides an analysis of the potential environmental and social risks based 
on the characteristics of the programme and suggests potential mitigation measures based on 
the severity of such risks and impacts identified, which focuses on EV deployment and the 
construction of charging infrastructure, grid connections and bus depot upgrades. All 
subprojects will be required to prepare an ESIA and ESMP subject to the E&S due diligence 
following AE’s internal policies and procedures, as outlined in the ESMF. For subprojects led by 
the public entities, ESIA and ESMP will be evaluated by the AE to ensure compliance with 
applicable environmental and social safeguards of the AE. For subprojects financed through 
intermediation, all involved local financial institutions must have fully operational 
environmental and social risk assessment systems (ESRAS) or the environmental and social risk 
management systems (ESMS), which will be evaluated during the E&S due diligence conducted 
by the AE. In both cases, gaps with AE’s E&S standards will be identified and the AE will depict 
additional measures to be taken by the implementing partner to close such gaps through an 
Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) contractually required in the loan agreements. 
The implementation of the action plans will then be monitored and reported to ensure 
compliance with AE’s applicable E&S standards. All subprojects under the programme are 
required to comply with the applicable national and local E&S laws and regulations in the 
respective target countries as well as AE’s E&S Safeguards that are aligned with the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) Performance Standards on Environmental and Social 
Sustainability.  
33. 
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions: The programme identified medium adverse 
impacts on employment loss due to change in job dynamics and required skillset, and potential 
occupational health and safety risks for workers involved during the construction, maintenance 
and operations of EVs and charging infrastructure. The programme will provide technical 
assistance to implement specialized training and retraining schemes to help workers acquire 
the necessary new skills to transition to the new market demands, and as EV units’ providers/ 
sellers will likely provide the national dealer with training and tools operator companies will 
prioritize training of existing personnel. The ESMF triggers AE’s E&S safeguard on working 
conditions and training and specifies requires on labor safety and job security applicable to all 
components of the programme. As set in the AE’s exclusion list, the programme will not finance 
operations to clients or executing agencies that carry out the production or activities involving 
harmful or exploitative forms of labor forced and child labor. The AE is recommended to 
establish occupational health and safety (OHS) management guidance and procedures such as in 
the form of sectoral labor practices and working conditions checklist at the subproject level.  
34. 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention: The programme’s ESMF is 
guided with the aim of avoiding and minimizing negative impacts on human health, biodiversity, 
and ecosystems through the prevention of pollution. Activities under the programme will 
potentially generate wastewater and hazardous materials as regards the use, replacement, 
reuse and recycling, and disposal of EV batteries (primarily lithium batteries and the peripheral 
components). Additional impacts can be attributed to small-scale construction activities of grid-
connected charging stations and bus depot upgrading, which may generate noise, dust particles, 
solid and liquid waste, and soil and water contamination from and scrapping of out-of-use 
vehicles, such as oils and lubricants, lead-acid batteries, tires and scrap metals. The programme

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 120 
 
 
will exclude the production, trade, storage or transport of large volumes of products hazardous 
chemicals, or commercial scale use of hazardous chemicals, and provide technical assistance to 
the targeted countries and requires an integral EV Battery Waste Management Program must be 
developed together with the ESMP, which will need to comply with current or proposed new 
regulatory requirements established by each target country for the management, treatment and 
disposal of End-of Life EV Batteries. The programme envisions that necessary legal framework 
and capacities on EV battery management will be developed and deployed during the 
implementation of the programme and specifies in the ESMF if the local legislation does not 
have specific regulations in this regard, the best international practices must be applied. Given 
the regulatory framework on the proper management of EV batteries in the targeting countries 
are yet to be developed, the AE is recommended to further elaborate the guideline on EV battery 
management and detail the best practice and technical standards to be followed at the 
subproject level.  
35. 
ESS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security: The investment under the programme 
could potentially adversely affect the community health and safety. These could include 
infrastructure and equipment safety risks during the construction, maintenance and operation 
of the EV charging stations and upgrading related systems; increased accidentality as the low or 
non-existent noise of EVs are less noticeable during operation; potential for community 
exposure to hazardous materials and chemical substances related to EV battery disposal and 
scrapping conventional vehicles; and conflict risks between institutions, companies and 
community during the installation and cabling activities which may fluctuate the electric power 
service and cause power outrage in the affected communities, therefore, the community may 
have power outage. The ESMF has provided measures to manage these risks including, among 
others, informing the community and road actors of the precautions needed with the circulation 
of vehicles with low or no noise generation, selecting manufacturers that incorporate sound 
alert systems in vehicles to alert pedestrians, cyclists and those in need of sound stimulus to 
become aware of the proximity of a vehicle, and management of intervention schedules at hours 
where the demand for energy by the affected community is the lowest. The AE is recommended 
to incorporate measures to avoid and minimize community exposure to hazardous materials in 
the EV battery waste management plan at subproject level. 
36. 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. The programme will exclude 
subprojects that involves land acquisition and involuntary resettlement and construct small-
scale urban charging stations and new connecting power lines located on lands of public domain 
and property of municipal or state authorities. The programme will build e-bus charging 
stations on sites belonging to the bus companies. While no resettlement processes are expected, 
there is a possibility that governments may propose facilitating the installation of new recycling 
facilities, the ESMF specifies that if a subproject requires lands for the development of any 
infrastructure and cannot avoid to economic and/or physical displacement, the implementing 
partners must structure a resettlement action plan (RAP), determining the compensation and 
benefits for displaced persons or livelihood restoration plan, that must be consulted and agreed 
upon by the affected parties. An indicative outline of the RAP is provided in the ESMF.  
37. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. The AE’s due diligence indicates that the scope of the programme does not pose any 
risks on critical habitats, such as legally protected areas, natural habitats, or modified habitat 
with significant value for biodiversity, and no potential adverse impacts are expected in relation 
to land use change and deforestation. Hence the ESMF does not trigger AE’s safeguard on 
conservation of biological diversity but highlights the programme’s commitment to avoiding 
and minimizing impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems through the prevention of pollution, 
which is considered by the AE as a critical factor contributing to the degradation of natural 
resources and loss of biodiversity in the region. The AE also applies the precautionary principle 
and requires the application of protective measures on certain products or technologies where 
it is deemed necessary. The ESMF specifies that any subproject potentially affecting critical

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 121 
 
 
habitats will be categorized as high E&S risk thus not eligible to the programme. In addition, the 
AE also exclude operations in protected areas and activities involving the introduction of exotic 
species and/ or organisms genetically modified (GMO) without the corresponding technical 
studies and authorization to enter the country by the relevant regulatory institutions. 
38. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The three countries 
where the project is being implemented have indigenous peoples who may be affected by the 
project. Subprojects with potentially adverse impacts on indigenous people will not be eligible 
to participate. The executing entities (EEs) will develop and conduct consultation and 
stakeholder engagement activities with indigenous peoples if necessary. For subprojects where 
an environmental and social assessment identifies indigenous people as stakeholders, 
participation and consent requirements will be implemented in accordance with the AE’s 
safeguards. If necessary, the EE will develop and implement an ethnic group plan, which meets 
the requirements of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, arrived at by consent, depicting the 
necessary measures to facilitate the positive impacts to occur, to mitigate or compensate for the 
negative impacts and to ensure that the benefits generated by the project are inclusive and 
culturally appropriate. This plan must incorporate a culturally appropriate engagement 
approach.  
39. 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage: The ESMF establishes specialized requirements for 
subproject specific ESMP, when warranted, must contain measures to ensure the protection of 
the cultural heritage from loss or damage and support its preservation. The ESMF also 
suggested measures including the design and application of a Cultural Resources Management 
Plan, application of field-based studies and documentation of findings as well Chance Findings 
Protocols during any construction activity. The ESMF also requires that the management and 
preservation of cultural resource findings must be undertaken by or in coordination with the 
competent authorities. During the preparation of subprojects, AE could require the 
implementing partners additional or specialized technical support to comply with these 
requirements, and in the event of a lack of capacity of the partners, an external evaluation team 
should be brought in to carry out risk and benefit enhancement analyses as well as help in the 
design of specialized studies required. The AE is recommended to incorporate chance finds 
protocol in the ESMF in case tangible cultural heritage is found at subproject level. 
40. 
Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. 
The ESMF has identified medium SEAH risk related to the deployment of EVs in the public 
transport sector and low gender-based violence (GBV) and SEAH during the construction of 
small-scale EV infrastructure works. Potential mitigation measures include training transport 
operating companies to detect SEAH incidents, raising awareness and creating spaces free of 
gender-based violence (GBV) and SEAH, and supporting the establishment of an adequate 
regulatory framework for public transport operating companies to implement gender policies 
preventing SEAH and GBV. The AE also incorporates in the gender action plan code of conduct 
establishing zero-tolerance for SEAH against community members and project workers and 
requires that all implementing partners must have in place a fully functional and survivor 
centred and gender-responsive grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for SEAH-specific 
complaints or incidents. The ESMF requires subprojects must be designed to minimize SEAH 
risks and GBV to the affected communities and subproject workers, and that GBV and SEAH 
risks must be identified at the E&S due diligence and corresponding mitigation measures be 
included in the gender action plan and be disclosed. The AE provides several avenues for 
individuals and communities filing complaint related to the programme, including through AE’s 
Integrity and Ethics Committee and the Prohibited Practices Prevention Committee, and 
through the Accountability Mechanism for projects financed by the Green Funds. The ESMF also 
requires that all subprojects must establish survivor-centred and gender-responsive GRMs 
incorporating specific procedures to receive, register and manage SEAH complaints and 
incidents.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 122 
 
 
41. 
Implementation arrangements. The AE will monitor and supervise the environmental 
and social performance and compliance with contractual requirements of the specific 
subprojects financed by programme. All Loan agreements will include monitoring and reporting 
requirements to be fulfilled by the implementing partners on environmental and social 
safeguards compliance. A Project Management Unit (PMU), composed of professionals from the 
AE and the Executing Entity and supported by an external E&S and Gender expert, will be 
established to ensure the day-to-day implementation and monitoring the impacts of the 
programme. AE’s specialists will carry out supervision mission, review level of environmental 
and social safeguard performance and prepare supervision reports with recommendations to 
address non-compliances. The AE will ensure that adequate financial and technical resources 
are provided to oversee and implement the requirements of the ESMF. Where needed, 
additional E&S specialist consultants will be engaged to assist implementing partners in 
conducting specialized assessments of the subproject during its operations and work with the 
implementing partners to improve their E&S management systems and capabilities.  
42. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The development of the 
programme has evolved based on consultations conducted with various stakeholders including 
national government representatives such as from National Designated Authorities, national 
companies in charge of electric energy, municipalities of the main cities in targeted countries, 
and main actors including those involved in capacity building and financing EV, charging 
infrastructure and in the battery value chain. The programme also provides for engagement of 
stakeholders during the implementation of the supported subprojects and capacity building 
activities through an ongoing process involving stakeholder analysis and planning, disclosure 
and dissemination of information, consultation and participation, grievance mechanism, and 
environmental and social performance reporting to affected communities. The ESMF provides 
an indicative outline of the stakeholder engagement plan required by all the subprojects.   
43. 
Grievance redress mechanism. The programme provides access to grievance redress 
mechanisms at the AE, implementing partners and subproject levels. As part of the AE’s E&S 
safeguards requirements, all subprojects will design and implement a GRM commensurate with 
the magnitude and the nature of E&S risks identified. All implementing partners will be 
required to implement effective GRMs to receive and assist with the resolution of any concerns 
and grievances of stakeholders that may arise in connection with a sub-project’s gender, social 
and environmental performance, including survivor-centred and gender-responsive SEAH 
redress procedures or requirements. The programme expects subproject GRM be used to 
provide the fastest solutions for complaint and better management of stakeholder expectations. 
In addition, subprojects are required to carry out an extensive information process to publicize 
the subproject-level GRMs and ensure that affected people can access to it. These mechanisms 
will be provided in addition to AE’s accountability mechanisms. While the AE is in the process of 
developing a centralized GRM at the institutional level that can be used to address all possible 
complaints related to the E&S management where AE operates, the AE is recommended to keep 
all relevant stakeholders informed once its corporate GRM is established and keep the ESMF 
and guidance to subproject GRMs updated.   
4.2 
Gender policy  
44. 
The AE provided a gender assessment and GAP with the funding proposal and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. 
45. 
While the gender equality agenda has gained strength in Latin America (including 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay) regarding social and feminist movements, and the legislative 
frameworks domesticating the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women (CEDAW) and others, the reality is in the actual implementation of the various 
commitments the countries have made, slowing progress in the realization of women’s labour

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 123 
 
 
market rights, meaningful participation and representation in decision-making processes, and 
overall curbing different forms of gender-based violence, including realization of 
human/women’s rights in general. The gender assessment found that in all three countries the 
female labour force participation as a share of the total female population at working age ranges 
from 53 to 60 per cent in 2019, which is about 20 per cent lower than the participation rate of 
men. Gender wage gaps persist across sectors, and gender roles due to home-based care work 
(among other things) impede women’s access to better economic opportunities. In addition, 
occupational segregation persists across countries and women’s careers are concentrated 
around low-paid jobs and informality. With regards to violence against women, in Uruguay 2.8 
per cent of women and girls between the ages of 15 and 49 have experienced some form of 
violence, in Paraguay the number is 8 per cent and it is 10.1 per cent in Panama (according to 
data for the 12 months from the time the gender assessment was undertaken).  
46. 
There are specific actions that need to be undertaken in order to guarantee safety when 
using public EV transport, and as workers/users of the service. Women in the region are 
frequently victims of gender-based violence when using transport, and the Covid-19 pandemic 
has exacerbated the numbers. The urban transport system poses some risks of harassment and 
sexual abuse, and safety and security measures are required when designing and implementing 
transport programmes. In addition, women are not adequately represented in the transport 
sector jobs in the region, and this e-mobility programme presents an opportunity for women to 
access the green jobs generated by the projects to be designed with investment loans (e.g. public 
sector projects that will help women obtain professional driving licenses and in return they are 
be able to opt for the direct jobs that the e-buses, e-taxis and e-vans will create). The gender 
assessment recommends that access to these opportunities should be facilitated through the 
provision of scholarships for women to receive training on professional driving. 
47. 
The programme’s GAP aims to ensure that the various recommendations presented in 
the gender assessment report are put into actionable items in order to enhance the gender-
responsiveness of the e-mobility programme. The AE will appoint a team of four specialists who 
will lead implementation of the GAP, and this team will be managed under the PMU. The AE is 
recommended to ensure that gender specialists with experience in the targeted countries are 
recruited. In addition, the AE should ensure that the grievance mechanisms employed by the 
programme are made accessible to both women and men. The funding proposal has identified 
two main goals for subprogramme 2 (E-Motion: e-mobility should be achieved from a gender 
equality and social inclusion perspective), as follows: (1) regarding the workforce: reduction of 
sex-segregation in employment while creating new jobs and expertise; and (2) regarding 
ridership: reduction of gender biases and exclusions from transportation while changing to a 
low-emission system. The GAP therefore outlines three main gender-specific outputs, each with 
its own activities, indicators, targets, timeline and costs: output 1: sector-specific country-level 
gender assessments undertaken as part of the development of low-carbon EV road maps and 
policies (national level); output 2: successful knowledge exchange and collaboration on gender 
aspects in transportation (regional level); and output 3: gender components integrated in the 
subprojects financed by the programme. 
48. 
Key activities that will be implemented under output 1 are (1) adoption of a 
transformative gender perspective, with a focus on mobility, safety and jobs, in the design and 
review of all three country-level/local road maps and electric mobility policies, strategies and 
implementation plans: design an effective advocacy strategy and action plan for mainstreaming 
gender in such activities; (2) facilitate/conduct a multi-stakeholder consultation strategy during 
the implementation of the E-Motion subprogramme 2 (Component 1); and (3) develop a 
country-specific GAP on the basis of the synthesis of each contextual gender assessment and the 
support given to design/review low-carbon EV national road maps and policies; to be 
reinforced by the consultation/participatory processes that will be undertaken to inform the 
project. In depth interviews with key gender/social actors will also be included to strengthen 
the diagnosis in each country.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 124 
 
 
49. 
The following activities have been planned under output 2: (1) include a gender 
perspective approach in capacity-building and training activities (e.g. workshops) targeted to 
key public and private stakeholders (e.g. government actors, operators) in order to increase 
awareness about gender equality gaps and opportunities in transport; (2) conduct online 
capacity-building and training (e.g. webinars) for key public and private stakeholders (e.g. 
government actors, operators, sector companies) in order to increase knowledge of how to 
include the gender perspective in urban transport projects; (3) collect locally adapted best 
practices (e.g. the “Bajale al acoso” in Quito) on violence and harassment prevention and 
treatment in public transportation. Systematized regional best practices will inform the 
capacity-building and training activities, and contribute to define the adapted best practices to 
be implemented in all three countries; and (4) design national communication campaigns about 
sexual harassment and protocols of attention in public transport.  
50. 
Output 3 has six key activities: (1) mobility infrastructure design and management 
financed by the programme and planned to be gender-sensitive and gender-responsive (e.g. 
planning for care facilities, schedule changes, special fares, analysis and modification of routes, 
interior design of buses to accommodate older people and people travelling with infants, bags 
and strollers; (2) participatory and inclusive design of each project financed by the programme 
will include a gender-sensitive and gender-responsive approach, including the following 
measures: hiring female trainers and/or trainers with experience in participatory processes and 
women’s engagement, adapting the sessions’ schedule to women’s practical needs (women’s 
work and domestic responsibilities) including a brief survey to find the most suitable times, 
engaging participants organizations and holding training sessions during work time, choosing a 
venue where women feel comfortable (not a male-dominated site), providing childcare during 
the activities; (3) integrating measures into urban passenger transport projects financed by the 
programme oriented to generate and improve gender disaggregated data collection on urban 
transport; (4) integrating measures into projects that improve women’s access to jobs, such as 
training targeted at women to improve their skills, or advocacy aimed at labour unions (it is 
very usual that masculinized unions obstruct the incorporation of women to the field); (5) 
establishing interventions to address and prevent gender-based violence and sexual 
exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment against people using public transport, 
including training of staff, information campaigns and awareness-raising, required 
infrastructure, and feedback and grievance mechanisms; and (6) promoting gender equality in 
the workplace, such as advertising that job vacancies are open for women, adapting working 
schedules to women’s care needs at home, building dressing rooms, provide childcare. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk)  
51. 
GCF is requested to provide a loan of USD66 million and a grant of USD7.5 million for the 
deployment of the electric vehicle (EV) in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. CAF will co-finance a 
senior loan of USD122 million and raise equity of USD30.4million. CAF and GIZ are providing in-
kind contribution amount to USD2.3milion.  
52. 
While mainly targeting the private sector, the programme allows for the provision of 
financing for both public and private sector entities.  The investment may be directly made by 
CAF in Component 2 & 4 and intermediated through the local financial institutions in 
Component 3. The level of support and an individual sub-project per country and per vehicle 
segment will be determined during the implementation period. Different business models (e.g. 
separation between asset ownership and operation, financing/operating leasing, public-private 
partnership etc.) are envisaged depending on the needs of the sub-project in each country.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 125 
 
 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk) 
53. 
CAF is the AE and EE for the programme. CAF has a strong record in the transport sector 
by financing over USD2,200million in the past 10 years in Latin America. It also has an 
experience in implementation of EV projects. CAF benefits from preferred credit status and is 
rated as Aa3 by Moody’s 
54. 
GIZ is another co-EE for the programme which is responsible for executing technical 
assistance. GIZ has a technical expertise in the development of large TA programs and working 
with different financiers in the E-Mobility sector. 
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
55. 
Credit risk: GCF will assume the credit risk of sub-borrowers for direct financing in 
Component 2 & 4, and LFIs for intermediated financing in Component 3. The credit risk of sub-
loan recipients of the LFIs will be borne by the LFIs. The risk is shared with CAF as both loans 
will be blended and rank pari passu.   
56. 
Co-financing risk: the financial structure considers 90% of the sub-projects funded with 
loans and the remaining 10% is funded by equity from private sponsors. A minimum of 10% 
equity co-financing is included in the eligibility criteria. The co-financing risk can be further 
mitigated by the co-financing ratio at the sub-project and programme level in the term sheet. 
57. 
Technology and market absorption risk: FP states that all technologies have been 
proven at least in pilot cases in Latin America with similar circumstances. Technological 
advancements will result in a decline in EV cost which will be creating a conducive environment 
for mass deployment of the EV. On the other hand, this will also lead to lowering the 
replacement costs of EVs leased or financed. A sub-project using the leasing model, the risk of 
low residual value needs to be absorbed by the market.  Currently, due to the nascent market in 
EV sector, there are very limited business sectors to absorb the losses resulting from the low 
residual value of assets due to the technology obsolescence. This will affect the subsequent EV 
projects and investments after initial investment by GCF and CAF.  
58. 
Project viability and Concessionality: the project viability will depend on the political 
willingness and support from the government. The target impact of the programme is assumed 
that the investment in EVs will take place as planned despite the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Stable frameworks and favourable regulatory environment will help to attract new 
investors for commercial uptake of EVs sector which will be critical for the sustainability and 
scale up of the EV deployment.   
59. 
GCF concessional financing will reduce investment risks through the investment 
combined with the business models and policy frameworks conducive to EV deployment. The 
interest rates for private and public sector borrowers will be differentiated. For the private 
sector investment, the AE determines the pricing on project-by-project basis. The AE is 
contractually required to pass down the concessionality to the end beneficiaries.   
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (high risk) 
60. 
The beneficiary countries – Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay– are not subject to United 
Nations Security Council (UNSC) restrictive measures. The AE, along with GIZ, will act as the 
Executing Entity (EE) for this funded activity. GIZ is a GCF-accredited entity, and the AE has not 
raised any material issues when it comes to its ability to implement the planned activities, from 
a compliance standpoint. The AE has assessed money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited 
practices and sanctions related risks to be of low probability and medium impact. Throughout 
the programme, the AE intends to implement its standard set of controls, inclusive of providing

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 126 
 
 
a mechanism for reporting irregularities which may occur. The Office of Risk Management and 
Compliance (ORMC)/Compliance notes that Panama continues to be listed by the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) as jurisdictions with strategic deficiencies in their AML/CFT regimes. 
Given this exposure, ORMC/Compliance recommends performing enhanced due diligence in all 
project activities pertinent to this country.  ORMC/Compliance has conducted a review of the 
project in accordance with relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material 
issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this 
funding proposal, the ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘high’ and has 
no objection to this request proceeding to the next steps for processing. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
61. 
 In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.   
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
62. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration 
Low 
Compliance 
High 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
63. 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) will perform the dual role of AE and EE for the 
programme.  
64. 
As an AE, CAF will be responsible for the overall management, implementation oversight 
and supervision of the programme in line with its own internal rules, policies and procedures, 
including administering and managing the use of GCF proceeds, as well as the monitoring, 
evaluation and reporting responsibilities. 
65. 
On the other hand, as an EE, CAF will be responsible for providing governance, oversight 
and quality assurance in accordance with its policies, procedures and with the funded activity 
agreement and the accreditation master agreement (AMA). CAF project teams will be 
responsible for the identification, appraisal, implementation and evaluation of eligible 
investments of the programme. The subprojects’ appraisal process will follow CAF’s procedures. 
Business and technical teams will carry out due diligence and appraisals on each project in 
accordance with CAF standards and procedures. CAF will provide financial assistance targeting 
public and private sector project owners (Components 2, 3 and 4), and support the technical 
assistance dedicated to preparation of subprojects (Component 1). 
66. 
As an EE for the project, GIZ will be responsible for implementing activities within the 
TA component (Component 1). GIZ will ensure the implementation of activities using a 
combination of its own technical staff based in partner countries, as well as independent 
consultants. GIZ will report to the E-Motion Steering Committee and to the CAF programme 
manager. 
67. 
The PMU will oversee the general coordination and management of the programme, 
management of the TA, preparation of reporting and monitoring reports due to the GCF and the

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 127 
 
 
supervision of the evaluation process. It will also oversee the implementation and follow up of 
the E-Motion communication plan for subprogramme 2. 
68. 
CAF will enter into a funded activity agreement with the GCF for the loan and the grant. 
The agreement will describe the specific requirements regarding the financial management of 
the GCF resources for the programme. In addition, CAF will sign a subsidiary agreement with 
GIZ to channel GCF funds for the purpose of implementing Component 1 (TA component). 
69. 
CAF’s internal audit team will conduct internal audits and external audits will be 
conducted by international certified auditors, to assess the adequate use of the GCF funds. 
70. 
At the time of this assessment, outstanding issues remain to be addressed in the funding 
proposal as well as in the budget. These will be reflected in the term sheet as a Condition 
Precedent (CP). The CP will serve as a place holder until such time as the issues have been 
addressed. This assessment is subject to change. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
71. 
As a mitigation programme, CAF E-Motion is expected to result in overall GHG emission 
reductions amounting to 3.3 MtCO2eq over a 25-year lifespan, of which 0.78 MtCO2eq is due to 
EVs investments and 2.5 MtCO2eq is due to modal shift to public transport, based on the impact 
calculations available in annex 23 of the funding proposal, and as reflected in the metrics of the 
integrated results framework, core indicator 1. 
72. 
The programme expects to improve air quality by avoiding emissions of 80 tonnes of 
PM2.5 and 4,080 tonnes of NOx by the end of the implementation period, as well as saving costs 
related to energy consumption, pollution and global warming externalities amounting to USD 40 
million, as per the environmental and socioeconomic co-benefit indicators provided in section 
E.5 of the funding proposal.  
73. 
The theory of change properly depicts how the results chain will cascade from the goal 
statement to the project activities, and clearly articulates the relevant interlinkages between 
logic levels, barriers and risks. The “if, then, because” logic is adequately formulated and the 
proposed outputs and outcomes are defined in a manner that is adequately supportive of 
meeting the ultimate programme goal. As a large proportion of the GHG emission reductions are 
expected to be attributable to modal shift to public transport, the AE has properly incorporated 
relevant assumptions related to modal shift in both the theory of change and the logical 
framework, as requested by the Secretariat. 
74. 
Section E.3 of the logical framework has been designed with relevant details, including 
the inclusion of solid means of verification and reporting on the appropriate core and 
supplementary indicators for the targeted results areas, as per the GCF integrated results 
management framework.  
75. 
Regarding the programme-specific indicators in section E.5, the Secretariat has 
requested the AE to add surveys as a means of verification for outcome indicator 2.2 “ % of 
enhanced ridership of public transportation” to be conducted in accordance with CDM 
Methodological Tool 18: Baseline emissions for modal shift measures in urban passenger 
transport, Version 01.01 and to submit the list of data and parameters monitored in accordance 
with the said tool as an attachment to the second annual performance report and the last annual 
performance report (the programme completion report). A corresponding covenant has been 
incorporated in the term sheet and agreed with the AE. 
76. 
The monitoring and evaluation plan in annex 11 of the funding proposal has been found 
to follow the appropriate requirements, as it includes the entire list of the programme 
 
1 https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-18-v1.pdf

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 128 
 
 
integrated results management framework indicators while ensuring alignment of the 
data/sources with set means of verification. As recommended by the Secretariat during 
interdivisional review, the AE increased the monitoring and evaluation budget from 300,000 
USD to 1.1 million USD to allow additional reporting requirements as described in paragraph 17 
above and to comply with the GCF Evaluation Policy provisions. In order to address iTAP 
imposed conditions, the AE has subsequently increased the budget for monitoring and 
evaluation to reach USD 4.1 million or about 2% of the total programme budget, which is in 
alignment with the GCF Evaluation Policy recommendations. However, some of the budget lines 
appear inflated including the rates for international and national consultants. Therefore, further 
clarifications and justifications would need to be provided by the AE ahead of FAA execution 
and a corresponding condition has been added in the term sheet to ensure the final budget is 
cleared and agreed by the Secretariat ahead of FAA signing.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
77. 
The AMA was signed with the AE on 15 November 2016, and it became effective on 19 
March 2018. 
78. 
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme. It is 
recommended that, prior to submission of the funding proposal to the Board (a) the AE has 
obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the GCF has received a certificate or legal opinion 
from the AE in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF confirming that all final internal 
approvals by the AE have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to implement 
the programme. 
79. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in three countries: Panama, Paraguay 
and Uruguay.  
80. 
The GCF has signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with Uruguay, 
which was signed on 14 November 2017 and became effective on 7 October 2021. 
81. 
The GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities in the two other countries. This 
means that, among other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these 
countries, which risks need to be further assessed. 
82. 
With respect to Panama, the GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Panama on 23 April 
2018, followed by an updated draft agreement on 17 February 2020. The agreement is under 
review by the Government. 
83. 
With respect to Paraguay, the GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Paraguay on 4 
December 2015, followed by an updated draft agreement and background note on 3 August 
2016. The agreement is under review by the Government.  
84. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and 
immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal)

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 129 
 
 
85. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Submission by the AE to the GCF of a certificate or legal opinion, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, confirming 
that the AE has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity 
and authority to implement the proposed programme; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the AE has 
provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal 
approvals, whichever is later2; and 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat. 
 
 
2 The GCF can only execute a funded activity agreement with an Accredited Entity that has an executed and effective 
AMA (including an amended and restated AMA).

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 130 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP195 
Proposal name: 
E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation
Accredited entity: 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) 
Country/(ies) : 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 
Impact potential 
   Scale: Medium to high 
1.
A bit of background information will be necessary for this funding proposal (FP). For the
past several years preceding the submission of this request for funding to the GCF, Agence
Française de Développement (AFD), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), and CAF conducted independent studies
that evaluated opportunities for electric mobility (e-mobility) in Latin American countries.
These studies, which were independently funded by each of these institutions, clearly drew out
the big opportunity for e-mobility in countries of the Latin American region. The big
opportunity in that region, as shown by the results of the independent evaluation, exists
because of the endowment of clean electricity infrastructure, dominated by renewable energy
including large hydropower plants in the region. For example, the three countries covered by
the FP have an average grid emission factor ranging between 0 and 0.23 tCO2/MWh.1
2.
The impressive results obtained from the independent studies by the institutions
mentioned in the last paragraph led to a decision to develop a regional E-Motion concept note
that was submitted to GCF. According to CAF, the accredited entity (AE) of this project, before
this E-Motion’s concept note, no regional pre-programme was conducted. The E-Motion concept
was conceived as a regional umbrella programme with the aim of fostering e-mobility and joint
efforts between all the institutions (AFD, KfW, GIZ and CAF) and avoid duplication of actions. It
is expected that the E-Motion collaboration will foster e-mobility in the 11 Latin American
countries covered by the concept note. At the advice of the GCF Secretariat, the E-Motion
programme was broken into two subprogrammes.
3.
According to information obtained from CAF during a question-and-answer interaction
between the AE and independent TAP, the advice from the GCF Secretariat to break these
submissions into two subprogrammes was based on the countries where the two AEs (CAF and
AFD) can operate as AEs and on the best way to execute the programme. While CAF can operate
in the whole region, AFD cannot operate in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. Given these
differences in the operational scope of these two AEs, subprogrammes 1 and 2 will have the
following AEs and cover the following countries:
1 Combined Grid Emission Factor by International Financial Institutions Technical Working Group on GHG 
Accounting/UNFCCC (2021): Panama: 0.23 tCO2/MWhel; Paraguay: 0.00 tCO2/MWhel; Uruguay: 0.065 tCO2/MWhel. 
See annex 2.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 131 
 
 
(a) 
Subprogramme 1 will have AFD as the AE and cover the following eight countries: 
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, and Peru; 
and  
(b) 
Subprogramme 2 will have CAF as the AE and cover the following three countries: 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay.  
4. 
Subprogramme 2, with CAF as the AE, is the focus of this independent TAP assessment. 
The climate context of this programme can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Globally, the transport sector currently constitutes 25 per cent of global emissions. It is 
the fastest growing sector of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions globally and is growing 
faster than any other energy use sector in most economies; 
(b) 
Although Latin American countries currently contribute about 10 per cent of global GHG 
emissions, decarbonizing the transport sector of Latin American countries, if properly 
conceptualized and implemented, will deliver not only good global impacts but also 
sound benefits to the countries in terms of delivering modern and clean public transport 
rolling stock; and 
(c) 
The three countries that will be covered by the proposed programme already have very 
green power infrastructure, with the following country grid emission factors: Panama 
(0.23 tCO2/MWhel); Paraguay (0.00 tCO2/MWhel); and Uruguay 0.065 tCO2/MWhel). This 
existing low-carbon production of electricity in the project countries of this FP is a 
sound requirement for a successful e-mobility system.  
5. 
The FP provided information and evidence that e-mobility programmes have been 
introduced in some countries in Latin America before these current proposed interventions. 
Countries in the region with some forms of e-mobility experience include Chile, Colombia, and 
Uruguay. These e-mobility activities started as pilots that evaluated what kinds of framework 
and business models must be in place to allow unencumbered introduction of e-mobility in each 
country. These regional e-bus programmes were essentially pilot programmes promoted by 
each country’s federal government and the conclusions of these government-led activities can 
be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Separation of ownership and operations can be an effective instrument to promote e-
buses and can bring in new financially strong players into the industry;  
(b) 
Investment subsidies are critical for kick-starting the process because of the need to 
displace cheaper fossil fuels, which are the most common bus fuel in the baseline 
situation of most countries; 
(c) 
In order not to thwart the realistic long-term success of the e-bus programme, these 
subsidies must be reduced significantly after an initial fleet of e-buses and after having 
established a working business model; 
(d) 
Without financial incentives in the early introduction, the e-bus programme will not be 
commercially competitive. However, some of these pilots have shown that some large 
cities are willing to pay for these incremental costs due to e-buses improving air quality 
and reducing GHG emissions; and 
(e) 
Uruguay, one of the three countries that will be covered by the FP, showed through its 
pilot programme that there are barriers that must be mitigated.   
6. 
Noting the claim that this government-sponsored pilot in Uruguay was fundamentally 
successful, the independent TAP questions why it could not be expanded to a commercial scale. 
From an evaluation of the information available on this pilot, the key answer to the question 
above may be derived from the explanations below:

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 132 
 
 
(a) 
Between November and December 2013, different tests were carried out on a 100 per 
cent electric 12-meter bus, model K9 of the company BYD. The performance of the tests 
in Montevideo City, Uruguay was monitored by passenger load simulation and by 
replicating operational schemes; 
(b) 
Later, in May 2016, the same bus was used for a longer test but in real life conditions. It 
was used in different lines and transported passengers over several months. The results 
of the successful operation indicated the need for a subsidy; 
(c) 
The subsidy is expected to cover the price gap between a conventional bus and an 
electric bus as well as infrastructure requirements and charging management. As the 
Government of Uruguay is also compelled to subsidize diesel fuel consumption for 
conventional buses, the Electric Bus Subsidy was financed, in this first call, from the 
future savings in Diesel Bus Subsidy; and 
(d) 
After successful operational results, the Electric Bus Subsidy was approved in 2018 by 
Law 19.670. This pilot in Uruguay left the following lessons that are essential for the 
replication of this success in a fully commercial programme in the country: 
(i) 
The move from battery electric bus (BEB) pilot to a BEB commercial stage will 
require a subsidy from the start of the commercial stage to overcome the higher 
upfront cost of BEB as a replacement for the baseline system; 
(ii) 
Since subsidies are easier to introduce and difficult to remove, the Government 
of Uruguay will prefer an implementation process that is not based on subsidy 
but will include a concessional fund that can eliminate the gap between the 
baseline and the project; 
(iii) 
Without such concessional funding, the 2018 Electric Bus Subsidy will have to be 
continued as it will be key to providing rights and duties for operators, therefore 
ensuring the BEB operational scheme will continue as planned to generate 
impact and guarantee repayment from operators to banks; and 
(iv) 
It is therefore clear that without financial incentives (such as those that will be 
delivered by concessional loan and grants), BEBs cannot be scaled up even 
though its performance was remarkable at the pilot stage as operators will not 
assume the financial risk alone. 
7. 
The main barriers to electric vehicles (EV) in the three countries covered by the FP can 
be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
EVs require high capital investment (CAPEX) compared to the fossil fuelled alternatives 
that are used in the baseline of this intervention. According the FP, this cost may be two 
to three times higher than the baseline alternatives. This will result in higher capital 
requirements, higher finance and insurance costs, and higher risk exposure due to 
higher debt levels; 
(b) 
The cost of capital available in these countries, like in most developing countries, is 
usually higher, thus making the EV programme financially unprofitable. This is the 
situation in many developing countries with long payback times; 
(c) 
Another barrier to successful introduction of EV programmes in these countries arises 
from the non-alignment of existing governance structures to the business models that 
are conducive to EV deployment, especially for the public transport sector;  
(d) 
In the three countries covered by this FP, there is limited know-how on optimal EV 
ecosystem design, maintenance and operations; and 
(e) 
Lastly, when EV targets are established, there are usually no concrete and tangible 
support policies conducive to EV uptake in place in the countries.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 133 
 
 
8. 
The implementation methodology built into the design of subprogramme 2 of this FP is 
for it to deliver more than a sustainable E-motion programme, which is expected to reduce or 
completely eliminate the barriers presented in paragraph 7 above. The general characteristics 
of the business model adopted for the proposed project intervention in Panama, Paraguay, and 
Uruguay can be summarized as follows:  
(a) 
The two key components of the business model intended to enable the attractiveness 
and commercial viability of commercial e-bus subprojects are:  
(i) 
Bulk purchase, which will be tackled through technical assistance (TA); and  
(ii) 
Separation of asset ownership and operations/management; 
(b) 
Bulk purchase: Bulk purchase is important not only due to significant price discounts 
that it can deliver but also because it enables the optimization of the e-mobility system 
in terms of charging infrastructure and bus types allowing, for example, the use of 
common chargers among buses (up to 12 buses per charger); and 
(c) 
Separation of asset ownership and operation/management: Separation of asset 
ownership and management is critical due to high investment costs of e-buses, which 
require strong financial players with access to cheap long-term finance. In this token, 
high net worth private sector investors who are able to access better international and 
locally available funds with attractive fund metrics (low interest rates, grace period, long 
debt maturity, etc.) will purchase and own the assets (e-buses, charging stations, etc.) 
and make these available to operators and management of the e-bus lines along 
designated routes under carefully drawn agreements. This business model will remove 
or drastically reduce the impact of higher CAPEX of e-mobility programmes, which has 
inhibited its penetration over the past years. 
9. 
Subprogramme 2 implements interventions to kick-start EV mass deployment 
significantly earlier than under a business as usual scenario by reducing the risk profile of 
investments and providing comprehensive TA. The key strategic value of the subprogramme is 
that it functions as market accelerator, enabling a far faster uptake of e-mobility than under a 
business as usual scenario and avoiding a lock-in of long-lived assets in fossil technology. 
Subprogramme 2 fills the gap between the existing initial pilots in some countries in the region 
(including Uruguay) and long-term targets. These interventions are to be made at a time when 
e-mobility is not yet commercially viable and thus requires initial investment support, which is 
the case in all countries with significant uptake of e-mobility. The programme focuses on purely 
electric commercial vehicles, namely buses, taxis, and urban freight vehicles together with the 
required charging infrastructure and grid upgrades. No private use vehicles will be financed. 
10. 
Subprogramme 2 of the E-Motion programme will be implemented in Panama, Paraguay 
and Uruguay and has the following components: 
(a) 
Component 1: Establishment of an e-mobility conducive ecosystem by providing TA to 
create a policy and business framework conducive for massive deployment of EVs on 
local (project design, business model design and development, city EV policies, training, 
etc.), national (sectoral electrification roadmaps, stakeholder coordination, support of 
national enabling policies for EV deployment, advice on battery reusage, recycling and 
disposal) and regional levels (capacity-building, knowledge materials, outreach and 
dissemination, programme monitoring); 
(b) 
Component 2: Deployment of large-scale e-bus fleets (major investment component) 
coupled, when possible, with innovative business models based on a separation of asset 
ownership and operations, modernizing and increasing the attractiveness of the public 
transport sector while also making it financially more efficient and sustainable;

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 134 
 
 
(c) 
Component 3: Deployment of electric light commercial vehicles (LCV) (public2 and 
private); 
(d) 
Component 4: Deployment of large-scale, fast-charging and gender aware 
infrastructure for the countries; and 
(e) 
Project management: Establishment of a Programme Management Unit (PMU) for 
project implementation and impact monitoring. 
11. 
The programme has been designed with a comprehensive and ambitious Gender Action 
Plan (GAP) targeting the improvement of gender equality and reduction of sexual harassment in 
public transport. 
12. 
Although this FP was submitted by CAF as the AE, CAF will jointly implement this 
programme with GIZ. The joint arrangement will be as follows: 
(a) 
CAF will serve as the AE for the programme. It will also serve as the executing entity and 
co-financier for the financial assistance targeting public and private sector project 
owners (component 2, 3, and 4), and to support the TA dedicated to subproject 
preparation (component 1, output 1.5.3); and 
(b) 
GIZ will serve as the executing entity for TA (outputs under all subcomponents under 
component 1). 
13. 
Financing for the four components described in paragraph 10 above and the respective 
sources of funding (GCF and co-financing) for the activities are summarized in table 1. 
Table 1: Project components and activities with indicative financing 
 
14. 
 The indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country is provided in annex 17. 
15. 
The total financing needed (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is USD 
229.093 million. This is expected to be contributed as follows: 
(a) 
GCF: USD 74.319 million made up of: 
 
2 Component 3 is for both public and private fleets of light commercial or light passenger vehicles. To clarify, public e-
fleets are not intended for providing public transport systems (these will be through e-buses under component 2); it 
is for operation of many public entities within the countries that also need to decarbonize their mobility operations.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 135 
 
 
(i) 
Senior loan: USD 66.798 million with a 15-year tenor, 3-year grace period and 
0.75 per cent annual interest rate; and 
(ii) 
Grant: USD 7.521 million; and 
(b) 
Co-financing: USD 154.8 million sourced as follows: 
(i) 
CAF: USD 122 million loan with a 15-year tenor, 3-year grace period and pari-
passu seniority; 
(ii) 
Others (public or private): USD 30.4 million equity; and 
(iii) 
CAF/GIZ: USD 2.3 million in kind.  
16. 
The total projected GHG direct impact of subprogramme 2 in Panama, Paraguay and 
Uruguay due to EV investments is estimated to be 0.8 MtCO2e over the lifetime of the EVs 
financed by the programme based on the initial pipeline of subprojects. Actual emission 
reductions (ER) will depend on which subprojects are implemented and monitored by 
subprogramme 2. Over the lifetime subprogramme 2, its projected GHG impact in Panama, 
Paraguay and Uruguay due to modal shift is estimated to be about 2.5 MtCO2e over the lifetime 
of the EVs financed by the programme based on the initial pipeline of subprojects. 
17. 
The GHG ER that will be delivered by subprogramme 2 in the three targeted countries 
was presented in annex 23 to the FP submitted by the AE. Under the direct emissions section of 
annex 23, the estimated ER was based on the pipeline of projects and, furthermore, it was stated 
in the report that actual ER will depend on which projects are implemented and monitored by 
subprogramme 2. Since the number of projects that will be implemented is not yet certain, the 
independent TAP decided to rate the mitigation impact of this programme as medium to high.  
18. 
The independent TAP considers that the expected mitigation impacts of this programme 
could be high, as estimated. However, since the number of projects that will be implemented 
may be greater or fewer than the ones in the pipeline that was used for the estimation of GHG 
ER, we have ranked the mitigation potential as medium to high. Proper monitoring of results 
will help the AE in the results-based management of processes and the achievement of the 
actual mitigation benefits that will be delivered by this intervention.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
                         Scale: High  
19. 
The programme will deliver a paradigm shift as it will catalyse the shift of the public 
transport system from the fossil fuel system dominant in the three countries to a low carbon 
transport sector in the medium to long term. Not only will the programme deliver this shift over 
the medium to long term, it will also catalyse and engender the development of electric charging 
stations, which will proliferate along the corridors of the projects of subprogramme 2 in 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. As stated in the FP, the programme will lead to the creation of 
an EV conducive ecosystem, which will also encourage the penetration of EV into other modes 
of the transport sector in each of the three countries. In addition, the entire programme design 
and implementation is geared towards reducing or completely eliminating barriers that, over 
the years, have been known to impede the penetration of mass EV deployment into the 
transportation sector of the three countries.  
20. 
The successful delivery of products from subprogramme 2 will also contribute to 
increasing the potential for scaling up the programme at the national and international levels. 
The scaling-up potential will be created by the programme through capacity created in the e-
mobility ecosystem, proven cases of successful business models, improved profitability and 
reduced risks of EV investments, and knowledge products. This has been the experience in 
many countries where such intervention has succeeded; the technology, business models, and 
modes of delivering this success are replicated quickly in these nations and internationally.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 136 
 
 
21. 
The fact that subprogramme 2 will provide TA and financial assistance for the design of 
the business model, the development of all the appurtenances of the e-mobility infrastructure 
(including the charging stations, etc.), and the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure 
will deliver documentations, which will aid replication in all three countries as well as 
internationally. Another equally important characteristic of subprogramme 2 is that some of the 
TA has been set up to improve and/or enforce enabling public policies and legal, regulatory, 
fiscal and/or normative frameworks for e-mobility. These are important to enabling the 
paradigm shift potential of such programmes in the three countries and could perhaps provide a 
learning by doing experience that can facilitate replication quickly. 
22. 
Some of the TA components of the programme have been developed for the training of 
project stakeholders from both the private and public sectors, such as equipment suppliers or 
third parties for EV and charger operations and maintenance. Topics cover safety training and 
capacity-building in optimal management of EV fleets. Key documents that will be generated by 
these capacity-building components will become available through multiple channels under the 
knowledge management activity in-country, thus enabling replicability of the success of the 
programme in other parts of the three countries. The programme will also provide webinars, 
electronic reports, case studies and workshops to disseminate experiences and build a base for 
replication. This is a strong base for the paradigm shift potential of subprogramme 2. 
23. 
 The programme will also be able to demonstrate paradigm shift potential by ensuring 
an effective monitoring, reporting and verification system as well as coordination during 
implementation and, more importantly, during the operation of the relevant projects in each 
country covered by this programme. This will enhance knowledge of the programme content 
and the potential to foreclose a “locking-in” of fossil fuel options as well as actively promote the 
use of low carbon transport alternatives. 
24. 
Many of the points presented in the previous paragraphs highlight that subprogramme 2 
has very robust implementation components that will ensure high paradigm shift potential is 
delivered by this programme.  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High  
25. 
The programme is well-aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and aims to 
reduce GHG emissions. It will contribute significantly to SDG 3 (good health and well-being), 
SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy), SDG 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), SDG 11 
(sustainable cities and communities), and SDG 13 (climate action). 
26. 
Major environmental co-benefits from this programme include reduced noise emissions 
and reduced emissions of air pollutants from the reduction or complete elimination of fossil fuel 
combustion in the programme transport facilities. The major concern for air pollution in the 
cities is particulate matter 2.5 (PM2.5) and NOx emissions. Using a conservative approach (the EU 
COPERT model data)3, it has been estimated that the projected direct reduction of pollutants of 
subprogramme 2 in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is 80 tPM2.5 and 4,080 tNOx. Information 
available in the FP also indicated that the poor are disproportionately affected by air pollution 
as they tend to live and work closer to its sources.4 Children and the elderly are particularly 
vulnerable. In addition, recent studies show that women are more affected by poor air quality 
than men. Therefore, replacing diesel-fueled buses with e-buses will deliver significant impact 
on air quality and health of people. 
 
3 COPERT is a software tool used world-wide to calculate air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions from road 
transport 
4 Mitchell G and Dorling D. 2003. An environmental justice analysis of British air quality. Environment and Planning A: 
Economy and Space. 35(5): pp.909–929.

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 137 
 
 
27. 
Apart from the environmental co-benefits discussed above, the programme is also 
expected to deliver economic, social, and gender co-benefits. The major social benefit is 
improved air quality and reduced noise in urban areas through use of EVs. Economic co-benefit 
will be delivered through the monetary value of reduced air emissions (GHG and air pollutants). 
The programme includes a Gender Action Plan (GAP) that is expected to be applied to all 
activities in the programme. According to the FP, the programme’s GAP includes actions and 
targets on: (i) improved access for women to public transportation; (ii) improved sex-
disaggregated data collection on urban transport; (iii) improved women’s access to jobs; (iv) 
interventions including awareness raising and infrastructure to reduce sexual harassment in 
public transport; and (v) trainings and workshops to disseminate best practices for reducing 
sexual harassment in public transport. The programme implementation will therefore deliver 
gender co-benefits.                                                                
28. 
With the alignment of the programme to the various SDGs discussed in paragraph 24 
and the various co-benefits that will be delivered, the independent TAP concluded that the 
potential of subprogramme 2 to significantly contribute to the sustainable development of 
Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is very high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                               Scale: High  
29. 
The need for an EV dominated transport sector is recognized by each of the three 
countries covered by subprogramme 2. Therefore, Uruguay had commenced an investigation of 
the potential of a pilot EV programme in the country even before subprogramme 2 was 
launched. A key conclusion of the Uruguay pilot EV initiative is that there exist barriers to the 
successful launch of the E-motion project in the country. One such barrier was the need to 
financially support the incremental cost difference between the cost of the baseline diesel bus 
and the e-bus. 
30. 
A market study (annex 2), which was a part of the front-end work carried out for the 
origination of subprogramme 2, identified the following barriers that are hindering and will 
hinder future EV uptake in the three programme countries (Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay): 
(a) 
High investment costs: The key limiting barrier to upscaling EVs is the higher initial 
capital costs; 
(b) 
Limited supply of EVs: Besides high initial costs for the purchase of EVs, limited supply 
in the national market is another significant barrier; 
(c) 
Lack of effective incentive mechanisms: Existing incentives are limited to the 
importation of EVs. They are not transferred to the final price seen by the buyer; hence, 
the incentive is blurred; 
(d) 
Limited pollution control: There is limited pollution control of vehicles in circulation, 
including old, secondhand combustion engine operated ones; 
(e) 
Lack of credit facilities: Contrary to conventional vehicles, there are no available credit 
facilities from banks that provide loans for the purchase of alternative vehicles; 
(f) 
Insufficient charging infrastructure: With respect to charging infrastructure, there exist 
several identified drawbacks, such as the lack of easy-to-install chargers at home and in 
workplaces or companies and lack of incentives for third part investment in chargers, 
among others; 
(g) 
Lack of qualified labour and technical expertise: Due to the scarce market for EVs and 
the insufficient charging infrastructure installed at the national level, there is a lack of 
qualified labour and technical expertise in e-mobility;

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 138 
 
 
(h) 
Inappropriate public transport subsidies: Public transport subsidies specifically aim at 
covering the costs of fossil fuels for public passenger buses; and 
(i) 
Inappropriate public bus system design: The existing bus system needs to be 
strengthened and modernized. The modernization should deliver clean and comfortable 
cabins, very structured rail routes, efficient e-buses, and restriction of private vehicles 
and motorcycles in specific routes and areas. This will catalyse modal shifts. 
31. 
The design of subprogramme 2 consists of modules developed to eliminate these 
barriers. Thus, it can be concluded that subprogramme 2 as conceptualized will assist the three 
countries in this programme to meet their needs for the transportation system desired.  
32. 
Viable commercial market environment in-country is needed in each of the three 
countries. A viable commercial market must have investors that are able to raise the CAPEX for 
this new e-mobility system (rolling stocks and, where necessary, charging station costs). CAF 
carried out market costing studies on the different vehicle segments for different price ranges 
and countries (see annex 2 of the FP submitted to the GCF Secretariat). The CAF study also 
evaluated the commercial attractiveness of EVs versus fossil fuel vehicles. Two of the results of 
the study showed that: 
(a) 
The big incremental gap between the cost of the fossil fuel option and the EV option will 
require an investor who is able to raise this fund from the money market at very good 
fund rates; and 
(b) 
A viable commercial market can be created if the ownership of the assets is separated 
from the management and operation of the EV system. 
33. 
The structure of the business model that is built into the operationalization of 
subprogramme 2 thus satisfied what must be done to ensure that the EV system, when 
introduced, will succeed. The operators of the baseline public bus system do not have the 
financial capabilities to fund the CAPEX of the EV alternative, nor do they have the wherewithal 
to obtain funds from international sources, where the cost and terms of debt funds are low 
enough to ensure that the three countries are able to have the kind of infrastructure that will be 
delivered by a successful subprogramme 2. This is a further attestation to the fact that the 
intervention will deliver a product that meets the need of the three nations covered. 
34. 
The programme as conceptualized and presented in the FP is seeking debt and grant 
funding from GCF. The debt funding from GCF, if approved, will be at a very concessional rate of 
0.75 per cent per annum. This will have a positive impact on the CAPEX of the programme and 
ensure that the barrier of high incremental cost between the baseline system that is being 
replaced and the new EV system is mitigated, further contributing to the impact of the 
programme in each of the three countries. 
35. 
The independent TAP concluded that if subprogramme 2 is not implemented as 
submitted in the FP, many, if not all, of the barriers to the implementation of a successful and 
robust EV programme in the three countries covered will continue to make it impossible. The 
independent TAP therefore concluded that this programme will highly meet the needs of the 
recipients in the three countries targeted.  
1.4 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high  
36. 
Country ownership of the programme intervention in each of the three countries is 
established by how many key national policies in each country are considered in the design of 
the programme. According to information contained in the FP and its annex 7, in the framework 
of the elaboration of the E-Motion concept note, CAF and its partners (AFD, Proparco, KfW, GIZ) 
held meetings with the national designated authorities (NDAs) of the countries concerned and

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 139 
 
 
key actors in the e-mobility sector to ensure that the FP responds to the countries’ needs (see 
annex 7). The interaction was at two levels. At the first level, an E-motion presentation was 
made to technical entities within public entities directly related to e-mobility in each country, 
typically: Ministry of Transportation, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Environment, national 
companies in charge of electric energy, and municipalities of the main cities. During this first 
interaction, discussion was centered on identifying synergies with current policies of each 
country to promote e-mobility and to work from the beginning with these entities on how to 
adapt E-motion to the reality of each country to achieve the greatest impact. 
37. 
This is a good start to building strong country ownership into this programme. This first 
round of interaction with public entities associated with country-level decisions on the 
transport sector was followed by regular interactions with these public sector stakeholders to 
update them on each stage of the project. The third round of interactions occurred when 
interviews were conducted as part of the market study framework. Thereafter, stakeholders 
mapping was carried out to firmly identify each of the entities that will be needed to enhance 
the success of the programme. The following entity classification was arrived at after the 
mapping: 
(a) 
NDA: obtaining the letter of no objection from the NDA of the country; 
(b) 
E-motion vehicle segment: national entities that are connected to or identify with one or 
more vehicle segments (e-bus, e-taxi, e-LCV, electric public fleet); 
(c) 
Charging infrastructure: all actors related to chargers to the extent that they are part of 
the value chain or require support for the implementation of their e-mobility project; 
(d) 
Financial role: associated with actors who already provide financing for e-mobility or 
the executing entities of E-motion funds; 
(e) 
Batteries: actors linked to the battery value chain; and 
(f) 
Capacity-building: actors linked to creating capacities in e-mobility subjects. 
38. 
The six attributes listed above were further broken into the following nine attributes 
that was utilized in further interactions with the AE, which resulted in identifying critical issues 
that must be built into the operational model of subprogramme 2. The nine decision attributes 
include: 
(a) 
NDA; 
(b) 
e-bus; 
(c) 
e-taxi; 
(d) 
e-LCV; 
(e) 
e-Public Fleet; 
(f) 
Charging infrastructure; 
(g) 
Financial role; 
(h) 
Battery management; and 
(i) 
EV capacity-building. 
39. 
It is important to note at this point that none of the nine attributes above are focused on 
how the transport sector policies and regulations will evolve over the years and how it will 
impact subprogramme 2 activities into the future. In spite of this very important missing focus, 
the nine attributes were used in selecting entities that were considered in the market study and 
for the future implementation stage of the programme (useful information for CAF). The 
classification above was utilized to map important national entities from each of the three

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 140 
 
 
countries. In-depth discussions on each country were had with these entities, resulting in the 
structure and implementation plan for subprogramme 2 in the three countries. A summary of 
the classifications in the three countries can be summarized as follows: 
40. 
For Panama: 
(a) 
Key classifications of the stakeholders’ interactions in this country can be summarized 
as follows: 
(i) 
The result of the stakeholder map identified 47 entities relevant to e-mobility in 
Panama. 19 of these entities were interviewed; 
(ii) 
Of the 19 entities (who played a role in the evolution of the approach to deliver 
subprogramme 2 activities in this country), 8 were public while 11 were private; 
and 
(iii) 
The only international entity interviewed was the Zero Emission Bus Rapid-
Deployment Accelerator (ZEBRA) Project, co-led by C40 Cities and the 
International Council on Clean Transportation, which aims to help countries in 
Latin America restructure public transport systems, connect with battery 
electric bus (BEB) investors and stimulate BEB supply in Latin America to 
accelerate e-mobility adoption. In phase 1 (2020), ZEBRA worked with Mexico 
City, Bogotá, Medellin and Santiago, cities that have the biggest BEB fleets and 
new generation of trolleybuses in the region;5 and  
(b) 
Specific country conclusions reached can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
E-mobility incentives are under review in Panama’s Electric Mobility 
Interinstitutional Committee (CIME’s proposal) within the National Strategy for 
Electric Mobility ( ENME ) framework. The Ministry of Economy and Finance is 
aware of the need to promote EV by incentives; however, it needs further 
knowledge about the impact these potential incentives could have on public 
collection (incomes) in Panama. 
41. 
For Paraguay: 
(a) 
Key classifications of the stakeholders’ interactions in this country can be summarized 
as follows: 
(i) 
The result of the stakeholder map identified 31 entities relevant to e-mobility in 
Paraguay. 19 of these entities were interviewed;6 and 
(ii) 
Of the 19 entities (who played a role in the evolution of the approach to deliver 
subprogramme 2 activities in this country), 10 were public while 9 were private; 
and 
(b) 
Specific country conclusions reached can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
The National Electricity Administration (ANDE) is developing incentives for 
electricity cost to different Electric Mobility ( EM ) users and also analysing how 
to change regulation to let third parties implement public chargers and sell 
electricity by time, for example; 
(ii) 
The Ministry of Transport (VMT) has been working through Inter-American 
Development ( IDB) support mainly on defining the National Electromobility 
Strategy. The other main TA stream with IDB is the public transport 
 
5 See https://www.ebusradar.org/en/  
6 See annex 1 for the detailed stakeholder map.

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 141 
 
 
restructuring and the potential BEB pilot (30 units) that would be implemented 
with an operational lease model in the Municipality of Asunción; 
(iii) 
VMT has implemented a scrapping programme for old buses. This programme 
was very successful, and VMT/ (Ministerio de Hacienda (MH) provided subsidies 
to bus operators. This framework can be replicated into a BEB-only bus 
replacement with E-motion financial assistance; and 
(iv) 
Asunción is promoting their local programme called “Green City” and, for that, 
the Municipality of Asunción would be implementing their own fleet with EVs 
(buses and passenger cars). 
42. 
For Uruguay: 
(a) 
Key classifications of the stakeholders’ interactions in this country can be summarized 
as follows: 
(i) 
The result of the stakeholder map identified 61 entities relevant to 
electromobility in Uruguay. 22 of these entities were interviewed;7 and 
(ii) 
Of the 22 entities (who played a role in the evolution of the approach to deliver 
subprogramme 2 activities in this country), 10 were public while 12 were 
private; and 
(b) 
Specific country conclusions reached can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
In Uruguay, the National Administration of Power Plants and Transmission 
(UTE) is analysing mechanisms to let third parties implement public chargers 
and sell electricity as an “electromobility service”;  
(ii) 
UTE is planning to develop a national plan for implementing a public fast 
charging network; and 
(iii) 
Operators have been adopting EV mainly because the government has made the 
effort to implement gap subsidies. However, without incentives no EV 
investment would escalate as EV CAPEX is still quite expensive and the main 
barrier to e-mobility adoption. 
43. 
Common key conclusions reached in the three country studies include: 
(a) 
EV CAPEX is still quite expensive and is the main barrier to e-mobility adoption; 
(b) 
EV supply is restricted, and more models/range (km) are required; 
(c) 
Electricity is perceived as expensive and requires incentives as well; 
(d) 
There is a lack of public charging infrastructure; 
(e) 
There is a need for transport authorities to be more involved and take the lead in the 
actions needed to  articulate the ecosystem to reach ENME goals; and 
(f) 
There is a need for incentives, and regulation is key for banks to work with several 
transport operators.   
44. 
While all the stakeholder engagements described in paragraphs 34 to 40 above sound 
like strong programme interaction that will ensure that the programme is effectively designed, 
it is very weak in its alignment with the policies and regulatory frameworks in each of the three 
countries. Despite the fact that this programme was designed as a private sector intervention, it 
must consider that a successful transport sector intervention, even when privately funded, must 
be aligned with the evolution of public policy, which is the purview of the government of the 
 
7 See annex 1 for the detailed stakeholder map.

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 142 
 
 
country. Without this alignment, the risk of failure will be high. The way this private sector 
intervention was originated did not build a strong public sector engagement on transport policy 
and regulatory framework, in spite of the fact that public funding will not be utilized in the 
project. To reduce the associated risk, it is necessary that public policy and sector regulatory 
institutions in the country are involved in the entire project cycle, from planning to 
implementation and operation, to ensure these entities are on the same page as the project 
investors, infrastructure managers and operators, even when public funds are not involved in 
the funding of the infrastructure. In this way, country ownership will be strongly delivered. 
45. 
Given the observation in paragraph 43 above, the independent TAP scored this 
programme intervention as medium to high. To move this programme to a high score on the 
country ownership scale, there should be a set of activities after GCF approval to address the 
risk of failure resulting from the gaps discussed above. 
1.5 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high  
46. 
Financial structure: 
(a) 
The project seeks debt and grant financing from GCF that will be complemented by co-
financing from CAF (debt), equity financing from other private and public sources, and 
in-kind contributions from CAF and GIZ. The funds will be used to implement e-bus 
infrastructures in three countries namely Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay, which have 
diesel-fuelled buses in its baseline public transport system. The investment programme 
will cover the following key components and characteristics: 
(i) 
Electric commercial vehicles with highly intensive use, namely buses, light 
commercial vehicles fleets, public fleets and urban freight vehicles; 
(ii) 
Investment in charging infrastructure along the routes of these public vehicles; 
(iii) 
Upgrades of existing electricity grids that will supply electricity to the charging 
infrastructure; 
(iv) 
No private usage vehicles will be funded in the programme; 
(v) 
Investments in the E-motion programme in the three countries will be via a new 
business model and service delivery structures, which have been designed to 
enhance the attractiveness and sustainability of the public transport sector and 
thereby enable mode shift to modern public transport compared to the status 
quo ante; and 
(vi) 
The programme is also expected to reduce or even eliminate existing socially 
constructed disparities in its workforce and ridership through the 
implementation of new business models, such as ownership splitting, that may 
transform the transport sector. 
(b) 
The breakdown of funding contribution from the sources described above, the types of 
fund and the total that will be provided for the project are presented in table 2 below: 
Table 2: Project Funding Details 
 
Source 
Type of Fund 
Amount (in million USD) 
1. 
GCF 
Senior loan 
66.8 
Grant 
7.5 
2. 
CAF 
Senior loan 
122.0 
3. 
Others (public 
or private) 
Equity 
30.4

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 143 
 
 
4. 
CAF/GIZ 
In kind 
2.3 
Total 
229.0 
 
(c) 
About 29.2 per cent of the total funding for the project is requested from GCF as a senior 
loan (USD 66.8 million) while about 3.3 per cent (USD 7.5 million) is requested as grant 
funding. The senior loan from GCF will come with a 15-year tenor, 3-year grace period 
and 0.75 per cent annual interest rate. The requested grant funding (USD 7.5 million, 
about 3.3 per cent of total project funding) has been earmarked to fund the activities of 
component 1, namely TA to create the policy and business framework for the 
deployment of EVs at the local and country levels. Some of this grant funding has been 
earmarked to mitigate many of the earlier identified barriers to the penetration of EVs 
in the three countries covered.  
47. 
Co-financing/leveraging: 
(a) 
The effectiveness of the concessional loan from GCF can be measured by the fact that 
every USD 1 from GCF will crowd in about USD 1.8 of co-financing. The co-financing that 
will be crowded in will be a concessional senior loan (USD 122 million) from CAF with a 
15-year tenor, 3-year grace period and pari-passu seniority.  
(b) 
Although not used to calculate the efficiency metrics of this programme, it is important 
to note that equity and in-kind funding for this programme will also come from public 
and private sources and from CAF/GIZ sources.  
48. 
Financial viability and best practices: 
(a) 
The financial viability of the project during and beyond GCF support has been designed 
around the proper implementation of the outputs/activities for building a paradigm 
shifting e-mobility programme that will replace and prevent the lock-in of a fossil fuel 
public transportation system. The project intends to deliver a sustainable e-mobility 
programme in the three project countries and build the capacities needed in-country for 
different aspects of project planning and implementation.  
(b) 
At face value, the financial metrics reported above point to the fact that if the proposed 
project can be successfully implemented to deliver the main project target—which is to 
deliver an e-mobility programme in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay—the effectiveness 
and efficiency of this proposed project will score very well. However, there are two 
major risks that prevent the project from receiving a high score in effectiveness and 
efficiency. 
49. 
Until the identified weaknesses are mitigated and a better project architecture is put in 
place, the independent TAP will score the effectiveness and efficiency metrics as medium. 
50. 
The risks of the programme can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The first project risk is that the eventual GHG ER delivered by the project would not be 
up to the volume estimated because the one presented in the FP is based on the pipeline 
of projects that may not be implemented. Actual ER will depend on which projects are 
implemented and monitored by subprogramme 2. Since the number of projects that will 
be implemented is not certain, the independent TAP rated the mitigation impact of this 
programme as medium to high. The way to mitigate this risk is to ensure that elaborate 
GHG ER monitoring is carried out annually in each country to yield real measurable ER. 
If this is included in programme implementation, the mitigation impact metrics can be 
scored as high; and 
(b) 
The country ownership metrics were also scored as medium to high because there was 
no evidence that relevant government agencies were engaged beyond interviewing

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add. 05 
Page 144 
 
 
them during project design. The engagement was more focused on getting the no-
objection letter, a mandatory document needed for requesting project funding from GCF. 
There was also minimal engagement of public sector stakeholders, who are relevant to 
the technical and management aspects of this private sector funded and led initiative. A 
public transportation system, whether funded with public or private sources, stands the 
risk of failure if it is not aligned with national transportation policy right from the 
inception stage. It is also important that relevant institutions in the country are included 
right from start of the development of the project. The development and implementation 
of regulatory framework guiding the functioning of the sector must also be engaged. 
This was not focally built into the programme and as such stands as a risk to successful 
programme implementation. This can be cost-effectively added to the programme as 
presented without a delay in project timeline.    
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
51. 
The independent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval by the Board 
subject to the following conditions being met prior to the execution of the funded activity 
agreement: 
(a) 
Delivery by the accredited entity to the Fund, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat of: 
(i) 
A stakeholder engagement plan documenting how specific public institutions 
responsible for transport sector policy, relevant subject matters, and monitoring  
8will be engaged during the implementation of the proposed programme in each 
of the three countries for the purposes of aligning on an annual basis the policy 
and regulatory framework for the transport sector in each of the three countries 
with the development and implementation of the programme (the “SEP”). 
(ii) 
An updated monitoring and evaluation plan (“Updated M&E Plan”) to include 
data 9that can be used for annual verification of the greenhouse gas emission 
reductions (“GHG ER”) from e-bus, eLCV, charging infra etc. projects financed 
under the programme. The Updated M&E Plan shall be available for the 
verification of the programme at the end of the first year of the programme in 
each of the three countries. 
 
8 Relevant department in each country that is saddled with the monitoring of the performance of transport 
infrastructure 
9 Explicit variables and assumption used in the estimation of CERs and adaptation benefits

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.05 
Page 145 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP195) 
Proposal name: 
E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation
Accredited entity: 
Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF) 
Country/(ies) : 
Panama, Paraguay, and Uruguay 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
Impact potential (medium to high) 
We thank the iTAP for the assessment. 
Regarding paragraph 16, it is kindly suggests specifying in the text that the total projected GHG 
direct impact of Emotion programme in Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay is estimated to be 
3.3 MtCO2e, based on the initial pipeline of projects and over the lifetime of the EVs and 
infrastructure. This will help to avoid misunderstandings regarding the total GCH direct impact 
of the programme. 
Regarding paragraph 17 and 18, the AE would like to highlight that Emotion program has 
defined specific targets and indicators to measure the impact of the programme and has 
committed to finance at least 650 BEBs, 1,150 e-LCVs and 60 charging infrastructure. 
Moreover, please noted that due to the strong interest of involved stakeholders in 
implementing e-mobility solutions, Emotion expects that the demand will rather exaggerate 
the resources provided through the programme. Thus, it is expected that the ER potential will 
be fully exploited. 
Paradigm shift potential (High) 
Thanks for considering the programme’s paradigm shift potential as “high”. 
Sustainable development potential (High) 
Thanks for considering the programme’s Sustainable development potential as “high”. 
Needs of the recipient (High) 
Thanks for considering the programme’s Needs of the recipient as “high”. 
Country ownership (medium to high)

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.05 
Page 146 
 
 
 
We thank the iTAP for the assessment.  
 
AE recognizes the importance of the alignment of the Programme with the policies and 
regulatory frameworks of each of the three countries. Therefore, the initial activities performed 
in the 3 countries was to review, analyse and align E-motion with policies and regulatory 
framework (see figure 1 in FP and more detail in annex 2, appendix). Moreover, since the first 
approach, the AE has been keeping track of the evolution of the regulatory framework on each 
country and has stablished a direct dialogue with authorities of the GIETT in the case of 
Uruguay and being part of the cooperants table for e-mobility in Paraguay. In addition, please 
noted that National Authorities will play a crucial role during the execution of Emotion, for 
instance, as stated in the page 41 of the FP, all the activities related to TA component 
(establishment of a conducive e-mobility ecosystem) will be coordinated and realized together 
with national authorities to ensure complementarity of different endeavours. For that purpose, 
it will create a public sector committee in each of the three countries that include from 
planning to implementation and operation. These committees will be certainly useful to 
stablish a formal instance with each government to ensure alignment. 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness (medium to high) 
We thank the iTAP for the assessment.  
 
As indicated already in the “Impact potential” section above, Emotion has defined specific 
targets and indicators to measure the impact of the programme and has committed to finance 
at least 650 BEBs, 1,150 e-LCVs, 60 charging infrastructure, among others. Moreover, the AE 
agrees to the iTAP recommendation to GHG ER monitoring is carried out annually in each 
country to yield real measurable ER. 
 
Regarding country ownership, Emotion programme will create a public sector committee in 
each of the three countries that include from planning to implementation and operation. These 
committees will be certainly useful to stablish a formal instance with each government to 
ensure alignment. Moreover, National Authorities will play a crucial role during the execution 
of Emotion, all the activities related to TA component (establishment of a conducive e-mobility 
ecosystem) will be coordinated through the public sector committee and realized together with 
national authorities to ensure complementarity of different endeavours. 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
 
CAF appreciates the iTAP endorsement of the funding proposal for approval by the GCF Board. 
In that sense, CAF commits to provide: 
 
i) 
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) documenting how specific public institutions 
responsible for transport sector policy, relevant subject matters, and monitoring will be 
engaged during the implementation of the proposed programme in each of the three 
countries; and 
 
ii) An updated Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (“Updated M&E Plan”) to include data that 
can be used for annual monitoring of GHG ER from e-bus projects and eLCVs that were 
financed under programme. The Updated M&E Plan shall be available at the end of the 
first year of the programme implementation in each of the three countries.

=== PAGE 147 ===
Gender Assessment Report E-Motion 
programme 
E-Mobility and Low Carbon 
Transportation Sub-Program 2 
– Panamá, Paraguay, Uruguay –
Version: 4 
Date: 26.07.2022 
Gender documentation for FP195

=== PAGE 148 ===
1 
Table of Contents 
Summary ................................................................................................................................................. 2 
1. 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
Gender assessment by country ........................................................................................................ 6 
A. 
Gender equality in the region of Latin America .......................................................................... 6 
B. 
Panamá ........................................................................................................................................ 6 
C. 
Paraguay ...................................................................................................................................... 8 
D. 
Uruguay ..................................................................................................................................... 11 
3. 
Assessment of gender equality and women empowerment in urban transportation  ................. 13 
E. 
Mobility in urban transport ....................................................................................................... 14 
F. 
Safety and security in urban transport ...................................................................................... 18 
G. 
Jobs and urban transport .......................................................................................................... 23 
H. 
Women, Jobs and Covid-19 ....................................................................................................... 25 
4. 
GESI approach in the E-Motion Program ....................................................................................... 29 
5. 
Methodology .................................................................................................................................. 30 
6. 
Key areas of intervention and recommendations to strengthen gender aspects in the e-motion 
programme ............................................................................................................................................ 31 
7. 
References ..................................................................................................................................... 37 
 
Figures 
Figure 1: Reason for labour inactivity in Paraguay by gender, 2016: .................................................... 11 
Figure 2: Gender differences in mobility patterns* in selected LAC cities and EU27 ........................... 15 
Figure 3: Distribution of driver’s licenses by gender in LAC and selected countries ............................ 16 
Figure 4: Public transportation trips by purpose .................................................................................. 16 
Figure 5: The most dangerous transport systems for women .............................................................. 19 
Figure 6: Occupational Segregation in Latin America: women care, men build ................................... 23 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Annual average national labour force participation rates by sex, 2011–2020 ....................... 26 
Table 2: Average annual national open unemployment rate by sex, 2011–2020 ................................ 28 
Table 3: Key areas of interventions ....................................................................................................... 32

=== PAGE 149 ===
2 
Summary 
 
In Latin America, including Panamá, Paraguay, and Uruguay, the gender equality agenda has gained 
strength from converging national agendas at every scale, particularly with social and feminist 
movements demanding equality and non-discrimination, and the inclusion of CEDAW principles in 
national legislation. The reality, however, is that despite new policy frameworks, the implementation 
and real progress on women’s integration, especially into the labour market and key decision- 
making positions, is weak. 
 
In all 3 countries, the female labour force participation as a share of the total female population at 
working age is between 53-60% in 2019, which, respectively, is about 20% lower compared to men. 
Also, occupational segregation persists across countries and women’s careers concentrate on low 
paid jobs and informality. Despite many laws, gender wage gaps persist across sectors and gender 
roles impede women’s access to better economic opportunities since they are mainly forced to take 
over domestic responsibilities within the households, such as childcare. While in Panamá the 
proportion of women in managerial positions is above 42%, Paraguay and Uruguay lag in ensuring 
equal gender representation. Both countries reach a share of around 35%. Regarding the 
representation of women in political seats at the national and local level, all 3 countries reach poor 
results. At the national level, Uruguay has the highest level of women representation with 22.2% of 
seats held by women in parliament. Among the 3 countries, Paraguay reaches the lowest level with 
15% of seats represented by women in their national parliament. At the local level proportions vary 
from 10% in Panamá to 26% in Uruguay of elected seats held by women in deliberative bodies of 
local government.  
 
Concerning violence against women, 2.8% of ever-partnered women and girls between the age of 15-
49 have been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in 
the previous 12 months in Uruguay. This number is comparably low, as in Paraguay 8% and in 
Panamá 10.1% of women aged 15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or 
sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months. 
 
The outlook to both keeping the progress and continue reducing the gaps in gender equality is 
challenging after the COVID-19 pandemic. UN Women and other international organizations fear that 
recent gains in gender equality might be lost. The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened women’s 
situation and has aggravated differences amongst groups. 
 
Specific actions to guarantee that women feel safe when using public EV transportation, as workers 
and as users, are imperative in the region. Women in the region are frequently victims of gender-
based violence in the transport sector, and the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating the numbers. The 
urban transport system represents an environment where harassment and sexual abuses occur 
quotidianly in the regular trips women do every day. Incidents can happen in the e-buses, in the e-
taxis, while waiting, walking to and from the stops or using charging stations. Incidents increase at 
night, in isolated vehicles and unattended places, but crowded units as well. Safety and security 
measures not only benefit women but all the users. The recent study “Ella se mueve segura” (She 
moves safe) represents a timely and adequate guide from the region that will be used by the 
program to build capacity and learn at the project level, thanks to online training. Successful ongoing 
initiatives such as “Bajalé al acoso” in Quito, will be shared within the training. This initiative stands 
from others because it put together different institutions (police, justice), and it is very accessible by 
the poor. It has been successful in reducing harassment in the buses in Quito, which in the end, can 
change social norms towards respect to women’s bodies and lives. The program should include 
communication campaigns to raise awareness and prevent sexual harassment in the public transport 
sector.

=== PAGE 150 ===
3 
Women are not represented in the jobs generated by the transport sector in the region. The 
pandemic complicates the return to work for those women who lost their jobs and those whose care 
responsibilities have increased. The E-Motion Programme can be an opportunity for women in the 
programme countries to access the jobs generated by the projects to be designed with investment 
loans. For instance, the public sector projects will help women obtain professional driving licenses to 
be able to opt for the direct jobs that the e-buses, e-taxis and e-vans will create. This can be done via 
scholarships for women to receive training on professional driving.  
 
The Gender Action Plan guarantees that recommendations presented in this report are gender 
responsive and transformative, and translating into specific actions included in the E-Motion 
Program. Furthermore, the Gender Action Plan will set a budget and ensure a strategy for measuring, 
monitoring, and adjusting activities when needed. Finally, this report outlines that data collection is 
crucial to learn, share, and improve transport systems and recommends including an activity that 
supports the collection of sex-disaggregate data for operating e-buses and e-taxis.

=== PAGE 151 ===
4 
1. Introduction 
 
This Gender Assessment Report refers to sub-programme 2 of “E-Motion: E-Mobility and Low Carbon 
Transportation” (hereinafter referred to as "the Programme"), which includes the countries Panamá, 
Paraguay, and Uruguay under the accredited entity Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF – 
Development Bank of Latin America). The prevailing report was created in cooperation with AFD and 
grütter consulting. 
 
This document as well as the Gender Action Plan for the Program forms part of GCF’s requirements 
for all Funding Proposals.  
 
As expressed by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5, achieving gender equality and 
the empowerment of women is an important goal in itself and also cuts across the rest of the SDGs. 
However, the world is not on track to achieve gender equality by 2030 and has been pushed further 
off track by the socioeconomic fallout of the pandemic. Furthermore, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
acknowledges in its Updated Gender Policy (UGP) that climate change can exacerbate existing gender 
inequalities. CAF as well on the other hand promotes sustainable development and regional 
integration and in order to contribute to a more inclusive development, through the gender 
approach, it seeks to ensure that the services provided integrate and meet the needs and interests of 
all people, especially women from their diversity, and those who face obstacles to benefit from the 
fruits of development with equal opportunities. 
 
Due to an imbalanced division of labour, lower incomes, and lesser livelihood opportunities, less 
access and control over land and other productive assets, fewer legal rights, lesser mobility and 
lesser political and professional representation, women inherit a greater vulnerability to climate 
change. Women (as well as vulnerable communities) are a vital part of the solution to climate 
change, thus, need to be equally included in discussions and decisions.  
 
Regarding daily mobility patterns, women are more likely to rely on public transportation than men 
but they face the following two main barriers and exclusions: (a) Routes and schedules are designed 
with an only-commuter universally - male model and do not take into account trip-chaining and the 
different patterns and needs of women and other vulnerable groups; (b) Sexual harassment and 
other forms of gender- based violence in the vehicles, facilities and, in general, the public space. 
 
In addition, women are not represented in the jobs generated by the construction and transport 
sector in the region. A fact that could be consider central as the pandemic complicates the return to 
work for those women who lost their jobs and those whose care responsibilities have increased. 
 
To ensure that current public transport ridership levels are sustained or even increased as part as the 
transition towards electro-mobility understood as a paradigm change, the gender and other socially 
constructed disparities must be tackle. 
 
In general, for the Latin American and the Caribbean region, Gender Based Violence (GBV) is endemic 
and underreported, and before 2006 no country in LAC established femicide as a crime, while by 
2015 16 countries already did. Likewise, in many parts of the world, civil society has raised strongly 
against GBV and Argentina, Chile, México, Perú, and Uruguay have marched under the motto “Ni una 
menos” (Not one woman less). Nevertheless, enforcement of policies has been weak so far.  
 
The three countries have included quotas for political representation and have reached shares of 20-
30%, but still lag behind for an equal representation (UN ECLAC, 2021). The countries have advanced 
in maternal health, but inside every country, disparity persists geographically and by ethnic group or 
race. Parity in education is mostly reached in all countries at the primary and secondary levels, and in 
many cases, girls are outperforming boys; whereas in tertiary education attainment varies by

=== PAGE 152 ===
5 
country, and careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths) remain predominantly 
masculine. Occupational segregation persists across countries and women’s careers concentrates in 
low paid jobs and informality, which moreover, have little and low benefits, resulting in lower 
earnings and well-being. Despite many laws, gender wage gaps persist across sectors and gender 
roles impede women’s access to better economic opportunities since domestic responsibilities are 
mostly in their hands.  
 
Education in girls is affected by adolescent pregnancy, which is still high and despite the downward 
regional tendency in fertility rates, it is only exceeded by Sub-Saharan Africa. Marriage and sex are 
illegal for minors in all these countries, yet teenage pregnancies and minors living in union occur. 
Plans, strategies, and entities (Ministries or agencies) have been given more power or have been 
recently created. These entities are not funded enough to carry on, enforce, and follow up with all 
the gender equality agenda. 
 
Governments in the region of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) are making efforts to advance 
on the path towards gender equality. The last two decades brought significant advances for women 
in Latin American Countries. All of the countries in this program ratified the Inter-American 
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convention 
of Belém do Pará), an international human rights instrument adopted by the Inter-American 
Commission of Women (CIM) of the Organization of American States, whose main achievement was 
to incorporate specific legislation to include “femicide” as a specific aggravated crime. Since its 
ratification in 1994, countries have been advancing to prevent, sanction, and eradicate violence 
against women. In October 2004, the Follow-Up Mechanism (MESECVI) agency was established to 
ensure the State parties' compliance with the Convention. 
 
According to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, guaranteeing sexual 
and reproductive rights and promoting sexual and reproductive health have been integral 
components of the Regional Gender Agenda over the past 40 years (Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2021). Specifically, since 2000, this has been reflected in the 
agreements adopted by ECLAC Member States at each of the meetings of the Regional Conference 
on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
 
For the E-Motion Program, the contribution to reducing the gender gap in e-mobility and low-carbon 
transportation and to preventing and minimizing the harm of lacking gender equality and women’s 
rights is three-folded. First, the transport sector is a catalyst to change social norms. For instance, by 
raising awareness on sexual harassment and violence against women and girls, by providing visibility 
to women working in non-traditional roles in the EV (electric vehicle) markets, and by considering the 
mobility of care1 when designing transport operations, a societal impact can be achieved. Second, 
this new e-transport paradigm will lever women’s access to green jobs in traditionally sex-
segregated occupations or improve access to investment loans for female entrepreneurs. Third, the 
capacity building, training, and sharing of know-how to women and men designing the investment 
plans in the program will systematize gender mainstreaming in the transport sector.  
 
This gender assessment report provides information about gender equality and women 
empowerment in Panamá, Paraguay, and Uruguay. It aims at presenting the key gender gaps and 
opportunities in the e-mobility sector in the 3 targeted countries as well as providing 
recommendations on gender aspects to be included in the project design and proposed Gender 
Action Plan (GAP). The report is organized into three relevant sections. The following section covers 
the most relevant data and analyses found in ad hoc country studies on gender or data sources from 
 
1 The mobility of care refers to travel implications of daily tasks performed by individuals with care 
responsibilities, which are mainly performed by women. For more information see (De Madariaga, 2021)

=== PAGE 153 ===
6 
reliable international entities. These indicators regard maternal mortality, adolescent pregnancy, 
gender-based violence, as well as gender gaps in education, economic autonomy, political 
representation, and legal frameworks. Based on the general situation of women and girls’ situation 
and rights, the third section examines information on the links between gender equality in urban 
transportation for the three countries. This section also includes best practices of global initiatives in 
the transport sector. The section is structured in four interrelated topics, namely mobility, safety and 
security, jobs, and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The fourth section of the report presents the 
details of Methodology. While the section 5 details the way the three-folded approach mentioned 
above links the Program Components, this Gender Assessment and the proposed Gender Action Plan 
to incorporate the gender equality and social inclusive perspective in all the phases of the Program. 
Finally, the fifth section concludes with recommendations drawn to guide the Gender Action Plan. 
 
2. Gender assessment by country 
A. 
 
B. 
Gender equality in the region of Latin America 
 
Countries in the region of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) show large discrepancies with 
regards to political will and policy enforcement concerning gender equality. The region has 
progressive and comprehensive legislation on violence against women, including domestic violence, 
harassment, rape and honour crimes. Like all countries of the region, Panamá, Paraguay, and 
Uruguay have ratified several initiatives, e.g., the Convention Belem do Pará in 1994, the Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action (BPfA) in 1995, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) or the Regional Programme of Action for the Women of 
Latin America and the Caribbean 1995-2001. LAC countries developed national strategies and action 
plans to promote inter-institutional coordination and support services for victims of violence against 
women. According to the SIGI 2020 Regional Report for Latin America and the Caribbean, 15 
countries in the region achieved very low to low levels of gender-based discrimination in social 
institutions, while no country is classified as having high or very high levels of discrimination. Uruguay 
accomplished a low SIGI score of 22.2 – the SIGI level ranges from 0 to 100, with 0 indicating no 
discrimination and 100 indicating absolute discrimination. Paraguay only reached a medium score of 
32.8, while for Panama no score could be indicated as the country lacks sufficient data. 
 
Despite increasing political commitments, the implementation of ambitious laws and regulations 
remains uneven. Weak enforcement by governments, discriminatory social institutions, formal and 
informal laws, as well as social norms and practices continue to constrain women and girls’ 
empowerment and restrict their access to opportunities and rights in the region. Opinions and 
behaviours are still influenced by patriarchal norms that affect many fields. The most challenging 
dimension is discrimination in the household, leading for example to a traditional distribution of 
household chores between women and men. The lockdown and mobility restrictions, as responses to 
the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic, probably exacerbates current imbalances. As a consequence, 
women and girls across LAC countries experience some form of discrimination every day, including 
violence. The LAC region continues to have the highest femicide rates in the world. Various types of 
discrimination restrict women’s involvement in decision making in the private and public spheres.2 
 
C. 
Panamá 
 
Panama has been one of the fastest-growing economies in the world, with an average annual growth 
rate of 4.6%. Panamanian growth in 2020 has suffered a contraction, due to COVID-19´s impact, 
where many employment areas have been affected especially those related to services and 
transportation. A recovery is expected during 2021 by trade improvement, reopening of main 
 
2 (OECD, 2020)

=== PAGE 154 ===
7 
services such as transport, logistics, as well as construction and mining sectors. Social inequities 
remain high, especially when compared to countries of similar income. Progress in poverty reduction 
has been significant in recent years, however, important gaps remain.3  
 
According to the Global Gender Gap Index, Panama scored 0.737, this means that women are 26.7% 
less likely than men to have equal opportunities. In 2021, Panama ranked 44th place out of 153 
surveyed countries.4  
 
According to UN Women, in Panama 70% of legal frameworks that promote, enforce, and monitor 
gender equality, with a focus on violence against women, are in place. Frameworks that focus on 
employment and economic benefits are only achieved by 83.3% and 72.7% of frameworks that focus 
on marriage and family are in place.5  
 
As of February 2019, there are only 18.3% of parliamentary seats held by women in the national 
parliament, while only 10% of seats in local governments are held by women. In Panama, 44.8% of 
indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender perspective are available, with gaps in key 
areas.6 The maternal mortality ratio7 is 52 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2017, according to the UN 
Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (MMEIG).8 The ratio is relatively low compared to 
LAC countries and below the world average of 211 deaths per 100,000 live births.9 Also, evidence 
suggests that indigenous women and women in rural areas face higher rates of maternal mortality.10 
26.4% of women aged 20-24 years old were married or in union before age 18. The adolescent birth 
rate was 78.8 per 1000 women aged 15-19 as of 2016, coming down from 84.1 per 1000 women 
aged 15-19 in 2015. Panama remains one of the Latin American countries with the highest teen 
pregnancy rates.11 
 
According to the most recent data from UN ECLAC, 20 women died of gender violence, of which 6 
were killed by their intimate partner or former partner in 2018 (0.3 per 100.000 women).12 14.1% of 
women with only a primary education experienced violence compared to 4.8% of women with some 
tertiary education. However, it should be mentioned that data are scarce, data collection presents 
challenges and numbers are often underestimated. Despite having various institutions collecting 
data, the protocols differ, variables are not harmonized, and victims lack confidence and economic 
autonomy, have mistrust in authorities, or are unfamiliar with the processes. In Panama, only 5% of 
women who experienced physical violence sought institutional help and only 8% of the women 
turned to family or friends.13 The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly worsened the situation of 
violence against women. Statistical data corroborate that in 2020 incoming calls on the violence 
against women helplines were much higher than in 2019 with an instant increase after the start of 
the lockdown.14 
 
 
3 (IMF, 2020) 
4 (World Economic Forum, 2021) 
5 (UN Women, 2021) 
6 (UN Women, 2021) 
7 The ratio includes women who die from any cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy or its management 
(excluding accidental or incidental causes) during pregnancy and childbirth or within 42 days of termination of 
pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy. 
8 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
9 (UNICEF, 2019) 
10 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
11 (UN Women, 2021) 
12 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
13 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
14 (López-Calva, 2020)

=== PAGE 155 ===
8 
Data indicate that school attendance of girls is significantly influenced by water and sanitation 
services, as girls have higher needs for sanitation because of menstruation. In schools with 
inadequate sanitation, girls in sixth grade were 6 to 10 percentage points more likely to have missed 
at least one day of school during the previous six months than both boys in sixth grade and girls in 
third grade. However, in general, most indicators suggest that girls and women in Central America do 
not face disproportionate barriers in accessing education. According to a report of the World Bank 
Group, girls seem to outperform boys in many indicators.15 For instance, the enrolment rate in 
secondary (72% vs 67%) and tertiary education (58% vs 37%) is much higher for females than for 
males. With regard to participation in science, numbers seem to be different. Women participate less 
than men in the knowledge society and are significantly less numerous in scientific areas, linked to 
technology, computing, physics or mathematics, as well as in positions of decision making or high 
hierarchy and recognition in science technology and innovation.16 
 
Access to basic services is not universal and remains linked to factors such as geographic location, 
education levels, ethnicity and income levels of households. In Panama, 57.4% of women participate 
in the labour force, compared to 85.1% of men, i.e. the ratio of women to men is 0.67 and far from 
being close to parity.17 For younger adults (15-24), the rate drops to 34% for female and 58% for male 
(data refer to 2017).18 The job market in Panama, and LAC in general, is characterised by structural 
heterogeneity and strong job market segmentation, which result in income inequalities within 
households. There is a distinction between employment in high and low productivity sectors. High 
productivity sectors are related to new technology, higher education, and better working conditions, 
while low productivity sectors are linked to workers with lower incomes, less level of education, 
instability, limited social security coverage and an absence of work contracts. 77.5% of all women in 
the workforce work in the low productivity sector, including agriculture, commerce, and services, 
compared to 54% of all men in the labour force that work in this sector.19 Nevertheless, in very high 
segments, women are more equally integrated. Women in rural areas are significantly less likely to 
be in the labour force, however, participation rates have increased since the early 2000s.20 When 
women joined the labour force, they are more likely to be unemployed than men. Among those 
particularly young women have weak job prospects. Furthermore, more than one in four employed 
women and most employed rural women are working part-time. In comparison to other LAC 
countries, the gender income gap in Panama was the lowest in Latin America in 2010 at 0.90.  
 
According to a World Bank report, the public sector is an important source for jobs for women, for 
example, public sector employment accounts for more wage employment among women than men. 
Also, in the public sector wages and working conditions are usually better for women. This can be an 
indicator that also the E-Motion programme can enhance employment opportunities for Women in 
Panama.  
 
D. 
Paraguay 
 
The COVID-19 outbreak hit the Paraguayan economy in a moment of economic recovery after a 
stagnant scenario in 2019. Unemployment and underemployment increased in the commerce, 
services and construction sectors. Labour incomes dropped, especially for workers in the informal 
sector of the urban areas. The performance of family-based agriculture activities is crucial for the 
protection of those most vulnerable in rural areas.  
 
15 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
16 (Blanco, De León, Serra, & Cañizares) 
17 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
18 (World Bank Group, 2019) 
19 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
20 (World Bank Group, 2018)

=== PAGE 156 ===
9 
According to the Global Gender Gap Index, Paraguay scored 0.702, this means that women are 29.8% 
less likely than men to have equal opportunities. In 2021, Paraguay ranked 86th place out of 153 
surveyed countries.21 
 
According to UN Women, in Paraguay 91.7% of legal frameworks that promote, enforce, and monitor 
gender equality, with a focus on violence against women, are in place. Frameworks that focus on 
employment and economic benefits are achieved by 100% and 81.8% of frameworks that focus on 
marriage and family are in place.22 
 
As of February 2019, there are only 15% of parliament seats held by women in the national 
parliament, while 21% of seats in local governments are held by women. Although legislation has 
collaborated through participation quotas, these do not guarantee equal representation. 
Nevertheless, women’s participation has been increasing. Female politicians and indigenous women 
established their own associations through which they formulate demands and obtain guidance. In 
Paraguay, 42.8% of indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender perspective are available, 
with gaps in key areas such as information and communication technology (ICT).23  
 
In Paraguay, the maternal mortality ratio24 is 129 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2017, according to 
the UN Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (MMEIG).25 The ratio is high compared to 
LAC countries but below the world average of 211 deaths per 100,000 live births.26 21.6% of women 
aged 20-24 years old were married or in union before age 18. The adolescent birth rate was 72 per 
1000 women aged 15-19 as of 2016, coming from 61.8 per 1000 women aged 15-19 in 2008.27 This 
figure is significantly higher for the poorest population (28.7%) and indigenous people (69.1%).28 
Moreover, Abortion is the third most frequent cause of maternal deaths and maternal and infant 
mortality rates in Paraguay are among the highest in Latin America.29 
 
According to the most recent data from UN ECLAC, 37 women died of gender violence, of which 34 
were killed by their intimate partner or former partner in 2019 (1.0 per 100.000 women).30 8% of 
women aged 15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or sexual violence by a 
current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months in 2008.31 It should be mentioned that 
data are scarce, data collection presents challenges and numbers are often underestimated. Despite 
having various institutions collecting data, the protocols differ, variables are not harmonized, and 
victims lack confidence and economic autonomy, have mistrust in authorities, or are unfamiliar with 
the processes. According to an IDB report, there is generally limited access to services and a decent 
quality of life for women in Paraguay.32 
 
 
 
21 (World Economic Forum, 2021) 
22 (UN Women, 2021) 
23 (UN Women, 2021) 
24 The ratio includes women who die from any cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy or its management 
(excluding accidental or incidental causes) during pregnancy and childbirth or within 42 days of termination of 
pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy. 
25 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
26 (UNICEF, 2019) 
27 (UN Women, 2021) 
28 (IDB, 2019) 
29 (UN Womenwatch) 
30 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
31 (UN Women, 2021) 
32 (IDB, 2019)

=== PAGE 157 ===
10 
Regarding literacy, most indicators suggest that girls and women do not face disproportionate 
barriers in accessing education. According to the World Economic Forum, girls seem to outperform 
boys in many indicators.33 For instance, in 2020 the enrolment rate in primary and secondary 
education has been pretty equal for boys and girls, around 87% and 66% respectively. Only in rural 
areas, the proportion between girls and boys enrolled in basic and secondary education is 86 girls per 
100 boys.34 Moreover, the enrolment rate in tertiary education for women is much higher than the 
rate for male. 41% of female enrol in tertiary education compared to only 29% of male.35 
Nevertheless, it is estimated that 40% of investments in female education are not capitalized upon by 
labour force participation, whereas this number is close to 20% for males.36 Generally, approximately 
40% of the indigenous population is illiterate, in comparison to 5.4% of the nonindigenous 
population.37 
 
In Paraguay, 60.5% of women participate in the labour force, compared to 87.1% of men, i.e. the 
ratio of women to men is 0.69 and far from being close to parity.38 For younger adults (15-24), the 
rate drops to 43% for female and 69% for male (data refer to 2017).39 Although labour participation 
of women in Paraguay is rather high compared to other LAC countries, continuing to reduce barriers 
of entry could not even promote gender equality but also result in large economic results. Estimates 
suggest that a higher labour force participation of those women who completed some level of 
education could increase Paraguay’s GDP by a least 6.7%.40 Also, women still face difficulties arising 
from the sexual division of labour to support their economic activity. According to UN Womenwatch, 
the majority of women are concentrated in three occupational categories: own-account, domestic 
service and unpaid family work, which translates into vulnerable and precarious employment, no 
access to credit or social security, and low pay rate.41 According to a survey by DGEEC, about 51% of 
women reported housekeeping as their main reason for being outside the labour force, while men 
spend most of their weekly hours at their main occupation and only 16.3 % of their time on 
housework and childcare. Over 50% of males reported education as the reason for their labour 
inactivity.42 Also, women and girls aged 15+ spend 14.5% of their time on unpaid care and domestic 
work compared to 4.3% for men.43 Figure 1 displays the reasons for labour inactivity for women and 
men in Paraguay for the year 2016.  
 
33 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
34 (UN Womenwatch) 
35 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
36 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
37 (IDB, 2019) 
38 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
39 (World Bank Group, 2019) 
40 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
41 (UN Womenwatch) 
42 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
43 (UN Women, 2021)

=== PAGE 158 ===
11 
Figure 1: Reason for labour inactivity in Paraguay by gender, 2016: 
 
Source: (World Bank Group, 2018, S. 84) 
 
Among those participating in the labour force, women face only marginally higher unemployment 
and informality rates. However, women face significant wage discrimination, as reflected in the large 
male-to-female wage ratio. Holding individual characteristics fixed, the wage gap in monthly earnings 
is 43%. When restricting the sample to full-time workers the gap goes down to 27%, still a high 
gender difference in income payments. In comparison to other LAC countries, the gender income gap 
in Paraguay is slightly below average.44 In terms of the structural participation of women in the 
labour market, after retail, many entered government jobs (relatively high productivity) followed by 
financial services and manufacturing. Even though other services lost some female employment 
share, nearly a fifth of new jobs for women were in other services, the least productive sector. 45 
According to a World Bank report, the public sector is an important source for jobs for women, for 
example, public sector employment accounts for more wage employment among women than men. 
Also, in the public sector wages and working conditions are usually better for women. This can be an 
indicator that also the E-Motion programme can enhance employment opportunities for women in 
Paraguay.  
 
In the UNDP’s Human Development Gender Inequality Index, Paraguay only ranks 4th out of 22 
countries in the LAC region. The poor performance is related to high maternal mortality rates and a 
low share of women in parliament.46 
 
E. 
Uruguay 
 
Uruguay is positioned among the first places in the region in relation to various well-being indexes. 
Institutional stability and low levels of corruption are reflected in the high level of public trust in 
government. According to the Human Opportunity Index, Uruguay has managed to attain a high level 
of equal opportunities in terms of access to basic services such as education, water flow, electricity 
and sanitation.47 
 
 
44 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
45 (Bulmer, Scarpari, & Garlati, 2019) 
46 (UN Women, 2021) 
47 (World Bank, 2019)

=== PAGE 159 ===
12 
Gender inequality is still an issue and seems to be a difficult problem to solve, even though the 
country has made some improvements over the last few years. The country bears a value of 0.702 in 
the Global Gender Gap Index, ranking 85th place out of 153 surveyed countries.48 
 
In Uruguay, the maternal mortality ratio49 is 17 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2017, according to 
the UN Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency Group (MMEIG).50 The ratio is very low compared 
to LAC countries as well as compared to the world average of 211 deaths per 100,000 live births.51 
24.6% of women aged 20-24 years old were married or in union before age 18. The adolescent birth 
rate was 35.8 per 1000 women aged 15-19 as of 2018, coming down from 41.6 per 1000 women 
aged 15-19 in 2017.52 
 
According to the most recent data from UN ECLAC, 25 women died of gender violence, of which 22 
were killed by their intimate partner or former partner in 2019 (1.2 per 100.000 women).53 Also, in 
2013, 2% of women aged 15-49 years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or sexual 
violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months.54 Recent publication 
data reveal that the proportion of women who have experienced some form of gender-based 
violence in all areas during their lifetime is as high as 77%. More specifically, nearly 1 in 2 women 
have experienced some form of violence from their partner or ex-partner, throughout their lives. The 
most common is psychological violence. Gender-based violence outside the family sphere is also very 
common: 54.4% of women reported having experienced some episode of violence in public places at 
some point in their lives. The proportion of women who have experienced violence during childhood 
has also increased, from 34.2% in 2013 to 37.1% in 2019.55 It should be mentioned that data are 
scarce, data collection presents challenges and numbers are often underestimated. Despite having 
various institutions collecting data, the protocols differ, variables are not harmonized, and victims 
lack confidence and economic autonomy, have mistrust in authorities, or are unfamiliar with the 
processes.56  
 
Regarding literacy, most indicators suggest that girls and women do not face disproportionate 
barriers in accessing education. According to the World Economic Forum, girls seem to outperform 
boys in many indicators.57 For instance, in 2020 the enrolment rate in primary education has been 
rather equal for boys and girls, at around 97%. Concerning secondary education, enrolment differs 
already a bit in favour of girls, with 91% and 85% respectively. Lastly, the enrolment rate in tertiary 
education for women is much higher than the rate for men. 58% of female enrol in tertiary education 
compared to only 35% of male.58 However, women are also less likely to pursue careers in the field of 
science and technology. The participation of college graduate women in the field of industry, 
construction, engineering, ICT, natural sciences, mathematics, or statistics was 12%.59  
 
48 (World Economic Forum, 2021) 
49 The ratio includes women who die from any cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy or its management 
(excluding accidental or incidental causes) during pregnancy and childbirth or within 42 days of termination of 
pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy. 
50 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
51 (UNICEF, 2019) 
52 (UN Women, 2021) 
53 (UN ECLAC, 2021) 
54 (UN Women, 2021) 
55 (National Statistical Institute, 2019) 
56 (World Bank Group, 2018) 
57 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
58 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
59 (The World Bank, 2017)

=== PAGE 160 ===
13 
In Uruguay, 68%60 of women participate in the labour force, compared to 83% of men, i.e. the ratio 
of women to men is 0.82.61 For younger adults (15-24), the rate drops to 37% for female and 58% for 
male (data refer to 2017).62 Also, the percentage of 15- to 29-year-olds in the lowest income quintile 
who were functionally disengaged, i.e not attending school or working outside the home, was 22% in 
the case of men and 41% in the case of women in 2014. This gender disparity is a result of the high 
proportion of young women who work doing household chores. For instance, 22% of all 15- to 29-
year-old women in the bottom income quintile do not study and only work in the home.63 Also, 
women and girls aged 15+ spend 19.9% of their time on unpaid care and domestic work compared to 
8.4% spent by men.64 Among those joining the labour force, the unemployment rate remains 
comparably low, averaging 7.8% between 2006 and 2021.65 However, high unemployment rates 
persist among young people under 25 (19%), while this issue is even more significant in the case of 
women, with an unemployment rate of 24% among women under 25.66 Furthermore, gaps can be 
observed in the labour market, as women are under-represented in business management. In 2017, 
only 10.6% of senior management business positions were occupied by women.67 In comparison to 
other LAC countries, the gender income gap in Uruguay is at a medium level of 0.81.68  
 
According to a World Bank report, the public sector is an important source for jobs for women, for 
example, public sector employment accounts for more wage employment among women than men. 
Also, in the public sector wages and working conditions are usually better for women. This can be an 
indicator that also the E-Motion programme can enhance employment opportunities for women in 
Uruguay.  
 
As of February 2019, there are only 22.2% of parliament seats held by women in the national 
parliament, while 26% of seats in local governments are held by women. In Uruguay, 36.7% of 
indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender perspective are available, with gaps in key 
areas.69 There is no assessment available of UN Women with regard to indicators of Uruguay’s legal 
frameworks. Also, many areas such as gender and poverty, women’s access to assets including land, 
physical and sexual harassment, and gender and the environment currently lack comparable 
methodologies for comprehensive and periodic monitoring.70 In addition, the gender equality index 
prepared by the World Economic Forum (2014) ranks Uruguay in 82nd place among 142 countries, 
one of the worst rankings in Latin America. The worst subindex is that of political empowerment, 
where the country is ranked in 112th place.71 
 
3. Assessment of gender equality and women empowerment in urban transportation  
 
According to the UN, two-thirds of the population will be living in cities by 2050, exacerbating 
overcrowding and insufficiencies in urban mobility.72 Together with pollution, overcrowding, lack of 
modal integration, are some of the problems that the increase of urban population is exacerbating. 
While legislative structures in the Program countries are moving forward to address gender issues, 
 
60 Other sources report lower levels, around 53%, e.g. (World Bank Group, 2019) 
61 (World Economic Forum, 2020) 
62 (World Bank Group, 2019) 
63 (IDB, 2015) 
64 (UN Women, 2021) 
65 (CEIC, 2021) 
66 (IDB, 2015) 
67 (The World Bank, 2017) 
68 (Catalán, Cardarelli, & Cavallero, 2012) 
69 (UN Women, 2021) 
70 (UN Women, 2021) 
71 (IDB, 2015) 
72 (UN News, 2018)

=== PAGE 161 ===
14 
considering freedom of movements strongly differ between men and women when considering their 
agency. Agency in mobility can be defined as the ability to make and choices related to one’s mobility 
and make full use of public transport systems.73 Using the agency concept under a gender lens to 
analyse urban transportation, it becomes clear that the conditions, priorities, roles and beliefs about 
urban transport infrastructure and services vary between women and men. The lack of certain safety 
and security features in the design of the transport system can constrain a woman’s decision to 
choose a certain mode of transportation, sometimes in ways that are innocuous to men, such as dark 
bus stops or overcrowded buses. When it comes to the design of the transport infrastructures, the 
realities of women, children, minorities, the elderly, and people with disabilities are many times alike 
and need to be taken into account when designing a transport operation. Assuming that when they 
serve women, they are adequate for the overall population and enhances the quality of the system. 
 
As a consequence, lack of access to transportation and safety and security issues limits women’s 
participation in the labour market and reduces their participation in the economy by 16.5% 
globally.74 Women turn away working opportunities depending on the travelling conditions to the 
workstation (time spent, return timing, expenses, safety and security). Besides providing access to 
education, health and jobs, the sector generates jobs itself but traditionally most opportunities are 
likely to remain in men’s hands.  
 
There is a myriad of links between gender and urban transportation, and these links have been 
deeply studied in the last years. There are gender differences in the purpose, time, distance, mode of 
transportation, or perceptions on safety and security that affect women’s mobility agency and access 
to economic opportunities, and the differences comprised in this section are shared among the 
countries in the region, even in the three countries included in the Program. For the purpose of 
organizing the information for this gender assessment, three interrelated dimensions can be 
distinguished: (i) mobility, (ii) safety and security, and (iii) jobs. Additionally, this report covers the 
impact of the pandemic with a gender lens in a fourth section. 
 
F. 
Mobility in urban transport 
 
One has to be aware that an electromobility project generally impacts everyone accessing the 
transportation services, however impacts are often stronger on women as well as on poorer social 
classes. A project might reduce or broaden the current disparities in terms of access and usage of 
transportation means by women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other vulnerable 
collectives, dependent on whether gender issues are taken into consideration or not. To enhance 
women’s ridership, hence also to increase public transport ridership levels, it is imperative to tackle 
gender and other socially constructed disparities. 
 
A World Bank report (“Why Does She Moves?”) reveals that in Latin American cities female urban 
transport ridership characteristics differ from that of men. Women rely more on public 
transportation than men; women chain different destinations in a single trip (e.g. drop kids at school, 
buy food, visit relatives in need, or get to work), and many times they travel off-peak hours. They are 
often accompanied by others (e.g. children or elderly family members) and carry bags, strollers or 
purchases. Their commuter times are often longer and more expensive. This is because women 
combine multiple wage jobs and care responsibilities (family errands, care for the elderly, the ill, the 
kids, and their community) in one trip. Sometimes, the nature of the wage work (as part-time 
nannies, providers of cleaning services, domestic work) requires getting on and off in multiple 
destinations, and when a multimodal fare is not in place, they have to buy a new ticket every time or 
just walk more. Nevertheless, routers are designed with an only-commuter universally – male worker 
 
73 (World Bank Group, 2020) 
74 (ILO, 2017)

=== PAGE 162 ===
15 
model, which does not take into account the different patterns and needs of women. If there is no 
public transportation available, they just walk or decide not to travel. Women in these countries use 
occasionally official taxis when travelling with heavy bags or children, but most times they use 
informal taxis or taxi-buses (called “colectivos” in some countries) which have several benefits for 
women: they fill route gaps, their price is shared by passengers, they provide safety, security and 
comfort and, reduce stress from the trip. Some taxi drivers discriminate against women with bags, 
and some cities have subsidies to reduce taxis’ fare for certain passengers (women, students, or 
elderly). In Lima, women who live in the high hills feel discriminated against by moto-taxi drivers 
when asked to pay higher fares.75 
 
Figure 2 below shows the differences in the percentage of women and men in their mobility patterns 
(motorized trips, public transportation, and walking trips) in seven LAC countries compared to the 
EU27. Common mobility patterns are found in the region and they are similar to developed countries 
in the EU for women: women do more trips by foot than men, they use more public transportation 
and they do fewer motorized trips compare to men. However, when women are in higher-income 
groups, they show similar mobility patterns than men, especially when they can buy a private car. 
Women are more susceptible to a modal change to individual modes of transportation if perceived 
safer or they can choose not to travel if perceived unsafe. Additionally, women can transfer their 
fears and perceptions of public transportation to other generations.76 
 
Figure 2: Gender differences in mobility patterns* in selected LAC cities and EU27 
 
* Differences in the percentage of female – male 
Source: (Rivas, Suárez-Alemán, & Serebrisky, 2019, p. 14) 
 
The growth of motorization rates in the LAC region and its negative consequences on public 
transportation have a direct impact on women’s mobility. Women use significantly more public 
transportation and walk more, whereas men drive more cars. This is observed in the distribution of 
drivers’ licenses by gender, where female drivers’ licenses represent merely 30% of the total licenses 
in the region, as displayed in Figure 3. In contrast, some developed countries are in the process of 
closing or have closed the gender gap among drivers77. In Costa Rica, driving licenses for men double 
those of women, but when analysing the type of license the gender gap is even bigger for productive 
activities. Only 10% are authorized bus drivers, and between 7% and 12% of taxi concessions of 
airports and regular taxis are owned by women (it might not reflect women taxi drivers, only 
ownership).78 Data on freight and women have not been found. 
 
75 (World Bank Group, 2020) 
76 (CAF, 2019) 
77 (Rivas, Suárez-Alemán, & Serebrisky, 2019) 
78 (Cosevi, 2020)

=== PAGE 163 ===
16 
Figure 3: Distribution of driver’s licenses by gender in LAC and selected countries 
 
Source: (Rivas, Suárez-Alemán, & Serebrisky, 2019, p. 14) 
 
The mobility of care79 is unnoticed by data collection methods. To design and calculate ridership, 
data collection methods focus traditionally on one trip pattern (e.g. travel to and from work or to and 
from the study) while the mobility-related to care responsibilities is overlooked because it is 
fractured in a multitude of purposes and fall into different categories (e.g. shopping or escorting). 
Figure 4 below, visualize the traditional way on the left and the new concept which groups trips for 
activities related to care on the right (maintenance of the household and care for others). The 
number of trips for care work and those for paid work is similar for this example’s data. Traditionally, 
surveys have undervalued the “reproductive” trips, considering only the “productive” trips for the 
design of transport systems. This gender bias underestimates others ridership than commuting, and 
a poor urban transport design has negative consequences for the agency of women. 
 
Figure 4: Public transportation trips by purpose 
 
Source: Sanchez de Madariaga research 2009, 2010, 2013a, 2013b, Image by Eric Steiner 
 
 
79 (De Madariaga, 2021)

=== PAGE 164 ===
17 
To give visibility to mobility patterns, the IDB has a Client Map Methodology80 which breaks into 12 
segments of a trip’s experience in Bogotá, Santiago and Medellín. Then different profiles of riders 
(women, elderly, people with disabilities) are assessed and the results help to design better urban 
transport. 
 
Fare schemes can foster women’s use of public transportation. Women have more price sensitivity 
than men because of their unique mobility pattern (chain trips, with family members, off-peak hours) 
and the poor suffer the most with unregulated tariffs.81 Urban transportation must promote a fare 
structure that subsidence short trips or propose an integrated fare system. Women’s value of time 
differs from men’s as they plan their trips to accommodate a busy agenda of care activities and are 
very concerned about the time of their return home, so besides safety and security, waiting time and 
fare are key to their decisions. Further, because most women’s trips are not related to income-
generating activities, women might give up convenient modes of transportation and walk to save 
money.82 As examples from the LAC region show, there is a flat rate that allows people to travel long 
distances at the same price as shorter ones in Quito. Buenos Aires decided to increase transport tariff 
in 2016 and la Defensoría del Pueblo83 (Office of the Ombudsman) received considerable claims from 
vulnerable riders, of which 90% are women with small kids, and specifically domestic workers. 
 
Ride-hailing has become an alternative for women to increase their urban mobility in safer conditions 
than other modes. The main characteristics of ride-hailing, many times match women’s unique 
needs. Its on-demand services are convenient for women’s off-peak mobility, the service can cover 
gaps in public transportation given that public transportation mostly covers masculine trips (from 
home to work/study centres) and tend to connect mostly the residential areas with the CBD, and 
women’s perception of security augments when ride-hailing at night, especially when the supplier of 
the services has an app with safety and security features to monitor and share the ride and to know 
about the driver’s reputation. 
 
Gender-segregated ride-hailing benefits female passengers and drivers. Safety and security are the 
most limiting or facilitating factor for female’s agency in mobility and access to jobs and other 
opportunities offered by the cities. In 2018, a survey carried out in 6 countries for the IFC found that 
20% of women riders reported that the lack of women drivers reduces the trip they would make, 
whereas 44% said that they would be more likely to use a ride-hailing service if they could select a 
woman as a driver.84 Ride-hailing is an alternative for women when there are gaps in the public 
transport system since women’s trips are chained because it has become a safer mode of 
transportation thanks to technology. At Uber Brazil, more than half of women started driving more 
when gender segregated transport was offered, which manifests how women can get jobs as drivers 
in taxis when they perceive a safe environment at work. 
 
Regarding the situation in the three target countries, a briefly daily mobility context is presented 
below: 
 
The data from the Socioeconomic Survey of Urban Transport (2006) which fixes the study area as the 
Metropolitan Area of Panama, shows that two main trip purposes, those for work (35.4%) and study 
(39.3%) stand out. The rest of the purposes were grouped in the survey report as "private reasons" 
 
80 (IDB, 2011) 
81 (CAF, 2019) 
82 (Allen, 2018) 
83 The Defensoría del Pueblo was created in the city of Buenos Aires to protect human rights from 
administration or public services actions or omissions. Its work on gender and its Observatorio de Género were 
promoted by the movement “Ni una menos”. 
84 (IFC, 2018)

=== PAGE 165 ===
18 
and reached 25.3%, including the reason for grocery shopping and errands that showed the highest 
participation with 9%. While regarding the modes of transport, a high percentage of the trips are 
made by public transport (50.3%) and walking (19.9%). However, it was not even possible to find 
public information to characterize the gender mobility patterns of the main metropolitan area of 
Panama. This fact highlights the importance of generating information on mobility and transport 
disaggregated by gender.  
 
For the case of Uruguay, information obtained through the Mobility Survey of the Montevideo 
Metropolitan Area developed in 2016 is presented. According to this survey, the main trip purpose in 
the Metropolitan Area of Montevideo is going to and from work. Considering the three trip purposes 
that follow it in percentage (study, accompanying kids and grocery shopping and errands, oriented to 
the subsistence of the household): a total of four purposes constitutes the main generators of 
mobility in the city. Analyzing the data according to gender, it is observed that there is a slight 
difference in terms of trips to work (male mobility seems to be more related to "labor"), reaching 
34,5% among men and 27,6% among women. There is also a gender difference in the case of 
“mobility of care”, data collected in this case as it was mentioned before by following the traditional 
way, including trips for grocery shopping and errands and accompanying kids. While among women 
accompanying kids trips represent a 15,8%, of the trips, among men this trip purpose is close, 
reaching a 14,7%. The same occurs with grocery shopping and errands trips, which are preferably by 
women (representing a 12.9% of their total trips), among men this purpose reaches a 9.1% of the 
total of their trips. This should be reflecting a more equitable distribution of tasks within the 
household between women and men than observed in other surveys in the region. 
 
Regarding modes of transport, the survey shows a modal share of slightly less than two thirds of 
motorized trips (car, motorcycle, bus, etc.) and one third of active mobility (walking and riding a 
bicycle), of which the vast majority are walking trips. In particular, bus trips reached a 25%. In terms 
of gender, women have a higher proportion of trips by bus (29,8%) and walking (37,8%), while among 
men prevail a private motorized mobility (including private car and motorcycle). Most important 
gender differences emerge when the proportions of private motorized trips as drivers is analyzed: 
30,7% among men and just 13,1% among women. 
 
Paraguay has not published yet an official Household Mobility Survey. In fact, during 2021 the first 
survey of this kind was carried out for the Metropolitan area of Asunción within the framework of a 
project supported by the United Nations (UN). However, in 2016, the IDB published a study which 
aims to characterize the perception of safety and security in public transport in the Metropolitan 
Area of Asunción. It included a quantitative survey that allowed characterizing the mobility of women 
and showing the relevant role of public transport among women, since 54% of them use it for their 
daily trips. On the other hand, 17% of women walk, 23% use a car, 4% use motorcycles, and 2% use 
taxis. And as for the reasons, they use public transport mainly on trips for shopping, work or health 
reasons. 
 
G. 
Safety and security in urban transport 
 
Six out of 10 women reported having been harassed in public transportation in Latin American 
countries. In 2014, a survey in 15 out of the 20 largest cities in the world, asked 6550 women and 
experts in urban planning, about their perceptions when travelling in public transportation.85 
Women’s perceptions were collected around the following concepts: How safe women felt travelling 
alone at night, the risk of being verbally or physically harassed, the likelihood that other passengers 
 
85 The survey was carried out by YouGov and The Thomson Reuters Foundation. Not all the cities in the world 
were surveyed, so the results ranked the cities surveyed. See: https://news.trust.org//spotlight/most-
dangerous-transport-systems-for-women/

=== PAGE 166 ===
19 
would come to their assistance, the trust that authorities would investigate reports of harassment or 
violence, and the availability of safe public transport. Figure 5 below reveals the ranking of the most 
dangerous transport systems for women found by this study: 
 
Figure 5: The most dangerous transport systems for women 
 
*1 indicates the most dangerous, while 16 is the least dangerous 
Source: (World Bank Group, 2015, p. 2) 
 
Bogota, the world’s 16th largest capital, was ranked as the most unsafe city for women to travel alone 
at night. More than six out of 10 women in Mexico City, 64%, polled online by YouGov said they had 
been groped or experienced physical harassment on public transport. Lima ranked 3rd capital 
perceived as dangerous by women riders, and Buenos Aires came as 6th. The 2018 study “Ella se 
mueve segura” (“she moves safe”) from CAF presented results of a survey carried out to women in 
different public transport systems of Latin América. 67% of respondents in Quito suffered sexual 
verbal aggression. In Guadalajara, 62% of women reported being afraid of suffering a sexual attack, 
and 60% and 64% of women reported being victims of sexual harassment in Lima and Bogota, 
respectively. Most of these events are not reported to authorities nor shared with relatives or 
friends, and many times happens travelling from and to the transport systems.86 In Costa Rica, 80% of 
women report being victims of the violent situation in public spaces.87 
 
Perception of transport systems safety and security, shapes women’s agency in mobility in such a 
way that they rather pay higher fares and spend longer journeys than face exposure to risks. In Rio 
de Janeiro, minivans are more expensive, their trips are more delayed, and queues are longer than 
trains for long-distance commutes. Nonetheless, young women choose to travel in minivans because 
they feel protected from harassment thanks to the seats for passengers that minivans have 
installed.88 
 
Adequate urban transport infrastructure can boost women’s participation in the sector, both as 
passengers and providers. Good lighting and vigilance cameras can transform women’s perception of 
safety and security and discourage perpetrators from committing crimes. Both simple solutions 
prevent crimes, not only crimes against women. Cameras are common in subways and intermodal 
and main stations, and recently they are installed in buses to protect both passengers and drivers. 
Installation, operation, and maintenance are costly and can’t detect harassments, only aggressions. 
Combining security agents and cameras is the most effective solution.89 Since 2014, Buenos Aires 
 
86 Ella se mueve segura. Un estudio sobre la seguridad personal en las mujeres, CAF & Fia Foundation. (2018) 
87 Sexual and Reproductive Health Survey 2016 Costa Rica (2016). 
88 (World Bank Group, 2020) 
89 (CAF, 2019)

=== PAGE 167 ===
20 
installed cameras and GPS in public transportation units to monitor traffic registered inside and 
outside the bus. These kinds of tools can potentially be used for safety and security as well.90 
Particularly at dawn and dusk, isolated bus stops, empty or too crowded buses, poorly lighted park-
and-ride lots represent stressful settings for women that limit their mobility agency. The 
surroundings of the transport infrastructure play a role in creating travelling stress for women.91 
Further, measures easy to implement, such as allowing women to get off the bus between bus stops 
at night. These random bus stop locations might be better lit or be closer to women’s destinations, 
which can radically change their perception of safety and security at night. In Montreal and Toronto 
(Canada) these stops are permitted.92 
 
Women adopt specific strategies, which can work or not, but make women feel safer in the public 
transport system. Sexual harassment in public transport includes leering, winking, offensive gestures, 
unwanted touching, groping, pressing against the body, indecent exposure, and sexual assault.93 
Women change clothing, take long detours to avoid unsafe places, avoid boarding crowded buses or 
stay near the walls, and even carry non-lethal weapons. They feel safer when travelling in a group, 
during off-peak hours, in well-known and familiar environments and when they develop friendly 
relationships with drivers. In Manizales (Colombia), a medium-sized city where trips usually need 
only one mode of transportation, 73% of women have suffered at least one incident of harassment, 
sexual violence, or street abuse, and 47% changed their routines because of them. These women 
chose longer and safer routes changed transport modes (to taxi or motorcycle) and changed the way 
they dress, travel with others, or select a determined seat in the bus.94  
 
Campaigns to raise awareness about harassment together with safety and security protocols to 
report abuses can protect women and reduce incidents. In Quito, the 2017 campaign Bajale al Acoso 
(Stop Harassment) is active in the public transportation system. Videos and information campaigns in 
the bus raise awareness to passengers about the harassments in the transport system. The victim 
sends a free SMS with the word “Acoso” (“Harassment”) together with the bus number; then a 
protocol is activated in a central office which has the bus georeferenced: a team of security, legal, 
psychological and social professionals start working on the case. The bus speakers alert the 
passengers about the incident, a police patrol waits at the following bus stop, and the victim receives 
information and chooses whether to report in situ or later. Complaints and lawsuits have increased 
with this initiative. In February 2017, more than 2700 reports on sexual violence were received, 71 
went to court, and 21 received a sentence of 1 and 9 years of jail.95 Two years later, reporting fell 
34.5%.96  
 
Sex segregation in massive urban transport is a temporary measure that increases mobility and 
protects women from harassment. Women-only buses or carriages on trains have been operating for 
decades in many cities worldwide (Brazil, Mexico, Japan, India, Indonesia, Nepal, United Arab 
Emirates, Thailand) and have received praises and critics. Women feel safer when using exclusive 
spaces, but segregating women does not solve the problem. Moreover, women passengers on non-
segregated modes are perceived as open to sexual advances, even though the initiative reduces 
incidences.97 In 2008, Mexico DF launched Viajemos Seguras (“Let’s we women travel safely”) sex-
segregating units in its transport system and was implemented in other estates later. But the 
 
90 (IDB, 2020) 
91 (IFC, 2020) 
92 (CAF, 2019) 
93 (World Bank Group, 2015) 
94 (IDB, 2020) 
95 (IDB, 2020) 
96 According to Plural Consultora 
97 (World Bank Group, 2019)

=== PAGE 168 ===
21 
program did more than that, it located booths in transport stations to file complaints, transportation 
staff received training on violence against women and girls, vehicles and stations displayed 
prevention campaigns, and bus systems and trains had women-only cars. In 2015, Mexico DF 
responded to women’s groups' claims and implemented a more ambitious program, which installed 
emergency buttons in 90% of the Atenea buses (drivers can make a silent alarm call to an operative) 
and 271 buses had cameras installed. 
 
Mobile applications facilitate women protection and contribute to gathering data, which supply 
information to design safer transport infrastructure and raise awareness on harassment. Digital 
technology helps women track and share their location with family and friends. Ride-hailing 
companies have developed applications for passengers to share additional information on their trip 
and identify both the driver and the car’s plates. Passengers can leave comments after their journey 
and quantify a driver’s professionalism, cleanliness of the vehicle, and quality of their trip. In Brazil, 
“Chega de FiuFiu” (Enough whistling) is an initiative created by an NGO to geo-localise and foster 
reporting of harassment. The video documented the women’s regular interaction when walking and 
using public transportation to raise awareness of the harassment that women suffer routinely. In 
2018, Bogota under the “Me muevo Segura” study, adapted the Indian application Safetipin to 
measure the index of safety and security perception at night of different routes and places by 
women. Safetipin is based on nine variables to obtain a safety and security score: Level of lighting, 
Openness (sightlines), Visibility (overhanging trees, high walls etc), Level of crowding or emptiness, 
Security (agents), Walk/ footpath, Availability of public transport, Usage of the public space (for 
instance is it male-dominated or mixed) and, Feeling/ emotional response to space (sometimes also 
called “eyes on the street”). While analysing the personal data of respondents, 65% of the study 
participants were below 35 years old and 78 % work or study, and 50 % finished tertiary education.98 
Age, sex, education, and poverty are variables to consider when implementing technology to protect 
women in public transport since affordability (costs of telephones or internet) and user knowledge 
can be barriers for many women, especially the poorest.99  
 
The transport sector can serve as a catalyst to the promotion of women’s rights and inclusion. The 
Via Lilas program100 was launched in 2015 in Rio de Janeiro as part of the implementation of the 
Maria da Penha’s law on gender-based violence. Electronic kiosks, “totems” were installed in the 
Supervia Rio’s suburban rail lines, which serve around 700,000 daily users. Anonymously, women 
seek data on the health network, women’s rights laws, and gender-based violence protocols. 
 
Sensitization and prevention campaigns on Gender-Based Violence (GBV), including Sexual 
Exploitation, Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH), can equip public transport workers with tools to 
understand the various gender dynamics and address the same. In the Dominican Republic, a gender-
based violence campaign delivered workshops to drivers’ trade unions working in buses and 
“motoconchistas” (drivers of private cars that operate as public transport). The workshops included 
topics such as new masculinities and gender-based violence in the domestic spaces and with 
passengers in the transport environment.101 
 
Feedback and grievance mechanisms located in the transport systems help women and girls to 
inform authorities when they are victims of violence. In 2015 the UN Women Safe Cities Program 
installed booths in some of Quito’s more crowded transport stations. Women could report acts of 
violence and file complaints. Staff was trained on how to attend to victims, even drivers were trained 
 
98 (CAF, 2019) 
99 (Aguero, Bustelo, & Viollaz, 2020) 
100 See: https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/rio-lilas-initiative-using-transport-infrastructure-help-reduce-
gender-based-violence 
101 (IDB, 2019)

=== PAGE 169 ===
22 
to inform women on how and where to report incidents.102 Capacity building and coordination 
among different bodies (police, judiciary system, staff) is essential to provide useful and appropriate 
assistance to victims. Often, survivors of abuse perceive authorities in charge of taking care of them 
as lacking credibility.103 
 
Lack of trust in authorities is common to prevent women from reporting abuses. In a survey in 2016 
in Lima, 35 % of public transport users don’t trust police arriving at the scene when reporting the 
rape of a woman in the public transport system. For 41.5 % their trust is low, 18.9 % reported some 
trust, and 3.9 % trust a lot that police will arrive.104 
 
Overall in all the 3 targeted countries, there is a lack of local data regarding safety and security in the 
urban transport sector in Panama. However, as part of the contextual situation, in 2017 a national 
law project that originally sought to prevent, prohibit and punish street harassment, sexual 
harassment, stalking, sexism and racism in all daily spheres, was presented to the National Assembly. 
That constituted an important opportunity to address the perception of insecurity in transport 
because street harassment was considered as "the most common forms of violence experienced by 
women in public spaces, whether in parks, streets, bus stops, or on the subway". 
 
But when the law was approved in 2018, the particular reference to the street harassment was not 
included arguing that street harassment is considered "a cultural and popular issue that cannot be 
avoided or regulated".  
 
Currently, several women's and civil society organizations are working to develop campaigns to raise 
awareness about street harassment, showing that it is a recurring social phenomenon that implies a 
violation of women's human rights by restricting their freedom of mobility. 
 
Although there is a scarce data available that allows to do an specific diagnostic of the nexus 
between safety and security in transport in Uruguay, there is an official Plan developed by the 
Montevideo Government (called  “Plan Montevideo Libre de Acoso Sexual en los Espacios Públicos 
2018-2020"). This Plan presents evidence on transport, as it is considered part of the public space 
citizen experience.  Using in-depth interviews, the Plan argues that street harassment also occurs in 
public transport and mentions as an example that women tend to fear taxi drivers, mostly men, of 
experiencing a situation of harassment.  
 
Regarding the mobility of younger women, who are the ones who usually go out at night, the Plan 
mentions that they perceive mobility as a problem: "walking is not a possible option, buses do not 
respect the schedules, taxis are expensive, the bicycle presents risks”. For these reasons some young 
women avoid going out alone.  
 
Given that it is understood that mobility at night becomes a restriction for all women, with greater 
intensity according to intersections of gender, class, disability. These experiences reveal the daily 
inequalities and violence to which women are exposed. As a response women display a set of 
prevention and self-care strategies, for example, plan to be accompanied at the bus stop or while 
walking, take a taxi or Uber -those who have economic access-, and often use the mobile phone 
during the trip to pretend to be accompanied. Changes in women’s behavior that have a relevant 
impact on their routines to move around cities freely and autonomously. 
 
102 (Aguero, Bustelo, & Viollaz, 2020) 
103 (Kondylis, Legovini, Vyborny, Zwager, & Andrade, 2020) 
104 (Galiani & Jaitman, 2016)

=== PAGE 170 ===
23 
The IDB study (2016) already mentioned shows that the perception of insecurity in public transport is 
relatively high in Asunción Metropolitan Area: on average 6 out of 10 women felt public transport is 
unsafe or very unsafe, and this perception is higher among non-users of this service.  
 
Moreover, the survey reveals that 24% of women who regularly use public transport were victims or 
witnesses of a crime while using transport or waiting for it at the bus station in the last 12 months. 
These results show that the perception of insecurity is greater than the effective victimization. 
 
Likewise, the perception of insecurity has led 35% of women to make some modification to their 
travel routine by changing the means of transport used. 
 
It is also observed that around 80% of women have little or no confidence that the police will 
respond to the report that a woman was sexually assaulted on public transport.  
 
H. 
Jobs and urban transport 
 
Around 30% of the female workforce in Latin America and the Caribbean is occupied in the care 
sector (a sector traditionally dominated by women), compared to 6% of the male workforce, see 
Figure 6 below. Regarding the regional wage gap, women earn between 5% and 30% less than men 
with similar educational level and demogrcomaphic characteristics.105 
 
Figure 6: Occupational Segregation in Latin America: women care, men build 
 
Source: (Bustelo, Suaya, & Viollaz, 2019, p. 14) 
 
Generally, the transport sector provides men and women access to education, health and economic 
opportunities. Investments in infrastructure are common to boost the economy and, if done right in 
the aftermath of the covid-19 crisis, this is a chance to enhance labour market opportunities for 
women and reduce gender inequalities in the labour market.Transport sector jobs can be generated 
during the design and at the construction of the transport infrastructure, and during its operations 
and maintenance. In this program, most jobs will be generated during the operation and 
maintenance of the e-buses, e-taxis and e-vans and at the charging station’s maintenance.  
 
105 (Bustelo, Suaya, & Viollaz, 2019)

=== PAGE 171 ===
24 
Following recent legislation to grant and enforce equal opportunities, most countries in the region 
have carried out initiatives to extend women’s employment opportunities in the transport sector. 
However, the current gender gap in jobs in the transport sector of the program countries is 
enormous. Typically, women work in feminized and low-paid tasks such as cleaning or 
administration, while men work as drivers, mechanicians, or supervisors. Thus, both the number of 
women hired or trained and the quality of their contracts are low. Stereotypes, lack of family 
support, low rates of girls studying STEM, are some of the traditional barriers for women to work in 
sex-segregated jobs, sometimes perceived as unsafe. Reshaping women’s tasks when pregnant for 
their protection, expensive professional driving licenses, and stigma hinder more equality workforce 
in the sector. The power of labour unions can both ease or impede women’s access to jobs in the 
sector. 
 
Specific efforts need to be made to reach greater diversity in the sector. To bridge the job’s gender 
gap, it is important to advertise that all the vacancies are open for women, i.e job description and 
terms of references will be gender sensitive, job posting will encourage women for applications and 
will be posted at platforms frequently visited by women, adapt working schedules to women’s care 
needs at home, respect national quota regulations, building dressing rooms and provide childcare, 
offer scholarships to train women are incentives for the sector to attract them. Working with trade 
unions is also vital in masculinized occupations to allow women to enter. Still, in 2017 in Argentina, 
one the train labour union La Fraternidad do not allow women to be drivers.106  Moreover, the 
Gender Action Plan includes trainings specific to women in order to enhance their skill set in 
accordance with newly created jobs. 
 
In Chile, women drivers said that the visibility of women carrying a diversity of tasks and positions 
incentivises other women to push into higher labour market positions. From 2012 on, in Santiago, 
new regulation prompted the private companies to collaborate with municipalities to help B1 drivers 
to obtain professional driving licenses. Women participation in the courses were supported by 
scholarships (which were mostly given to women). Participants were more successful in entering a 
job. The price of professional licenses is a barrier as well for women willing to work as drivers. 
Moreover, it is difficult for female heads of households to attend these courses since they don’t have 
the time to leave their jobs or can’t leave their family responsibilities. Women drivers in Santiago 
were perceived as more compromised with the job, more responsible, have less sinistrality than 
men, or the accidents are less severe. Also, most women drivers were perceived as more kind, 
empathic, calm, they treat the passengers better and resolved conflict situations without escalating 
problems. After women started working, many men colleagues changed their behaviours and 
became more respectful.107 
 
A growing body of evidence shows how companies can benefit from investing in women as 
employees, entrepreneurs, customers, and community partners. Such investments benefit 
companies in several ways, from broadening the talent pool to increasing productivity, providing an 
opportunity to transform local and global markets.108 Even though the data is scarce109, women 
drivers tend to have fewer traffic accidents than men. Economically, the savings derived from the 
reduction in traffic accidents can benefit transport operators when hiring women drivers. 
 
For example, in Mexico DF, in 2008, the program Atenea was created to reduce traffic to and from 
schools by hiring women bus drivers, who would offer more confidence to parents in the school 
routes. In 2017 there were 136 buses for the program, and 75 drivers were women. In the state of 
 
106 (CAF, 2019) 
107 (IDB, 2019) 
108 (IFC, 2017) 
109 World Health Organization Factsheet, 2002. Gender and Road Traffic Injuries

=== PAGE 172 ===
25 
Jalisco where the police were linked to corruption and high rates of alcoholism were considered the 
leading cause of traffic deaths, the government renovated the traffic police with a call for women 
named “Buscamos a las mejores” (We are seeking the best women) to attract women to work as 
traffic officers. 
 
As a summary note on the current status about jobs and urban transport in the three target 
countries it is important to highlight that data are scarce, representing a central constain to prepare 
a particular framework per country and particularly to do a comparative analysis between the three 
countries. 
 
However, a recent IDB study110 analyzes official data from household surveys, which shows the 
percentage of the employed population by gender and sector, aggregating the data from Costa Rica, 
Panama and the Dominican Republic. This data shows that the participation of women in the 
Transport and Storage sector is 18% compared to 82% of male participation.  
 
Women in Uruguay participate in 22% of the transportation sector while represent only 5% of the 
workers employed in the Construction sector and 6% in the Road sector111.  
 
In Paraguay, and IDB study112 shows that only 1.7% of the entire female labor force is concentrated in 
the area of transportation, storage and communications; and among those employed in this sector, 
women represent barely 14% of the total number of employees (compared to 86% of male 
occupation). 
 
But particularly in this country a pioneer initiative highlights. In 2015, the Ministry of Public Works 
and Communications (MOPC) iniciates the implementation of a special program with the support of 
IDB began. Its objective the improvement of Caminos rurales (“Rural Roads”) and as part of the 
works it was also included the training of women in non-traditional jobs. Given the success of the 
experience, it will be replicated both in the rest of the planned neighborhood road works as well as in 
other areas of action of the MOPC, such as the case of Water and Sanitation. 
 
The information and analysis presented before for each country aligns with what has already been 
presented at the regional level about the masculinization of the Transport sector and possibly also 
the Construction sector. 
 
I. 
Women, Jobs and Covid-19 
 
Women’s labour force participation113 has been steadily rising in the last decade for each of the 
countries until the pandemic. The devastating impact of COVID-19 has affected disproportionally 
women’s labour force participation.  According to the UN Economic Commission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the unemployment rate for women in the region is currently 12%. Many 
of them have been pushed out of the market, but that figure rises to 22.2% if assuming the same 
level of labour participation for women as in 2019. One should consider that women have been 
pushed out of the economically active population, being forced to fully commit to caring activities, 
 
110 López Marmolejo, Ruiz-Arranz y Ochoa (2021) 
111 Capurro, A, Harguindeguy, S, Rubinstein da Silva, E. (2018) 
112 Caldo A., Sosa, M., Monje, A. Granada, I. (2019) 
113 The labour force participation rate is a measure of the proportion of a country’s working-age population 
that engages actively in the labour market, either by working or looking for work; it provides an indication of 
the size of the supply of labour available to engage in the production of goods and services, relative to the 
population at working age. In contrast, employment comprise all persons above a specified age who during a 
specified brief period, either one week or one day, were in the following categories: paid employment or self-
employment.

=== PAGE 173 ===
26 
they plainly aren’t seeking new jobs. Taking also into account that the transportation sector is 
traditionally very masculinized (e.g. women participate in 22% of the transportation sector in 
Uruguay), the project represents an opportunity to shorten gender gaps related to job segregation. 
 
The sex-desegregated Table 1 below provides a glimpse of the labour supply for the last years, which 
in the second quarter of 2020 has dropped around 10 points in Argentina, Colombia, Dominica 
Republic, and Mexico, 7 in Brazil, 5 in Ecuador and 27 points in Peru. For Argentina, Brazil, and 
Colombia, the difference between men and women’s labour force participation was narrowing from 
around 20-25 difference points to 20 in the first quarter of 2019, but in the Dominican Republic and 
Ecuador, the women-men gap narrowed from around 30 to 20 points. In Costa Rica, the women’s 
rate in the 2nd quarter of 2020 is almost the same as that of 2011. In contrast with these dropping 
numbers globally, 70%114 of nurses, front-line care workers, midwives, and community health 
workers are women, whose jobs have been vital for controlling the health crisis. Women working in 
the health sector are more affected by COVID-19, and studies from the USA and European countries 
have revealed that positive COVID-19 cases are two to three times higher for women than for their 
male colleagues. 
 
Table 1: Annual average national labour force participation rates by sex, 2011–2020 
Annual average national labour force participation rates by sex, 2011–2020 (M: Men, W: Women) 
1st quarter 
1st quarter 
2nd quarter 
2nd quarter 
Country 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019a 
2019a 
2020a 
2019a 
2020a 
Argentina 
59.5 
59.3 
58.9 
58.3 
57.7 
57.5 
57.8 
58.5 
59.1 
58.9 
58.6 
59.5 
49.2 
M 
72.9 
72.2 
72.0 
70.9 
70.1 
69.4 
69.7 
69.6 
69.9 
69.8 
68.7 
70.2 
58.0 
W 
47.4 
47.6 
47.1 
46.9 
46.4 
46.9 
47.6 
48.7 
49.4 
49.0 
49.5 
49.9 
41.2 
Brazil 
60.0 
61.4 
61.3 
61.0 
61.3 
61.4 
61.7 
61.6 
62.0 
61.7 
61.0 
62.1 
55.3 
M 
70.8 
73.1 
72.9 
72.5 
72.4 
72.3 
72.0 
71.7 
71.7 
71.6 
70.8 
71.7 
65.5 
W 
50.1 
50.8 
50.7 
50.6 
51.2 
51.4 
52.3 
52.5 
53.2 
52.8 
52.1 
53.4 
46.3 
Colombia 
63.7 
64.5 
64.2 
64.2 
64.7 
64.5 
64.4 
64.0 
63.3 
63.5 
61.6 
62.9 
54.8 
M 
75.1 
75.4 
74.9 
74.9 
75.2 
74.9 
74.8 
74.6 
73.9 
74.2 
72.7 
73.4 
66.2 
W 
52.8 
54.1 
53.9 
54.0 
54.8 
54.5 
54.5 
53.8 
53.1 
53.3 
50.9 
52.9 
43.9 
Costa Rica 
58.4 
62.5 
62.2 
62.6 
61.2 
58.4 
58.8 
60.7 
62.5 
62.4 
63.4 
63 
57.6 
M 
73.6 
76.2 
75.5 
75.9 
74.3 
72.4 
73 
74.3 
74.4 
74.4 
74.7 
75.1 
70.5 
W 
44.2 
48.4 
48.6 
49.2 
48.1 
44.3 
44.5 
46.9 
50.6 
50.3 
52.1 
50.8 
44.6 
D. Republic 
57.8 
59.0 
58.7 
59.1 
61.8 
62.3 
62.2 
63.6 
65.1 
64.9 
63.4 
65.2 
56.7 
M 
73.1 
74.4 
74.1 
74.6 
76.3 
76.6 
76.1 
77.8 
78.4 
78.8 
76.3 
78.5 
70.6 
W 
43.7 
44.0 
43.7 
44.0 
48.1 
48.9 
49.0 
50.4 
52.7 
52.0 
51.5 
52.7 
43.9 
Ecuador 
62.5 
63.0 
62.9 
63.2 
66.2 
68.2 
68.8 
67.0 
66.6 
… 
… 
66.8 
60.9 
M 
77.9 
78.1 
77.6 
78.8 
80.5 
81.0 
81.0 
79.7 
78.7 
… 
… 
78.6 
73.8 
W 
48.1 
48.8 
48.9 
48.5 
52.7 
56.2 
56.9 
55.0 
55.0 
… 
… 
55.5 
48.5 
Mexico 
59.8 
60.4 
60.3 
59.8 
59.8 
59.7 
59.3 
59.6 
60.1 
59.5 
59.9 
60.2 
49.4 
M 
78.5 
78.8 
78.5 
78.3 
78.0 
77.7 
77.6 
77.4 
77.2 
76.9 
76.4 
77.1 
63.5 
W 
42.8 
43.9 
43.9 
43.1 
43.4 
43.4 
43.0 
43.5 
44.7 
43.7 
44.9 
44.9 
36.7 
Panamá 
61.9 
63.4 
64.1 
64.0 
64.2 
64.4 
64.0 
65.4 
66.5 
… 
… 
… 
… 
M 
79.2 
80.1 
79.7 
79.4 
78.4 
78.6 
77.6 
78.8 
78.8 
… 
… 
… 
… 
W 
45.8 
48.2 
49.4 
49.8 
50.8 
51.1 
51.2 
52.8 
55.0 
… 
… 
… 
… 
Paraguay 
61.1 
64.4 
63.3 
62.3 
62.1 
62.6 
71.0 
71.9 
72.4 
73.6 
71.2 
71.2 
66.7 
M 
73.2 
75.1 
74.0 
74.6 
74.1 
74.5 
84.4 
84.6 
84.8 
86.2 
83.8 
83.8 
81.3 
W 
49.0 
53.7 
52.7 
50.1 
50.2 
50.8 
57.8 
59.4 
60.2 
61.3 
59.1 
58.9 
52.6 
Peru 
73.9 
73.6 
73.2 
72.3 
71.6 
72.2 
72.4 
72.3 
72.7 
72.9 
70.2 
72.0 
45.3 
M 
82.7 
82.4 
82.0 
81.4 
81.0 
81.2 
81.0 
80.7 
81.1 
81.5 
78.3 
79.6 
54.7 
W 
65.2 
64.8 
64.5 
63.3 
62.3 
63.3 
64.0 
64.0 
64.5 
64.4 
62.2 
64.5 
36.1 
Uruguay 
64.8 
64.0 
63.6 
64.7 
63.8 
63.4 
62.9 
62.4 
62.2 
62.4 
61.6 
61.7 
58.8 
M 
74.7 
73.5 
73.9 
74.3 
73.0 
72.2 
71.6 
70.7 
70.1 
70.2 
68.4 
70.0 
66.5 
W 
55.8 
55.6 
54.4 
55.9 
55.4 
55.4 
55.0 
54.9 
54.9 
55.2 
55.4 
54.0 
51.7 
 
114 (Butler, 2020)

=== PAGE 174 ===
27 
Source: (ECLAC & ILO, 2020)115 
 
In the second quarter of 2020, there have been significant drops in employment rates that have 
affected both women and men, and the progress of the pandemic’s devastation will worsen the 
figures. ILO says that women’s employment dropped by 18.1% compared to men’s, which dropped 
by 15.1%. women’s workforce is more extensive in the third sector, which is most affected by the 
pandemic (domestic services, restaurants and hotels, commercial activities). 40% of all employed 
women in the world (estimated at 510 million women) work in hard-hit sectors, compared to 36.6% 
of employed men. Women’s paid labour and women-run businesses are being hit hardest. One of the 
occupational categories more affected is that of wage earners employed by households, most of 
them are women of relatively low-income households, who lack essential work benefits (health 
leave, notice period, severance pay). In Latin America, 93% of the 11 to 18 million domestic workers 
are women.116  
 
This pandemic affects women, young people, and immigrants the most for a variety of reasons (For 
instance: they mostly work in the informal market, no new positions being created for young people 
or lack of legal papers to work). The global pandemic impacted employment rates in many ways; 
many companies have ceased operations or remain on stand-by due to country restrictions. 
Absenteeism has been a consequence of the pandemic since workers have not been able to attend 
their jobs’ locations. Companies and countries have been designing ways to adapt to the temporary 
situation without firing workers (Ex: income support mechanisms or early leave).117 
 
The open unemployment rate118 is larger in women because the household care responsibilities have 
increased with the pandemic. Table 2 below clearly shows tendencies. According to ILO, Dominican 
Republic’s open unemployment rate drastically decreased to 3.2 in the second quarter of 2020 from 
6.4 in the same period of 2019. Both people who were unemployed before the pandemic and those 
who lost their jobs because of COVID-19 are not looking for jobs. Figures are similar for both sexes in 
the Dominican Republic. The number of people in open unemployment in this health crisis increased 
less among women (by 7.7%) than among men (29.4%); the contrary is expected in an economic 
crisis. Female open employment has increased less than expected, probably due not only to the loss 
of jobs but also to the increase in care work, resulting in women not looking for paid work. While for 
men, who are still considered the breadwinners of the family, looking for jobs is easier after they lost 
them during the pandemic.119 Women hold their selves responsible for the family care burden, while 
men are still seen as “help” in the region.120 The fact that open unemployment has risen more for 
men (in all the eight countries) does not mean that the crisis has more hit men compared to women; 
it means that further research on open employment is required. 
 
 
 
 
 
115 Own elaboration from data from: ILO & ECLAC (Nov 10, 2020). “Employment Situation in LAC (Number 23): 
Employment trends in an unprecedented crisis: Policy challenges”. Data comes from household surveys.  Some 
data are preliminary figures or new series, please visit the document to know more about these figures. 
116 (UN Women, 2020) 
117 (ECLAC & ILO, 2020) 
118 Open unemployment refers to those looking for a job that cannot find one because of the economic 
conditions. 
119 (ECLAC & ILO, 2020) 
120 (World Bank Group, 2020)

=== PAGE 175 ===
28 
Table 2: Average annual national open unemployment rate by sex, 2011–2020 
Average annual national open unemployment rate by sex, 2011–2020  
(M: Men, W: Women) 
1st 
quarter 
1st 
quarter 
2nd 
quarter 
2nd 
quarter 
Country 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2019 
2020 
2019 
2020 
Argentina 
7.2 
7.2 
7.1 
7.3 
6.5 
8.5 
8.4 
9.2 
9.8 
10.1 
10.4 
10.6 
13.1 
M 
6.3 
6.1 
6.1 
6.5 
5.7 
7.8 
7.5 
8.2 
9.2 
9.2 
9.7 
10.2 
12.8 
W 
8.5 
8.8 
8.5 
8.4 
7.6 
9.4 
9.5 
10.5 
10.7 
11.2 
11.2 
11.2 
13.5 
Brazil 
6.7 
7.3 
7.1 
6.8 
8.5 
11.5 
12.7 
12.3 
11.9 
12.7 
12.2 
12.0 
13.3 
M 
4.9 
6.0 
5.8 
5.7 
7.3 
10.1 
11.3 
10.8 
10.1 
10.9 
10.4 
10.3 
12.0 
W 
9.1 
9.2 
8.9 
8.2 
10.1 
13.3 
14.6 
14.1 
14.0 
14.9 
14.5 
14.1 
14.9 
Colombia 
10.0 
9.7 
9.0 
8.5 
8.3 
8.6 
8.8 
9.0 
9.9 
11.2 
11.8 
9.5 
18.3 
M 
7.8 
7.5 
7.0 
6.7 
6.4 
6.7 
6.8 
7.1 
7.8 
8.8 
9.4 
7.7 
16.0 
W 
12.9 
12.5 
11.6 
10.9 
10.7 
11.0 
11.3 
11.6 
12.6 
14.4 
15.1 
11.8 
21.6 
Costa Rica 
7.7 
10.2 
9.4 
9.6 
9.6 
9.5 
9.1 
10.3 
11.8 
11.3 
12.5 
11.9 
24 
M 
6 
8.9 
8.3 
8.1 
8 
8 
7.5 
8.4 
9.3 
9.3 
8.6 
9.9 
20 
W 
10.3 
12.2 
11.1 
11.9 
12.2 
12.1 
11.6 
13.2 
15.3 
14.2 
18 
15 
30.4 
D. Republic 
6.1 
6.7 
7.4 
6.7 
7.3 
7.1 
5.5 
5.7 
6.2 
5.8 
5.7 
6.4 
3.2 
M 
4.7 
5.1 
5.3 
4.8 
5.2 
4.8 
4.0 
3.5 
3.9 
3.7 
3.6 
4.2 
2.4 
W 
8.3 
9.2 
10.5 
9.7 
10.5 
10.5 
7.8 
8.8 
9.3 
8.9 
8.6 
9.5 
4.3 
Ecuador 
3.4 
3.2 
3.0 
3.4 
3.6 
4.5 
3.8 
3.5 
3.8 
… 
… 
4.4 
13.3 
M 
2.9 
2.8 
2.7 
3.0 
3.0 
3.7 
3.0 
2.9 
3.2 
… 
… 
3.7 
11.6 
W 
4.2 
3.8 
3.6 
4.1 
4.4 
5.7 
4.8 
4.3 
4.5 
… 
… 
5.5 
15.7 
Mexico 
5.2 
4.9 
4.9 
4.8 
4.3 
3.9 
3.4 
3.3 
3.5 
3.4 
3.4 
3.5 
4.8 
M 
5.2 
4.9 
4.9 
4.8 
4.3 
3.9 
3.3 
3.2 
3.5 
3.3 
3.5 
3.5 
5.3 
W 
5.2 
4.9 
5.0 
4.9 
4.5 
3.9 
3.6 
3.4 
3.5 
3.5 
3.4 
3.6 
3.9 
Panama 
2.9 
3.0 
3.1 
3.5 
3.8 
4.4 
4.8 
4.9 
5.8 
 
 
 
 
M 
2.6 
2.5 
2.5 
2.7 
3.1 
3.7 
3.7 
3.9 
4.7 
 
 
 
 
W 
3.5 
3.9 
4.1 
4.6 
4.9 
5.3 
6.3 
6.3 
7.2 
 
 
 
 
Paraguay 
5.5 
4.6 
5.0 
6.0 
5.4 
6.0 
6.1 
6.2 
6.6 
6.9 
7.9 
7.4 
7.6 
M 
4.3 
3.7 
4.5 
4.6 
4.9 
5.0 
5.1 
5.5 
5.5 
5.5 
6.3 
7.2 
6.7 
W 
7.3 
5.8 
5.7 
8.1 
6.1 
7.5 
7.6 
7.4 
8.0 
8.9 
10.1 
7.8 
8.8 
Peru 
4.0 
3.7 
4.0 
3.7 
3.5 
4.2 
4.1 
3.9 
3.9 
5.2 
5.1 
3.6 
8.8 
M 
3.7 
3.2 
3.4 
3.4 
3.4 
3.9 
3.8 
3.5 
3.5 
4.4 
4.5 
3.3 
9.7 
W 
4.4 
4.4 
4.7 
4.0 
3.6 
4.6 
4.4 
4.4 
4.5 
6.2 
5.8 
4.0 
7.5 
Uruguay 
6.3 
6.5 
6.5 
6.6 
7.5 
7.8 
7.9 
8.3 
8.9 
8.8 
9.7 
8.9 
10.0 
M 
4.8 
4.9 
5.0 
5.1 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.9 
7.3 
7.2 
8.6 
7.4 
8.9 
W 
8.1 
8.3 
8.2 
8.3 
8.9 
9.4 
9.5 
10.1 
10.7 
10.6 
10.9 
10.7 
11.4 
Source: (ECLAC & ILO, 2020)*121 
This situation negatively influences younger women, particularly younger mothers who, when facing 
long periods of inactivity, experience shows that their career paths are drastically altered. The more 
time absent from school or work, the greater the risks of exclusion from the labour market, the 
precariousness of jobs, or the informality. This latter happens to young men as well. 
 
Cleaning, cooking, and serving meals, teaching children and shopping for the family are the major 
workloads that have been intensified recently. The pandemic has made a point in the care work, 
which traditionally governments have ignored, and the economic markets have devaluated. In all of 
 
121 Own elaboration from data from: Employment Situation in Latin America and the Caribbean (Number 23): 
Employment trends in an unprecedented crisis: ECLAC&ILO, Nov 2020. Data comes from household surveys.  
Some data are preliminary figures or new series, please visit the document to know more about these figures.

=== PAGE 176 ===
29 
Latin American and the Caribbean region’s countries, and globally, the burden of the economy of 
care falls entirely into women’s responsibility. Despite the well-timed and record measures taken by 
governments to tackle COVID-19’s economic outcomes, the few social protection measures were 
lacking a gender lens. Reconciliation of paid and unpaid work and family’s care must be addressed to 
allow women to go back to paid work.122 
 
4. GESI approach in the E-Motion Program 
 
Based on the findings of this assessment, there are two main goals that sub-programme 2 of “E-
Motion: E-Mobility should achieve in terms of gender equality and social inclusion: 
 
1. Impact on the workforce: reduction of sex-segregation in employment while creating new jobs and 
expertise 
 
2. Impact on the ridership: reduction of gender biases and exclusions from transportation while 
changing the system to a low-emission one. 
 
So, it is expected that for the E-Motion Program, the contribution to reducing the gender gap in e-
mobility and low-carbon transportation and to preventing and minimizing the harm of lacking gender 
equality and women’s rights is three-folded. First, the transport sector is a catalyst to change social 
norms. For instance, by raising awareness on sexual harassment and violence against women and 
girls, by providing visibility to women working in non-traditional roles in the EV (electric vehicle) 
markets, and by considering the mobility of care when designing transport operations, a societal 
impact can be achieved. Second, this new e-transport paradigm will lever women’s access to green 
jobs in traditionally sex-segregated occupations or improve access to investment loans for female 
entrepreneurs. Third, the capacity building, training, and sharing of know-how to women and men 
designing the investment plans and the sub-projects as part of the program will systematize 
gender mainstreaming in the transport sector.  
 
This three-folded approach will be mainly address as part of the Component 1 and its associated 
activities which will provide technical assistance to enable effective financial assistance and to create 
a (gender-responsive) policy and business framework conducive for massive deployment of EVs. 
Activities will be coordinated and realized together with national authorities to ensure 
complementarity of different endeavours. In addition, trough the implementation of some activities 
as part of the Components 2, 3 and 4 this three-folded approach will reach all phases of the sub-
projects and a wide profile of stakeholders.  
 
Accordingly, the program will promote gender equality and women´s empowerment at the project 
and sub-project level and support the use of gender-disaggregated indicators. The investments and 
sub-projects of the Program need to include a gender strategy with actions to increase women’s 
mobility, promote safety and access to jobs. By establishing actions to increase women’s mobility, 
safety, and access to jobs, this Program can improve women’s agency in mobility if mainstreaming 
gender equality in its sub-projects becomes systematic. 
 
In turn the proposed Action Plan, which organizes this approach in particular sub-activities 
aggregated by outputs, guarantees that general recommendations presented in this report are 
gender responsive and transformative, and translating into specific actions included in the E-Motion 
Program and project levels. Additionally, the Gender Action Plan ensures the specific actions are 
measured and adequately monitored, and adjusted when needed. 
 
 
122 (UN Women, 2020)

=== PAGE 177 ===
30 
Its also important to highlight that all the activities outlined in the proposed Gender Action Plan 
emerges from and also provide order to socioeconomic, legal, institutional and mobility diagnosis 
developed in this Gender Assessment (particularly the four interrelated topics: mobility, safety and 
security, jobs, and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic), as well as the general recommendations 
presented. Below there are presented the three detailed outputs that structure the Gender Action 
Plan, closely related with the Components of the Program:  
 
• 
Sector specific country-level gender assessments undertaken as part of the development of 
low-carbon electric vehicle roadmaps and policies (national level) 
• 
Successful knowledge exchange and collaboration on gender aspects in transportation 
(regional level) 
• 
Gender components integrated in the sub-projects financed by the Program. 
 
5. Methodology 
 
In this section is presented the methodology that has been used to come up with the Gender 
Assessment. 
 
A desk-based research of aspects related to women in the region of Latin America and particularly in 
the three countries included in the Program (Panama, Paraguay, Uruguay) has been undertaken. This 
diagnosis covers two main aspects that let understand the gender gap in general terms as well as the 
gender equality and women empowerment in urban transportation. 
 
• 
Gender equality in the region of Latin America 
 
As part of the first aspect, secondary and quantitative data has been used to analyze women 
situation regarding the following indicators: political representation, health, education, employment, 
domestic responsibilities, gender wage gaps, gender-based violence. The data and analyses was 
found in ad hoc country studies on gender or data sources from reliable international entities. 
 
This chapter also includes the review of legal and institutional framework addressing gender-based 
violence at national level. Other public policy documents were reviewed as well as the main 
international agreements ratified as part of the national legislation. 
 
• 
Assessment of gender equality and women empowerment in urban transportation  
 
Mainly secondary and quantitative data has been used to analyze each of the three interrelated 
dimensions that this Assessment has distinguished in order to organize the information: (i) mobility, 
(ii) safety and security, and (iii) jobs. The data and analyses was found in ad hoc country studies on 
gender or data sources from reliable international entities. 
 
Consistent with some studies that consider the availability of data in the sector, it is observed that in 
the last years there is more official and public information in the Region referring to women as 
transport users than as workers in the sector, although in some cases (e.g. Panama) it is not yet 
possible to analyze mobility patterns disaggregated by sex or gender. Furthermore, when mobility 
information is available, it usually refers to the main cities or urban areas of each country. 
Consequentially, a lack of data on gender and e-mobility was identified, as ocurrs in other developing 
countries. So this report has relied on secondary review, data and analysis available for gender and 
transportation sector in general.

=== PAGE 178 ===
31 
There was also identified an information gap about safety and security in urban transport. This kind 
of sensitive data needs to be collected through quali-quantitative strategies which implies specific 
professional abilities to be produce and analized. In addittion, it is important to highlight that 
initiatives to collect data about safety in urban transport, many times come from civil society or 
women organizations with the aim of making visible a gender problem that has not been well 
addressed. Which could be an economic constrain for the data to be systematically produced. In the 
lat few years some national and local governments with the support of international agencies have 
already started to work on generating primary data. The study about safety and security in urban 
transport in Asunción (Paraguay) included in this report is an example of this lasted advances.  
 
Specific consultations or in-depth interviews with key social actors were not carried out during the 
preparation of this gender assessment, however it is foreseen to implement a brief qualitative 
fieldwork as part of the Action Plan in order to complement the diagnosis in each country. 
 
6. Key areas of intervention and recommendations to strengthen gender aspects in the 
e-motion programme 
 
In the programme countries, gender equality has been improving in recent years, but the COVID-19 
pandemic has worsened it. In light of the country snapshots on gender and the assessment of (i) 
mobility, (ii) safety and security, and (iii) jobs, this report concludes with the following 
recommendations to strengthen gender mainstreaming into the E-Motion Subprogram2 
components: 
 
The review of public policies at the country level will integrate gender aspects, this means that the 
technical assistance will help find obstacles and risks in the policies being reviewed that may impede 
women from benefiting from the EV mass adoption. The themes covered by the topics in chapter 3 of 
this assessment (mobility, safety and security, and jobs) constitute a guide that the technical 
assistance will use when providing support to the investment plans. The public and private sector 
investment plans will receive technical assistance to systematically include a gender assessment and 
gender action plan with concrete measures, activities and products that will ensure that women 
benefit equally from the massive adoption of EV through direct jobs.  
 
Specific actions to guarantee women feel safe when using EV transportation, as workers and as 
users, are imperative in the region. Gender-based violence is endemic in these countries and 
underreported. Women in the region are frequently victims in the transport sector, and the COVID-
19 pandemic is exacerbating the numbers. The urban transport system represents an environment 
where harassment and sexual abuses occur quotidianly in the regular trips women do every day. 
Incidents can happen in the e-buses, in the e-taxis, while waiting, walking to and from the stops or 
using charging stations. Incidents increase at night, in isolated vehicles and unattended places, but 
crowded units as well. Safety and security measures not only benefit women but all the users. The 
recent study “Ella se mueve segura” (She’s moving safely) represents a timely and adequate guide 
from the region that will be used by the program to build capacity and learn at the project level, 
thanks to online training. Successful ongoing initiatives such as “Bajalé al acoso” in Quito, will be 
shared within the training. This initiative stands from others because it put together different 
institutions (police, justice), and it is very accessible by the poor. It has been successful in reducing 
harassment in the buses in Quito, which in the end, can change social norms towards respect to 
women’s bodies and lives. The program will include communication campaigns to raise awareness 
and prevent sexual harassment in the public transport sector. 
 
Moreover, efforts should include, for instance, to enhance accessibility of jobs related to the E-
motion programme for women (advertise that all the vacancies are open for women, i.e. job 
description and terms of references will be gender sensitive, job posting will encourage women for 
applications and will be posted at platforms frequently visited by women), adjusting work places

=== PAGE 179 ===
32 
towards the needs of women (adapt working schedules to women’s care needs at home, respect 
national quota regulations, building dressing rooms and provide childcare), and offer scholarships in 
order to enhance women’s skill set in accordance with newly created jobs in the mobility sector. 
Working with trade unions is also vital in masculinized occupations to allow women to enter. 
 
Women are not represented in the jobs generated by the transport sector in the region. The 
pandemic complicates the return to work for those women who lost their jobs and those whose care 
responsibilities have increased. The E-Motion Program is an opportunity for women in the program 
countries to access the jobs generated by the projects to be designed with investment loans. For 
instance, the public sector projects will help women obtain professional driving licenses to be able to 
opt for the direct jobs that the e-buses, e-taxis and e-vans will create. This can be done via 
scholarships for women to receive training on professional driving. The technical assistance will also 
support investment projects for e-taxis adoption on how to include segregated ride-hailing from the 
market that is already present and growing in the region. The technical assistance will help the 
adopters to consider vulnerable groups who do not have access to technology. To prevent female 
turnover and retain women workers in the projects, activity is focused on the promotion of work-life 
balance for the projects. Data collection is crucial to learn, share and improve transport systems, an 
activity will help e-buses and e-taxis to sex-disaggregate data. 
 
Based on this Gender Assessment, the following areas for gender mainstreaming have been 
identified. These may be updated over time as the sector develops and the E-Motion Program is 
active in identifying further areas to incorporate gender mainstreaming. 
 
Table 3: Key areas of interventions 
Key issue identified in gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or risk 
Actions to address issues 
identified 
Mobility: Inadequate 
transportation infrastructure 
to reach services (work, 
education, training) 
Limited number of services 
designed 
for 
women 
incorporating women’s specific 
needs 
Identify opportunities to work 
with 
bus 
companies 
or 
corporates 
which 
support 
women-focused services (such 
school services etc), or working 
with the counterparties to 
develop initiatives. 
Women’s specific 
requirements not adequately 
incorporated into project-
design 
Upfront gender assessment to 
identify whether there are 
opportunities to optimise the 
placement of charging points 
for increased use of EVs by 
women wherever applicable 
(e.g., considering well-lit areas, 
public areas). 
Periodic consultation with 
women’s groups (e.g., women 
drivers associations, self-help 
groups for women from low 
income background, NGOs 
working on women 
employment) to identify 
potential risks and 
opportunities. 
Limited 
sex- 
disaggregated 
data 
to 
improve 
gender

=== PAGE 180 ===
33 
sensitivity in the sector or sub-
sectors 
Safety and security: Gender 
Based 
Violence 
and 
Harassment 
Facilities 
around 
transport 
hubs and vehicles (e.g., poor 
lighting, unsupervised spaces, 
absence 
of 
emergency 
buttons, etc.) 
Conduct training to 
counterparties to review their 
existing policies and 
procedures for management of 
GBVH issues, including existing 
education programs, safety 
and security measures, 
trainings, and grievance 
mechanisms. 
Require projects to include 
adequate design and 
maintenance of lighting and 
CCTV cameras (or other 
relevant safety and security 
features at charging 
infrastructure points). 
Require 
reporting/representation from 
counterparties that the 
vehicles are aligned with safety 
and security requirements as 
mandated by 
authorities/relevant 
concession agreements. 
Conduct stakeholder 
consultations with public and 
private entities around the 
design of projects to provide 
views and data on relevant and 
improved safety and security 
features.  
Behavioural 
aspects 
(e.g. 
physical violence and sexual 
harassment, lack of clear codes 
of conduct for employees, etc.) 
Review training programs 
periodically delivered by 
counterparties to drivers and 
transport workers on gender 
sensitivity and how to report 
and refer incidents of GBVH. 
Where counterparties do not 
have existing training 
programs, offer relevant 
training for drivers and other 
employees on gender 
sensitivity and how to manage 
incidents of GBVH. 
Jobs: Women’s involvement in 
transport related jobs 
Due to societal and cultural 
practices, women are less 
likely to be involved in decision 
making which may exacerbate 
gender blindness in project 
design 
Ensure women and vulnerable 
groups have an active role in 
project and sector level 
stakeholder consultations. 
Enhance accessibility of jobs 
related to the E-motion

=== PAGE 181 ===
34 
programme for women 
Need for capacity building and 
knowledge dissemination for 
gender considerations in the e-
mobility sector 
Awareness 
of 
gender 
mainstreaming may be limited 
in 
the 
transportation, 
e-
mobility and financing sectors 
Capacity building through 
trainings and workshops to 
increase awareness of gender 
sensitivity. Promote multi- 
stakeholder discussions to 
integrate gender 
considerations across the 
sector. 
 
Limited availability of sex-
disaggregated data in the e-
mobility space 
Ensure each sub-project 
collects sex-disaggregated data 
which can be used to identify 
risks, mitigants and 
opportunities. 
 
Knowledge sharing of lessons 
learned is limited 
Promote examples of lessons 
learned through data 
collection or sub-project 
implementation through 
thought leadership or 
otherwise to contribute to 
developing best practice. 
 
The Gender Action Plan guarantees that these general recommendations are transformed into 
specific activities by the E-Motion Program and that they have a budget and are measured, 
monitored, and adjusted when needed. If suitable the key interventions are also directly integrated 
in the Outputs of the E-Motion Program, e.g., related to the requirements for the sub-projects. 
 
Gender stakeholder engagement  
 
Once the project’s implementation phase begins, the National Mechanisms for the Advancement of 
Women (Inmujeres in the case of Uruguay, INAMU in Panama and the Ministry of Women in 
Paraguay) will be invited to assume a role as stakeholders, in their quality of the responsible national 
institutions for gender policies.  
 
The same will be done with all the institutional organisms responsible for gender equality policies 
within the Ministries of Industry (i.e. the Unidad Especializada en Género of the Uruguayan Office), 
within the Ministries of Economy, the Ministries of Transport (or Authority of Transport in the case of 
Panama), the Ministries of Public Works (i.e. the Project Implementation Unit123 of the Ministry of 
Public Works and Communications in Paraguay; the Office for Equal Opportunities and Gender of the 
Ministry of Public Works in Panama), and in the Electricity Companies involved. It is the case of UTE, 
Uruguay’s government-owned power company, which has a Gender Unit and has been certified in 
gender equality (Folleto_Tríptico_v2 (ute.com.uy). The Stakeholders Engagement Framework (SEF) to 
be implemented classifies the actors’ engagement levels and types in four categories. They might be 
some that should only be informed of the project’s interventions; others would need to be 
consulted, while a third group will be accountable for collaboration actions and a fourth type for 
empowerment actions, as the following table resumes:  
 
 
 
 
 
123 This Project Unit has implemented the pioneer initiative mentioned in section 3.

=== PAGE 182 ===
35 
Engagement 
level/type 
Inform 
Consult 
Collaborate 
Empower 
  
Expected 
Executed 
Expected 
Executed 
Expected 
Executed 
Expected 
Executed 
Stakeholder 1 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
-action 1 
-action 2 
Stakeholder 2 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
-action x 
-action y 
 
When completing the SEF document, the commitments of all stakeholders will be stated as well as 
their expected actions, establishing clearly roles and responsibilities. Every “expected action” will 
relate with the Operations Chronogram where the activities of the Gender Action Plan will be 
disaggregated, and each “executed action” will be linked to the verification means corresponding to 
each of the indicators included in the chronogram. 
 
Institutionalization of gender equality in CAF and its partners  
 
CAF undertook organizational restructuring from late 2021 to mid-2022 that has seen its 
commitment and strengthening of its Gender Unit. This Unit went up a level on the organizational 
ladder from being an area among a Direction of Climate Change and Inclusion to become the Gender, 
Inclusion and Diversity Management, directly dependent of the Corporate Vice President of Strategic 
Programming. The political will to address gender inequality is thus more explicit. Regarding its 
human resources, it currently engages four specialists 
.  
There are three documents that frame CAF’s approach towards gender equality: the Gender Equality 
Strategy, the Gender Equality Guidelines and a specific Gender Equity Safeguard (S09) among the 
social and environmental procedures that intend to reduce, mitigate and/or compensate for the 
unintended negative impacts of development projects. 
 
CAF’s 2022-2026 Gender Equality Strategy aims to facilitate women's access to financial resources, 
dignified job opportunities, basic and care services, and productive development. As well, it will 
contribute to strengthen its member countries' capacities against gender-based violence, femicide 
and teen pregnancy and to promote and strengthen the capacities, skills and competence for 
women's leadership and their participation in decision-making spaces. 
 
The Gender Equality Guidelines are an instrument aimed to guide the implementation of actions that 
promote gender equality, rights and empowerment of women in the region. They are implemented 
through three guidelines: (i) direct action, to develop activities whose main objective is to reduce 
inequality and expand access to opportunities; (ii) gender mainstreaming, to include the gender 
perspective in CAF's actions; and (iii) preventive action, whose purpose is to avoid the deepening of 
gaps or inequality that may result from CAF's operations. 
 
The Gender Equity Safeguard in force since 2016 applies to all projects and operations financed by 
CAF and constitutes the main preventive action of the Gender Equality Guidelines. Its applicability is 
determined during all phases of CAF's credit cycle. The Safeguard seeks to ensure that both women 
and men benefit equally from projects and programs financed by CAF, as well as that they participate 
equitably in the design and execution. It also seeks to prevent the projects and programs from 
deepening pre-existing gender gaps or producing adverse impacts. 
 
Regarding its partners, it must be noted that GIZ, the German Agency for International Cooperation, 
approved in 2012 a Gender Strategy that was updated in 2016, which is considered as an internal and 
external positioning of the organization. The Strategy aims to ensure that all activities, strategies and 
processes undertaken by GIZ are oriented towards gender equality and the elimination of 
discrimination and disadvantages based on gender.

=== PAGE 183 ===
36 
A GAP implementation team of four will be appointed: a coordinator and three country-based 
specialists. It will belong to the PMU. 
 
A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) gender sensitive 
 
It is expected that as part of compliance with the Environmental and Social Safeguards of CAF, the 
respective GRMs will be prepared for each sub-project. This requirement will be part of the TOR or 
the technical specifications included as part of the procurement documents. 
 
However, the request to prepare the GRM must ensure that they are adapted in order to cover, 
among their contents, the specific aspects related to the attention of complaints about gender 
violence (SEA/SH) that which could come from the influx of labor or from any other situation. 
 
The process of adaptation of the GRM to be gender sensitive will include significant emphasis on 
clarifying concepts of gender base violence and specificizing what are the risks of gender base 
violence in Program and sub-project, why do gender base violence complaints require a different 
approach, the principles of confidentiality and anonymity, informed consent, security, data 
recording, referral pathways. 
 
Even if the GRM for a sub-project is planned to be articulated with a government mechanism in place 
(national or local), it will be needed to detail how it works (roles, responsibilities, complaints form, 
channels available, the procedures for grievance management, communication strategy, etc.). 
 
This kind of systems must be serviced by trained personnel who can receive complaints with 
empathy and professionalism. In the case the GRM include a Community Grievance Focal Person it is 
recommended to be a women, hopefully part of the same community where the sub-project is 
based, that must receive training, particularly on how to handle SEA/SH complaints.

=== PAGE 184 ===
37 
7. References 
Aguero, A., Bustelo, M., & Viollaz, M. (2020). ¿Desigualdades en el mundo digital?: Brechas de género 
en el uso de las TIC. Inter-American Development Bank. 
Allen, H. (2018). Approaches for Gender Responsive Urban Mobility. GIZ, SUPT & Transformative 
Urban Mobility Initiative. Retrieved from https://www.sutp.org/publications/approaches-for-
gender-responsive-urban-mobility-gender-and-urban-transport-smart-and-affordable/ 
Blanco, E., De León, N., Serra, Y., & Cañizares, S. (n.d.). Assessment of Women, Science & Technology 
in Panama. National Assessments on Gender and Science Technology & Innovation (STI). 
Bulmer, E. R., Scarpari, R., & Garlati, A. (2019). Stubborn gender Gaps in Paraguay's Labor Market. 
Jobs Working Paper(no. 28). 
Bustelo, M., Suaya, A., & Viollaz, M. (2019). The future of work in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Inter-American Development Bank. 
Butler, C. (2020). Domestic Workers Left Out in the Cold. Retrieved from Solidarity Center: 
https://www.solidaritycenter.org/domestic-workers-left-out-in-the-cold/ 
CAF. (2019). Mediciones nocturnas en materia de seguridad para las mujeres. Mujeres an Cifras. 
Retrieved from 
http://omeg.sdmujer.gov.co/phocadownload/2019/boletines/Mujeres%20en%20Cifras%201
9.pdf 
CAF. (2019). She moves safely - A study on women's personal safety and public transport in three 
Latin American cities. CAF & FIA Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://scioteca.caf.com/handle/123456789/1405 
Caldo, A., Sosa, M., Monge, A. Granada, I. (2019). Estrategia de inclusión de mujeres en empleos no 
tradicionales en obras de mejoramiento de caminos vecinales en Paraguay. Inter-American 
Development Bank. 
Catalán, L. G., Cardarelli, A. R., & Cavallero, R. T. (2012). Women in the labour market - From injustice 
to affirmative action. 
Capurro, A., a Harguindeguy, S., Rego, S. Rubinstein, E.  Estudio de género en la industria de la 
construcción en Uruguay, sector vial (2018). Inter-American Development Bank. 
CEIC. (2021). Uruguay Unemployment Rate. Retrieved from CEIC: 
https://www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/uruguay/unemployment-rate 
Cosevi. (2020). Costa Rica overview. Retrieved from cosevi: 
https://datosabiertos.csv.go.cr/dashboards/19737/informacion-general-de-costa-rica/ 
De Madariaga, I. S. (2021). Mobility of Care. Retrieved from UN Habitat for a better future: 
https://unhabitat.org/mobility-of-care-ines-sanchez-de-madariaga 
ECLAC & ILO. (2020). Employment Situation in Latin America and the Caribbean. UN ECLAC & 
International Labour Organization. Retrieved from 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---americas/---ro-lima/---sro-
santiago/documents/publication/wcms_760452.pdf 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). (2016). 40 Years of the Regional 
Gender Agenda (LC/G.2682). Santiago. 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). (2021). Sexual and reproductive 
health laws in Latin America, 2021. 
https://oig.cepal.org/sites/default/files/c2100783_web.pdf. 
Galiani, S., & Jaitman, L. (2016). Public transport from a gender perspective: Perception of insecurity 
and victimization in Asunción and Lima. Inter-American Development Bank. 
IDB. (2011). Travel experience maps to measure the Accessibility of Public Transport. Retrieved from 
moviliblog: https://blogs.iadb.org/transporte/es/mapas-de-experiencia-de-viaje-para-medir-
la-accesibilidad-del-transporte-publico/ 
IDB. (2015). Uruguay - IDB Group Country Strategy 2016-2020. Inter-American Development Bank. 
IDB. (2019). Paraguay - IDB Group Country Strategy 2019-2023. Inter-American Development Bank. 
IDB. (2019). Participación femenina en el mercado laboral de transporte. Experiencias en las ciudades 
de Transport GenderLAB. Inter-American Development Bank. Retrieved from

=== PAGE 185 ===
38 
https://publications.iadb.org/publications/spanish/document/Participaci%C3%B3n_femenin
a_en_el_mercado_laboral_de_transporte_es_es.pdf 
IDB. (2020). Gender-based violence: enemy of sustainable mobility. Retrieved from moviliblog: 
https://blogs.iadb.org/transporte/es/violencia-de-genero-enemiga-de-la-movilidad-
sostenible/ 
IDB. (2020). Género y Transporte: Cali. Inter-American Development Bank. 
IDB. (2020, June). Giving voice to a cause: campaigns against harassment on public transport. 
Retrieved from moviliblog: https://blogs.iadb.org/transporte/es/dando-voz-a-una-causa-
campanas-contra-el-acoso-en-el-transporte-publico/ 
IFC. (2017). Investing in Women : New Evidence for the Business Case. International Finance 
Corporation. Retrieved from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28973?locale-attribute=fr 
IFC. (2018). Driving Toward Equality: Women, Ride-Hailling, and the Sharing Economy. Washington 
DC: International Finance Corporation and Uber Technologies, Inc. Retrieved from 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/gen
der+at+ifc/drivingtowardequality 
IFC. (2020). Gender-Segregated Transportation in Ride-Hailling: Navigating the Debate. Washington 
DC: International Finance Corporation. 
ILO. (2017). World Employment Social Outlook. Geneva: Internatinoal Labour Organization. Retrieved 
from https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---
inst/documents/publication/wcms_557245.pdf 
IMF. (2020). Panamat: Selected Issues. Retrieved from IMF elibrary: 
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/IMF002/28991-9781513541679/28991-
9781513541679/28991-
9781513541679_A006.xml?rskey=CFLiZb&result=18&redirect=true&redirect=true 
Kondylis, F., Legovini, A., Vyborny, K., Zwager, A., & Andrade, L. (2020, June). Demand for Safe Spaces 
- Avoiding Harassment and Stigma. Policy Research Working Paper 9269. 
Leiva, A. A. (2020). Conferencia Digital ADELA Panamá - Violence against women and the COVID-19 
pandemic in Panama. Konrad Andenauer Stiftung. Retrieved from 
https://www.kas.de/en/web/panama/event-reports/detail/-/content/violence-against-
women-and-the-covid-19-pandemic-in-panama 
López Marmolejo, A., Ruiz-Arranz, M., Ochoa, E. (2021) Cerrando brechas de género en el mundo del 
trabajo: Centroamérica, México, Panamá y República Dominicana. Inter-American 
Development Bank. 
López-Calva, L. (2020). No safer place than home?: The increase in domestic and gender-based 
violence during COVID-19 lockdowns in LAC. UNDP. Retrieved from 
https://www.latinamerica.undp.org/content/rblac/en/home/presscenter/director-s-graph-
for-thought/no-safer-place-than-home---the-increase-in-domestic-and-gender-b.html 
National Statistical Institute. (2019). Final results of the Second National Prevalence Survey on 
Gender-Based Violence and Generations. Retrieved from 
https://www.gub.uy/comunicacion/publicaciones/resultados-finales-de-la-segunda-
encuesta-nacional-de-prevalencia-sobre 
OECD. (2020). SIGI 2020 Regional Report for Latin America and the Caribbean, Social Institutions and 
Gender Index. Paris: OECD Publishing. doi:https://doi.org/10.1787/cb7d45d1-en 
Rivas, M. E., Suárez-Alemán, A., & Serebrisky, T. (2019). Stylized Urban Transportation Facts in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. Inter-American Development Bank. Retrieved from 
file:///C:/Users/Jannik%20Landwehr/Downloads/Stylized_Urban_Transportation_Facts_in_L
atin_America_and_the_Caribbean_en_en.pdf 
The World Bank. (2017). Jugar un partido desigual. #MujeresUruguay. Retrieved from 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uruguay/publication/mujeresuruguay 
UN ECLAC. (2021). CEPAL. Retrieved from Gender Equality Observatory for Latin America and the 
Caribbean: https://oig.cepal.org/en/indicators

=== PAGE 186 ===
39 
UN News. (2018, May). News. Retrieved from United Nations: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-world-urbanization-
prospects.html 
UN Women. (2020, September). COVID-19 and its economic toll on women: The story behind the 
numbers. Retrieved from UN Women: 
https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2020/9/feature-covid-19-economic-impacts-
on-women 
UN Women. (2021). Panama. Retrieved from Women Count: 
https://data.unwomen.org/country/panama 
UN Women. (2021). Paraguay. Retrieved from Women Count: 
https://data.unwomen.org/country/paraguay 
UN Women. (2021). Uruguay. Retrieved from Women Count: 
https://data.unwomen.org/country/uruguay 
UN Womenwatch. (n.d.). Paraguay. UN. Retrieved from 
https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/Review/responses/PARAGUAY-English.pdf 
UNICEF. (2019). unicef for every child. Retrieved from Maternal mortality: 
https://data.unicef.org/topic/maternal-health/maternal-
mortality/#:~:text=From%202000%20to%202017%2C%20the,reduction%20of%202.9%20per
%20cent. 
World Bank. (2019). The World Bank In Uruguay. Retrieved from The World Bank: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/uruguay/overview 
World Bank Group. (2015). Violence Against Women & Gilrs, Transport Brief. World Bank Group, The 
Global Women's Institute, IDB, ICRW. Retrieved from 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/135811611148441047/pdf/Violence-Against-
Women-and-Girls-Resource-Guide-Transport-Brief.pdf 
World Bank Group. (2018). Paraguay - Systematic Country Diagnostic.  
World Bank Group. (2018). Towards Equal? Women in Central America. Washington DC: The World 
Bank. 
World Bank Group. (2019). The Little Data Book on Gender. Washington DC: The World Bank. 
World Bank Group. (2020). Gender dimensions of the COVID-19 pandemic. World Bank Group. 
Retrieved from 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/618731587147227244/pdf/Gender-
Dimensions-of-the-COVID-19-Pandemic.pdf 
World Bank Group. (2020). Why Does She Move? A Study of Women's Mobility in Latin American 
Cities. Washington DC: The World Bank. 
World Economic Forum. (2020). Global Gender Gap Report 2020. Geneva: World Economic Forum. 
World Economic Forum. (2021). Global Gender Gap Report 2021 - Insight Report March 2021.

=== PAGE 187 ===
Gender Action Plan 
 
 
E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation Sub-
Program 2 
– Panamá, Paraguay, Uruguay – 
 
 
Version: 4 
Date: 26.07.2022

=== PAGE 188 ===
Gender Assessment and the E-Mobility Program 
 
The E-Mobility and Low Carbon Transportation Program (E-Motion) aims to enable a large-scale regional transition 
towards electro-mobility in Latin America focusing on intensive use vehicles leading to reduced fossil fuel 
consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and air pollutions. E-Motion will be implemented through two Funding 
Proposals: one by AFD (Sub-Program 1) as an Accredited Entity to cover 8 countries in Latin America, and one by CAF 
(Sub-Program 2) to cover the following 3 countries: Panama, Paraguay and Uruguay. The Program and its Sub-Program 
2 have a comprehensive approach to establish an e-mobility conducive ecosystem at the local, national and regional 
level, including activities such as targeted policy advice, business model development, stakeholder management and 
capacity building (all of which gender mainstreamed)  to ensure a favorable e-mobility environment combined with 
financial instruments to ensure deployment of large-scale fleets thereby de-risking future investments into e-mobility 
of investors. The Program can significantly reduce investment risks through the investment interventions combined 
with the implementation of business models and a policy framework conducive to EV deployment. 
 
To ensure that the E-Motion Program is mainstreaming a gender perspective into its investment decisions, a Gender 
Assessment Report has been conducted (Annex 8 of the GCF Funding Proposal). The Gender Assessment Report 
evaluates the situation of women in the respective Subprogram 2 countries and outlines the importance as well as 
the impact potential of the Program to enhance mobility, safety and access to jobs for women in urban transportation. 
Based on its findings, the report states specific recommendations on including a gender perspective for the Program 
implementation. These recommendations are the basis for the development of the following Gender Action Plan of 
the E-Motion Program.  
 
For the E-Motion Program, the contribution to reducing the gender gap in e-mobility and low-carbon transportation 
and to preventing and minimizing the harm of lacking gender equality and women’s rights is three-folded. First, the 
transport sector is a catalyst to change social norms. For instance, by raising awareness on sexual harassment and 
violence against women and girls, by providing visibility to women working in non-traditional roles in the EV (electric 
vehicle) markets, and by considering the mobility of care1 when designing transport operations, a societal impact can 
be achieved. Second, this new e-transport paradigm will lever women’s access to green jobs in traditionally sex-
segregated occupations or improve access to investment loans for female entrepreneurs. Third, the capacity 
building, training, and sharing of know-how to women and men designing the investment plans in the program will 
systematize gender mainstreaming in the transport sector. This three-folded approach will be mainly addressed as 
part of the Component 1 and its associated activities which will provide technical assistance to enable effective 
financial assistance and to create a (gender-responsive) policy and business framework conducive for massive 
deployment of EVs. Activities will be coordinated and realized together with national authorities to ensure 
complementarity of different endeavors. In addition, trough the implementation of some activities as part of the 
Components 2, 3 and 4 this three-folded approach will reach all phases of the sub-projects and a wide profile of 
stakeholders.  
 
The activities outlined in the present Gender Action Plan result in the three following outputs which will be specified 
below, including activities, indicators and targets, timeline, responsibilities and costs: 
 
1. Sector specific country-level gender assessments undertaken as part of the development of low-carbon electric 
vehicle roadmaps and policies (national level) 
2. Successful knowledge exchange and collaboration on gender aspects in transportation (regional level) 
3. Gender components integrated in the sub-projects financed by the Program. 
 
 
 
1 The mobility of care refers to travel implications of daily tasks performed by individuals with care responsibilities, which are 
mainly performed by women. For more information see (De Madariaga, 2021).

=== PAGE 189 ===
Gender Action Plan 
Action 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Costs in USD 
Impact Statement: Gender considerations are systemically mainstreamed into the whole E-Motion Subprogram2  
Outcome Statement: The targeted transportation sub-sectors are more gender-responsive and provide equal opportunities for men and women 
Output 1: Sector specific country-level gender assessments undertaken as part of the development of low-carbon electric vehicle roadmaps and policies (national 
level) 2 
Activity 1.1. Adoption of a transformative gender 
perspective, with a focus on mobility, safety, and 
jobs, in the design and review of all three 
country-level/local roadmaps and electric 
mobility policies, strategies, and implementation 
plans: design an effective advocacy strategy and 
action plan for mainstreaming gender in such 
activities.3 
 
Indicator: proportion of the policies and 
roadmaps supported that adopt a 
transformative gender perspective (gender 
neutral language, tariff integration with gender 
focus, women-targeted incentives, gender-
related risks and impacts identified and 
mitigated, consideration of the care mobility, 
etc.)4  
Target:  100% of policies and roadmaps 
supported by the Program use a gender 
perspective 
During year 1-2, 
on a rolling basis  GIZ  
46.500 
Activity 1.2.  Facilitate/Conduct multi-
stakeholder consultation strategy that will take 
part during the implementation of the E-Motion 
Subprogram 2 (Component 1)  
Indicator 1: Gender expert facilitates women’s 
participation and enables them to make their 
voices heard 
Baseline: 0 per consultation process 
Target: Participation and input of at least one 
(local) gender expert per multi-stakeholder 
consultation process 
During year 1-5 
GIZ Gender 
Specialist 
14.000 
Activity 1.3. Develop a country specific Gender 
Action Plan that will emerge from the synthesis 
of each contextual gender assessment and the 
Indicator: Country specific Gender Action Plan 
Baseline: 0 Country specific Gender Action Plan 
During year 2-5 
GIZ Gender 
Specialist 
14.500 
 
2 Sex-disaggregated data will be reported for all activities in the program. 
3 Multistakeholder consultations will be taking place during the implementation of the program. Based on those, information on contextualized gendered needs of 
different countries and diverse needs of the population in terms of e-mobility in the public transport sector will be provided.  
4 The program will support the design of new roadmaps and policies and will review current policies to recommend how to adapt them to create a e-mobility conducive 
ecosystem. This activity seeks to include a gender perspective in the process to provide recommendations to policies to be inclusive (Ex: gender neutral language, 
consideration of the care mobility, etc.)

=== PAGE 190 ===
4 
support given to design/review of low-carbon 
electric vehicle national roadmaps and policies; 
to be reinforced by the consultation/participatory 
processes that will be undertaken to inform the 
project. In depth interviews with key social actor 
will also be included to strengthen the diagnosis 
in each country. 
Target: 3 Gender Action Plan developed 
 
Output 2: Successful knowledge exchange and collaboration on gender aspects in transportation (regional level) 
Activity 2.1. Include a gender perspective 
approach in capacity building and training 
activities (workshops, etc.) targeted to key public 
and private stakeholders (government actors, 
operators) in order to increase awareness about 
gender equality gaps and opportunities in 
transport  
 
Indicator 1: proportion of capacity building and 
training activities developed during the E-
Motion Subprogram 2 that include effective 
awareness building on gender equality and 
urban transport (mobility, safety, jobs)5 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 50% 
Indicator 2: proportion of women members 
(among the key public and private 
stakeholders) attending trainings (also to 
empower their perspective) 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 30-50%6 
Indicator 3: Regional active network on women 
in e-mobility to share and exchange 
experiences, promote mentorship, and 
produce knowledge on a regular basis 
Baseline: 0 networks are available 
Target: 1 network that is actively used 
Year 1-5 
GIZ  
100.000 
 
5 This activity guarantees that gender equality is learned and integrated into the capacity building. It is expected that in some capacity building activities it will not be 
feasible to integrate gender aspects. Besides, this activity will monitor women’s participation on the capacity building activities. 
6 In reality in the program countries decision makers and people in powerful positions are mostly male. Although the optimal target would be 50% women and men (in 
line with the representation in society) it is suggested to keep the target more flexible to particularly train decision makers on gender perspective.

=== PAGE 191 ===
5 
Activity 2.2. Conduct online capacity building and 
training (webinars, etc.  to key public and private 
stakeholders (government actors, operators, 
sector companies, etc.) in order to increase 
knowledge in how to include gender perspective 
in urban transport projects. 
Indicator: online module7 of training on gender 
and urban transport 
Baseline 0 online modules 
Target: 1 
Indicator 2: attendees of the trainings 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 representative from the local public 
authority in each city where an investment of 
the program is foreseen 
Year 2 
GIZ 
45.000 
Activity 2.3. Collection of locally adapted best 
practices (an example could be “Bajale al acoso” 
in Quito) on violence and harassment prevention 
and treatment in public transportation. 
Systematized regional best practices will inform 
the capacity building and training activities and 
contribute to define the adapted best practices 
to be implemented in all three countries. 
Indicator 1:  Systematic collection of regional 
practices and identification of best practices 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 map of regional best practices 
Indicator 2:  number of best practices to the 
local cultures adapted 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 12 best practices locally adapted 
Indicator 3: Developed guidelines on how to 
mainstream gender into urban transport 
projects 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 guidelines developed 
Year 1 
GIZ 
14.000 
 
7 The online module will have verification means of attendance. The training will be practical with initiatives on the region (no theoretical), 3 hours max by day. 1 Module 
on mobility (1 day), 1 Module on Jobs (2 days), 1 module on Safety (3 days), 1 Module on how to prepare a gender assessment in a real project and preparing a gender 
action plan (1 day).

=== PAGE 192 ===
6 
Activity 2.4 Design of national communication 
campaigns about sexual harassment and 
protocols of attention in public transport 
Indicator 1: Public communication campaigns 
about sexual harassment and protocols of 
attention in public transportation8  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1  
 
Year 3 
GIZ 
7.000 
Output 3: Locally adapted best practices on gender in public transportation are integrated in the projects financed by the Program 
Activity 3.1. Mobility infrastructure design and 
management financed by the Program is planned 
to be gender-sensitive and gender responsive, 
e.g. planning for care facilities, schedules 
changes, special fares, analysis and modification 
of routes, interior design of buses accommodate 
for people travelling with infants, bags, strollers, 
elders, etc. 
Indicator 1: proportion of mobility 
infrastructure projects that include a Gender 
Equality Strategy 
Baseline: 0% 
Target:100% 
Indicator 2: proportion of projects that 
established a GAP, which contains specific and 
measurable activities and a respective budget9 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
Indicator 3: proportion of projects that include 
in the TOR a specific requirement for including 
a GAP, a gender specialist as a responsible and 
a gender sensitive GRM. 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
 
Year 1-5 
Project owners 
(public / private 
companies) with 
support of gender 
consultant 
29.000 
 
8 The public communication campaigns will be designed with consultations addressing specific perceptions and risks those different gender identities face, with significant 
attention to mitigate indigenous peoples and afro descendants’ potential risks. The protocols of attention will develop/enhance safe, confidential, and ethical grievance 
reporting mechanisms for survivors and monitoring mechanisms to identify, respond and address risks of sexual harassment. This technical assistance will guide the 
adopters to develop protocols of attention that are inclusive and safe for different gender identities present in each country/city of the new e-transport system. 
9 The project owners will learn and be helped on how to draft a gender assessment and GAP in the online module, in this activity they will get support from consultants 
to implement gender in their own investment plans.

=== PAGE 193 ===
7 
Activity 3.2 Participatory and inclusive Designing 
of each project financed by the Program will 
include a gender-sensitive and gender-responsive 
approach, including the following measures: 
hiring female trainers and/or trainers with 
experiences in participatory processes and 
women’s engagement, adapt the sessions 
schedule to women’s practical needs (women’s 
work and domestic responsibilities), inlc. a brief 
survey to find the most suitable times, engage 
participants organizations and hold training 
sessions during worktime, chose a venue where 
women feel comfortable (not a male-dominated 
site), provide childcare arrangements, etc. 
Indicator 1: proportion of Participatory Design 
activities (workshops, community meetings, 
etc.) that are gender-sensitive. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% of the Participatory Designing 
activities 
Year 1-5 
GIZ / CAF 
10.00010 
Activity 3.3. Integrating measures into urban 
passenger transport projects financed by the 
Program oriented to generate and improve 
gender disaggregated data collection on urban 
transport 
Indicator 1: proportion of urban passenger 
transport projects collecting and presenting 
gender disaggregated data 
Baseline: 0% 
Target:100% of the urban passenger transport 
projects financed by the Program 
 
Indicator 2: proportion of projects that include 
in the TOR a specific requirement for including 
a GAP with their particular measurable 
activities and a respective budget 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
 
Year 1-5 
Public transport 
authority with 
support of gender 
consultants 
7.000 
Activity 3.4. Integrating measures into projects 
that improve women’s access to jobs, such as - 
training targeted at women to improve their skills 
Indicator 1: proportion of projects (with direct 
finance by the Program) that reserve by 
requesting it in the TOR a share of at least 35% 
Year 5 
Project owners 
(public / private 
companies) 
81.000 
 
10 It is estimated that per training/workshop USD400 times 20 trainings/workshops are needed extra to established respective measures as mentioned.

=== PAGE 194 ===
8 
or advocacy aimed at labor unions (it is very usual 
that masculinized unions obstruct the 
incorporation of women to the field) 
of non-skilled jobs, that are related directly to 
the project, for women11  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 80% 
Indicator 2: proportion of projects (with direct 
finance by the Program) that reserve by 
requesting it in the TOR a share of at least 35% 
of skilled jobs, that are related directly to the 
project, for women  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 80% 
Indicator 3: 1 educational programme targeted 
at women to improve their skills for the 
mobility sector 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 
Indicator 4: advocacy sessions, campaigns and 
events conducted aimed to eradicate the 
sector’s labor unions gender biases   
Baseline: 0 
Target: at least 5 events  
 
 
Activity 3.5. Establishing interventions to address 
and prevent GBV and SEAH in public transport, 
including training of staff, information campaigns 
and awareness raising, required infrastructure, 
Indicator 1: 70% of the projects include a 
sexual harassment protocol  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
Indicator 2: 100% of the projects that include a 
harassment protocol implement them through 
Year 1-5 
CAF 
93.000 
 
11 This is monitoring that the GAP of the investment’s plans are reserving a minimum of jobs to women. The target is set to 80% because is expected that some investments 
plans might not generate jobs.

=== PAGE 195 ===
9 
and feedback and grievance mechanisms, among 
others.  
a surveillance system that considers both 
technological and human resources. 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% 
Indicator 3: 100% of the above develop a 
coordination strategy with the police and the 
local Mechanism for Women's Advancement 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 100% 
Activity 3.6. Promotion of gender equality at the 
workplace, such as advertising that job vacancies 
are open for women, adapt working schedules to 
women’s care needs at home, building dressing 
rooms, provide childcare, etc. 
Indicator 1: Training for the staff of public 
transport projects (workers, managerial and 
administrative staff, etc.) on gender equality 
and work-life balance issues via workshops12 
Baseline: 0 Workshops conducted 
Target: one workshop for each public transport 
project  
Indicator 2: proportion of projects/companies 
including annual surveys on work-life balance 
to their staff and sharing the results 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
Indicator 3: proportion of projects/companies 
with one focal point in charge of gender 
equality 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 100% 
Year 1-5 
Project owners 
(public / private 
companies) with 
support of gender 
consultant 
124.000 
 
12 Target learners are workers of the system (drivers, cashiers, etc) as well as managerial and administrative staff. A model of survey will be shared in the workshop to be 
used by the agency/company adopter of the technology

=== PAGE 196 ===
10 
GAP Implementation Team: a four-specialists 
team will be appointed to effectively implement 
the GAP. The team will belong to the PMU. 
Indicator 1: Employment of 3 Country-Based 
Gender specialist, including time spent on 
various activities outlined in Gender Action 
Plan 
Baseline: 0 Country-Based Gender specialist 
hired 
Target: 3 Country-Based Gender specialist 
effectively hired 
 
Indicator 2: Employment of 1 Coordinator 
Gender Specialist, including time spent on 
various activities outlined in Gender Action 
Plan 
Baseline: 0 Coordinator Gender Specialist hired 
Target: 1 Coordinator Gender Specialist 
effectively hired 
Year 1-5 
Program 
Management Unit 
(PMU) 
36.000

=== PAGE 197 ===
11 
Budget 
Item 
Quantity 
Unit cost (USD)/month or 
unit 
Total cost (USD) 
International Consultants 
10 
15,000 
150.000 
National consultants 
17 
7,000 
119.000 
Trainings and workshops average 30 participants (Venue, 
buses, and caregiver) 
36 
1,500 
54,000 
International Trainers/Speaker 
2 
15,000 
30,000 
International travel 
6 
4,000 
24,000 
Per diems international 
15 
300 
4,500 
Communication Material 
3 
60,000 
180,000 
Scholarships 
90 
550 
49,500 
Various measures to make workshops gender-sensitive 
1 
10,000 
10,000 
Total 
 
 
621.000 
 
 
__________
