=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (64-bit) 22.2.20212
creationDate: D:20220928170342+09'00'
modDate: D:20220929094604+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
17 – 20 October 2022 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 13 
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
29 September 2022 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP194 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB)
Cool";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page b 
3 
97 
111 
116 
139 
148 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
150

=== PAGE 3 ===
Programme title: 
Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool 
Country(ies): 
Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia 
Accredited Entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Date of first submission: 
[2020/12/04]  
Date of current submission 
[2022/09/23] 
Version number 
[V.012]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE b 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
35 % 
35% 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
65 % 
65 % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed / 
sequestered) 
1,562,759 tCO2eq 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
1.167 million direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
1.133 million 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
33,620 
0.15% of the 
population 
0.005% 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co-finance2)  
1,012,500,000 Euros  
326,000,000 USD 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF 
funding requested  
175,000,000 Euros 
 
45,000,000 USD 
  
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 4 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the 
GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be 
consistent with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
44,000,000 Euros  
☒  Loan 
131,000,000 Euros 
45,000,000 USD 
 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
10 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
 30 years 
A.13. Expected date 
of AE internal 
approval 
 
12/15/2022 
 
A.14. ESS category  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP 
been submitted as a 
CN before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. 
Complementarity and 
coherence  
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing 
Entity information 
● Agence Française de Développement (AFD)  
● PROPARCO (société de Promotion et Participation à la Coopération 
économique)  
● Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)  
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 5 
 
Climate change problem 
 
PEEB Cool is addressing a crosscutting mitigation and adaptation problem. Green buildings can 
reduce vulnerability to climate change by maintaining thermal comfort in buildings that are not 
mechanically cooled even under future climate conditions, while addressing mitigation needs by 
reducing the energy use and GHG emissions related to cooling where that exists. 
 
Adaptation: The IPCC has stated that it is virtually certain that in future there will be more frequent 
hot temperature extremes on most land areas on daily and seasonal timescales, and that it is very 
likely that heat waves will occur with a higher frequency and longer duration. As a result of these 
changes, maintaining thermal comfort in buildings in locations with hot climates is expected to present 
an increasing challenge. According to the WHO, population exposure to heat is increasing due to 
climate change, and this trend will continue. 3  Increases in heat load and a rising body core 
temperature can lead to a range of health effects, the worst of which is life-threatening heatstroke. 
Heat stress also has economic effects as it is projected to reduce total working hours worldwide by 
2.2 per cent and global GDP by US$2,400 billion in 20304. 
 
Mitigation: The construction and operation of buildings is responsible for 40% of all energy-related 
CO2 eq emissions and consumes 36% of the global final energy. Due to population growth, rapid 
urbanization and economic development, final energy demand from buildings is predicted to 
increase by 50% by 2050 compared with 2015 under business as usual scenarios. To be on track to 
meet global climate ambitions set forth in the Paris Agreement, the energy intensity per square 
meter of buildings needs to improve on average by 30% by 2030 (compared to 2015). This means a 
near-doubling of current annual buildings energy performance improvements until 20305. This is 
even more challenging in hot climates, as a significant fraction of energy use in buildings is for air 
conditioning. Globally, energy consumed by air conditioning already equals 2,000 TWh every year 
and is expected to triple by 2050. 
As long-lived assets, green buildings constructed today reduce vulnerabilities that would otherwise 
continue to exist for decades, and ensure lower emissions for the duration of their lifetimes. There is 
a need to act now on this market which represent USD 4.5 trillion per year6. How? 
i. 
By incorporating passive (bioclimatic) measures to maintain cooler temperatures than in 
conventional buildings.  
ii. 
Through installing more efficient cooling systems and using renewable energy to power 
these systems.  
iii. 
Using low carbon construction materials. 
iv. 
Through strong stakeholders mobilization to enhance public policies,incentivise and support 
the building sector industry. 
v. 
With enhanced public policies and adequate financial incentives. Many countries still do 
not explicitly mention the building sector in their NDC or do not have mandatory thermal 
regulations for buildings, for instance.  
Proposed intervention 
 
PEEB Cool is aiming to transform the construction sector at scale by supporting resilient and energy 
efficient building, so called green buildings, design, construction and operation.  
 
 
3 Information and public health advice: heat and health, World Health Organization. 
(https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/heat-and-health/en/ ) 
4 Working on a warmer planet : The impact of heat stress on labour productivity and decent work – International 
Labour organization, 2019 
5 UN Environment and International Energy Agency (2017) : Towards a zero-emission, efficient, and resilient 
buildings and construction sector. Global Status Report 2017 
6 Global ABC report status for buildings and construction 2019

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 6 
 
The Programme targets 11 countries in 4 continents with climates in which the temperature reaches 
level at which heat related risks become significant in Africa (Djibouti, Morocco, Nigeria, Tunisia), 
South-East Asia (Indonesia, Sri Lanka), South America (Argentina, Costa Rica, Mexico), and Eastern 
Europe (Albania, North Macedonia). 
 
 
The selection of the countries was based on a pre identified selection criteria: 
- 
Level of vulnerability to increased temperatures and climate extremes like heat waves 
- 
A preliminary gap assessment for specific needs in the residential, healthcare and 
commercial sectors 
- 
Similarity of technical barriers.  
- 
The geographic focus and experience of the AFD 
The results of this analysis have been included in the feasibility study in section 2.4. 
 
 
The proposed intervention has two components - an Investment Facility and an Enabling Facility. 
o An Investment Facility (component 1, with a budget of 987.8 MEUR and 326 MUSD) will offer 
financing and technical assistance to public and private Subproject 7 owners incorporating 
bioclimatic design principles and ambitious energy efficiency targets.  
o An Enabling Facility (component 2, with a budget of 21.5 MEUR, or an average of 1.95 MEUR 
per country) for investment in green buildings to support the transformation of the buildings 
sector environment towards green buildings through sectorial framework, policies, and 
trainings.  
The components have been designed to each address key barriers that are preventing the 
construction industry in the targeted countries from shifting from current unsustainable practices to a 
low carbon, climate resilient development path. It is based on the unique proposal that the two facilities 
go hand in hand as investment drives new industry practice which regulation and public policy 
incentivize and regulate. Thus the Programme will contribute to a paradigm shift in the sector, leading 
to the scaling up of the use of bioclimatic measures, efficient cooling systems and low carbon 
construction materials. 
 
Climate impacts/benefits 
Figure 1: PEEB Cool Geographical Scope

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.8.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
Promoting green buildings brings a triple win: providing a powerful tool to stimulate investment in the 
green economy (47k jobs created), improving resilience of the most vulnerable populations as 
buildings are better adapted to climate change, and achieving massive long-term savings of costs and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
 
PEEB Cool investments will improve the socio-economic resilience of all social strata in the 
communities in which they take place, but particularly of low- and middle-income groups, as a result 
of the construction of improved low- and middle-income housing as well as public buildings providing 
essential services to the community, such as education and health. Direct beneficiaries of the PEEB 
Cool Programme are the users of buildings constructed with the support of the Programme. The total 
number of direct beneficiaries of the Programme has been estimated at 1.133 million people (approx.. 
561,373 females).  
 
Climate mitigation impacts come in two forms:  
- 
Direct impacts, attributable to investments in subprojects / end-beneficiary projects promoting 
energy efficient and low carbon buildings, including efficient cooling systems and low carbon 
materials. 
- 
Indirect impacts, attributable to improved regulatory frameworks including national energy 
efficiency regulations, construction standards and certification commitments by industry 
actors, as well as training and increased capacities of human resources. 
 
The total estimated amount of GHG emission reductions induced by the program is 1.563 MtCO2 eq 
over a 25-year period (49 EUR/t CO2 eq for the GCF contribution or 9.85 EUR/tCO2 grant, based on 
an estimate of the impact of energy efficiency investments, construction standards and certification 
only). 
 
 
7 “Subproject” in this Funding Proposal refers to transactions from the PEEB Cool facility - potentially 
investments into a number of buildings. “End-beneficiary projects” in this Funding Proposal refers to individual 
transactions as part of a credit line subbroject

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
8 Information and public health advice: heat and health, World Health Organization. 
(https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/heat-and-health/en/ ) 
9 Gasparrini et al. (2017), Projections of temperature-related excess mortality under climate change scenarios, 
The Lancet Planetary Health, Volume 1, Issue 9. 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
I- 
Climate change problem 
Climate change is driving a significant increase in the global demand for cooling. This demand is 
intensified by the urbanization trends and the higher incomes in developing countries, but is also 
connected with the climate vulnerability of the population. Exposure to extreme temperatures and 
suboptimal thermal comfort conditions lead to adverse health effects, reduced productivity and the 
need for improved emergency services. Such impacts are especially threatening to countries which 
are more susceptible to extreme heatwaves. While addressing the demand for cooling may improve 
the resilience of communalities, it also leads to a reinforcing feedback loop, due to its impacts to 
GHG emissions. Increased active cooling, leads to higher energy (and coolants) use, and therefore 
increased GHG emissions that further increase the demand for cooling. PEEB Cool is a programme 
that will address both mitigation and adaptation needs through the construction of green building, by 
addressing cooling needs for improved comfort and well-being, while minimizing GHG emissions.  
 
Adaptation needs 
The countries of the PEEB Cool Programme are spread over seven different climates: 
Mediterranean, humid subtropical, tropical, equatorial, arid, mountain (or high plateau) and 
continental climates. In each of these climates the temperature reaches levels at which heat related 
risks become significant at least part of the year. Climate change will lead to an increase in these 
risks: more regular and extreme heatwaves and an increase in mean temperature. According to the 
RCP8.5 scenario, the mean annual temperature rise for countries in Africa ranges from 3°C to 7°C 
by the year 2100. For countries in South-East Asia and South America, it ranges from 2°C to 5°C. 
Country specific climate hazard information (presented in the country forms in the annex of the 
Feasibility Study) shows that across PEEB Cool countries climate projections indicate that the risks 
due to high temperatures will increase drastically.  
According to the World Health Organization “the room temperature should be kept below 32 °C during 
the day and 24 °C during the night. This is especially important for infants or people who are over 60 
years of age or have chronic health conditions”.8 Electric fans may provide relief, but when the 
temperature is above 35 °C, may not prevent heat-related illness. Research indicates that, in high-
emission scenarios, most regions are projected to experience a steep rise in heat-related mortality.9 
Vulnerability to climate change is connected to increased exposure to high temperatures. The main 
pathways relevant to PEEB Cool are linked with: 
• 
Direct vulnerability due to increased risk to adverse health effects from high indoor 
temperatures 
• 
Secondary vulnerability due to stresses to the health system from 
o 
Increased emergency health services needs, especially during heatwaves 
o 
Reduced productivity of the health professionals in hospitals

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
10 Tham, S. et al.  (2020). Indoor temperature and health: a global systematic review. Public Health, 179, 9-17. 
11 Li, M et al (2015). Heat waves and morbidity: current knowledge and further direction-a comprehensive 
literature review. International journal of environmental research and public health, 12(5), 5256-5283. 
12 Ye, X. et al. (2011). Ambient Temperature and Morbidity: A Review of Epidemiological Evidence. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(1), 19–28. 
13Bueno, A. M., et al. (2021). Evaluating the connection between thermal comfort and productivity in buildings: a 
systematic literature review. Buildings, 11(6), 244 
14 Singh, M. K. Et al. (2019). Progress in thermal comfort studies in classrooms over last 50 years and way 
forward. Energy and Buildings. 
• 
Direct vulnerability due to reduced productivity in businesses and schools.  
The reduced exposure to high temperatures, through improved indoor thermal comfort, will lessen 
the vulnerability of the population, minimizing the risks in health, the health system, and improving 
productivity.  
Increased indoor temperature has been linked with adverse health effects, reduced productivity, and 
increased need for emergency services. Higher indoor temperatures have been linked with worsened 
respiratory symptoms, lower blood pressure, increased insulin intake to patients with type one 
diabetes, worsened mental health symptoms, and reduced physical functioning.10  
Primary and secondary health providers are also vulnerable to increased temperatures. Several 
studies found that heatwaves lead to increased needs in emergency medical care 11, while others 
have linked increased temperature to increased morbidity. 12  
A series of studies have linked thermal comfort with productivity. Temperatures that are higher than 
28oC cause performance loss at work and “neutral” or “sightly cold” conditions have been associated 
with increased productivity13. Similarly, thermal comfort has also been associated with learning 
performance. Students in all classrooms at all stages of their education, i.e. primary, secondary and 
at university, report feeling comfortable on the cooler side of the thermal sensation scale, while a 
number of studies have linked indoor environment quality with academic performance14.  
The table below details climate change vulnerability profile for each country of the program: 
Country 
Historical Data 
Climate Projections 
(RCP4.5)  
Cooling degree day 
(CDD) - linked to 
temperature 
projections (RCP4.5)* 
Vulnerability for the 
priority sector 
Albania 
Albania has a 
subtropical 
Mediterranean climate 
with dry, hot summers. 
Temperature has 
increased by around 
1°C since the 1960s, 
with a faster rate of 
warming in recent 
decades). The number 
of days where 
temperature reaches 
above 35°C has also 
risen, with such 
events occurring 
annually now rather 
than every few years. 
Models show 
temperature will rise 
intensely throughout 
the century. 
Projections show 
change in temperature 
of 1.6°C by mid-
centuryand reaching 
up to 2.4°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach 1.8°C (on 
capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
(over 35°C) are 
expected to increase 
by 5 days for the 
period 2020-2039 (on 
a national level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 284 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
420 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
621 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Health Services :  
Heat-related deaths, 
especially among the 
elderly, present the 
most immediate threat 
for the Balkans. The 
country is additionally 
vulnerable due to 
developed public 
health system. 
Primary.  
Adaptation benefits : 
Resilient Health 
System

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
Argentina 
Argentina’s dense 
population in urban 
regions make it 
vulnerable to a variety 
of hazards, including 
extreme heat.  The 
ND-Gain Index ranks 
Argentina 69th on 
vulnerability and 108th 
on readiness. Periods 
in recent decades. 
Moreover, the country 
has experienced a rise 
in the number of days 
with heat waves. 
Argentina’s mean 
annual temperature 
between 1901-2016 
was 14.31°C, with 
significantly warmer. 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 0.97°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 1.1°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 1.4°C 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by17.35 days 
for the period 2080-
2099 (on a national 
level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 203CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
313 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
446 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Residential sector:  
Argentina is facing 
increasing 
urbanization rates. 
High temperatures are 
expected to increase 
pressures in urban 
zones, that have 
already been affected.  
Adapting to 
heatwaves should 
also take into 
consideration the 
aged power grid. 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health 
Costa Rica 
The average 
temperature is 19.5°C. 
However, the country 
is experiencing 
significant warming, 
with temperatures 
having increased by 
between 0.2°C and 
0.3°C per decade 
since 1960. The 
number of warm days 
has increased by 
2.5% and warm nights 
rose by 1.7% between 
1961 and 2003.  The 
number of cooler 
periods has also 
fallen, with a reduction 
in the number of cold 
nights of 2.2% and a 
drop in cold days by 
2.4% by decade since 
1961. These figures 
show a clear upward 
trend in warming over 
the last 60 years in 
Costa Rica. 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.6°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 2.0°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 1.9°C 
and reaching up to 
2.4°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by16.64 days 
for the period 2080-
2099 (on a national 
level). 
Projected change in 
annualcooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 485 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
786 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
1102 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Education:  
Costa Rica has more 
than 25% probability 
that at least one 
period of prolonged 
heat exposure, 
resulting in heat 
stress, will occur 
within the next five 
years.  
The Ministry of Public 
Education has 
identified schools as a 
possible intervention 
area. Improved 
thermal comfort will 
increase the 
productivity and 
academic 
performance in 
schools.  
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved academic 
perforamance 
Djibouti 
Temperatures have 
been increasing 
quickly in recent 
years, at a rate of 
around 0.22°C per 
decade in the last 30 
years.  The climate 
type of the country 
means dry spells and 
hot periods are 
reasonably frequent, 
with a duration of 65 
World Bank expects 
Djibouti to see 
warming of 1.7°C by 
2050, while the 
change in the 
maximum temperature 
will reach 2.00.  By the 
end of the century the 
change in temperature 
will reach 4.2 °C (on 
capital level). Hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 51 days 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 572 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
934 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
1232 CDD by thee 
end of the century. 
Small offices: 
According to ILO 
increased heat is 
expected to lead to 
loss in working hours 
in all sectors. A study 
in Djibouti City found 
that natural ventilation 
creates a comfortable 
indoor temperature 
and would allow 
buildings to benefit 
from cooling without

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
days and 9 days 
respectively. 
for the period 2080-
2099 (on a national 
level). 
the need for energy 
inefficient cooling.  
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved productivity 
Indonesia 
Temperature is rising 
rapidly at a rate of 
around 0.1°C per 
decade since 1990 
and is expected to 
continue this trend in 
the future.  
Moreover, Indonesia’s 
climate is driven, in 
part, by El Nino 
cycles. The country 
experiences dry and 
warm conditions 
during the El Nino 
periods and intense 
rainfall during La Nina 
periods. Currently, 
Indonesia experiences 
a mean dry spell 
duration of 9 days and 
a mean heat wave 
duration of 4 days, 
although both are 
expected to increase.   
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.4°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 1.9°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 1.7°C 
and reaching up to 
2.2°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by15.65 days 
for the period 2080-
2099 (on a national 
level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 442 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
666 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
936 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Residential:  
WHO estimates a 
rapid rise in heat-
related mortality by 
the end of the century 
under a BAU scenario. 
They project, an 
expected mortality 
rate of nearly 50 per 
100,000 in 2080 
compared to 5 per 
100,000 in 1990.  
Improved residential 
thermal comfort is 
expected to reduce 
adverse health effects. 
Adaptation measures 
in the residential 
sector will also 
improve rduce energy 
load.  
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health 
Mexico 
Mexico’s mean annual 
temperature has 
increased by 0.6°C 
since 1960, at around 
0.13°C per decade 
and up to 0.2°C in the 
dry, hot months. As 
noted in Mexico’s 
official Climate 
Change Strategy, the 
number of cooler days 
has fallen while warm 
nights have increased. 
Warming throughout 
the country is 
expected, especially in 
hotter urban regions. 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.8°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 2.2°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 2.4°C 
and reaching up to 
3.0°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by45.9 days 
for the period 2080-
2099 (on a national 
level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 487 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
731 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
1010 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Residential and 
small office: 
Increased 
urbanisation and low-
income housing 
caused infrastructure 
deficiencies and 
enhanced energy 
demands, especially 
during hot periods. 
According to ILO by 
2030, industry will lose 
1.3% of total working 
hours to heat stress, 
2.45% in construction 
and 0.3% in services. 
The total loss of 
working hours 
amounts to  544,400 
full-time jobs 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health & productivity 
Morocco 
In the last half century, 
average temperature 
has risen by around 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.5°C by mid-
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
Residential and 
Schools:

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
1°C, with observed 
average increases of 
0.2°C per decade and 
summer months 
experiencing faster 
and greater warming. 
This warming trend 
has increased the 
number of days and 
nights classified as 
‘hot’ by 21 and 40 
respectively. 
century and reaching 
up to 2.1°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 2.0°C 
and reaching up to 
2.7°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 31 days 
for the period 2080-
2099. (on a national 
level). 
Warming will increase 
at a faster rate in the 
interior, where regions 
are drier, rather than 
the coastline. 
rise from 345 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
559 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
825 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
WHO estimates a 
rapid rise in heat-
related mortality by 
the end of the century 
under a BAU scenario. 
They project, an 
expected mortality 
rate of nearly 50 per 
100,000 in 2080 
compared to 5 per 
100,000 in 1990. 
The ILO expects the 
proportion of working 
hours lost to heat 
stress in the country to 
fall by 0.14% in 
industry, 0.39% in 
construction and 
0.02% in services by 
2030 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health & academic 
performance 
Nigeria 
Nigeria has seen an 
increase in mean 
temperature of around 
0.19°C per decade 
over the last thirty 
years (around 0.60°C 
total warming) with a 
faster rate in the 
south.  The World 
Bank estimates that 
the number of hot 
nights and days has 
increased between 
1960 and 2003, with 
hot days rising by 73 
days annually.  
Dry spells and hot 
periods are significant, 
with a 17-day average 
duration of dry spells 
and 7-day average 
duration of heat 
waves.  Yet, there is 
significant variability 
throughout the 
country. 
The warming trend 
seen in recent years is 
expected to continue 
at a faster rate. The 
whole country will 
likely see significant 
warming, with those in 
rapidly growing urban 
populations at risk.  
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.3°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 1.6°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). By 
2100, the change will 
likely reach around 
1.7°C and reaching up 
to 2.0°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 67 days 
for the period 2080-
2099(on a national 
level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 605 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
918 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
1315 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Residential: WHO 
estimates that nearly 
80 deaths per 100,000 
will be expected due 
to heat by 2080 under 
a high emission 
scenario compared to 
3 deaths per 100,000 
during the baseline 
period. 
Improvement of 
residential thermal 
comfort will reduce 
health effects. 
Additional health co-
benefits are expected 
from improved 
ventilation that will 
reduce the threat of 
indoor pollution.  
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health 
North 
Macedonia 
Average temperatures 
have been increasing 
in recent decades as 
estimates show up to 
0.5°C of warming 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 2.0°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 2.9°C for the 
maximum temperature 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 239 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
379 CDD between 
Commercial: Heat-
related deaths, 
especially among the 
elderly, present the 
most immediate threat 
for the Balkans.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
between 1981 and 
2010.  
The number of warm 
days has increased by 
4-10 days per decade 
in line with a doubling 
of the summer heat 
wave length over the 
last century. Heat 
waves have been 
common throughout 
the country as over 
150 were recorded 
between 1961-2012, 
including 25 in Skopje 
and 38 in Demir 
Kapija. Moreover, the 
number has been 
rising in recent periods 
with 8 heat wave 
events observed in 
Skopje in 2012 alone. 
By 2100, the change 
will likely reach around 
2.4°C and reaching up 
to 3.7°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 15.81 
days for the period 
2080-2099(on a 
national level). 
2040 and 2059 and 
565 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Moreover, increased 
temperatures are 
expected to lead to 
lower productivity and 
loss of working hours.  
Improved thermal 
comfort in commercial 
spaces will safeguard 
the level of 
productivity in the 
country. 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved productivity 
Sri Lanka 
Over the last 50 years, 
temperature has 
increased at a rate of 
around 0.16°C per 
decade, with greater 
increases in minimum 
temperature 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.1°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 1.2°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 1.3°C 
and reaching up to 
1.4°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 32.13 
days for the period 
2080-2099(on a 
national level). 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 454 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
678 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
996 CDD by the end 
of the century 
Residential: Heat-
related mortality in the 
elderly is expected to 
rise to 22 deaths per 
100,000 under a high 
emissions scenario by 
2080 from 1 death per 
100,000 in 1990. At 
the same time a 
number of studies 
have highlighted the 
potential for 
adaptation of the 
residential sector. 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health   
Tunisia 
World Bank data 
shows a mean annual 
temperature of 19.4°C 
between 1901-2019, 
with a mean maximum 
of 25.4°C and a mean 
minimum of 13.5°C.  
However, 
temperatures in recent 
decades have risen 
significantly, by an 
average of 0.37°C per 
decade over the last 
30 years.  This 
combined with fewer 
cool periods and an 
increase in energy 
consumption on hot 
days threatens the 
Projections show a 
change in temperature 
of 1.4°C by mid-
century and reaching 
up to 1.7°C for the 
maximum 
temperature. By 2100, 
the change will likely 
reach around 1.8°C 
and reaching up to 
1.9°C for the 
maximum temperature 
(on capital level). 
Moreover, hot days 
are expected to 
increase by 17.35 
days for the period 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 203 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
313 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
446 CDD by the end 
of the century. 
Projected change in 
annual cooling degree 
days is projected to 
rise from 454 CDD 
between 2020-2039 to 
678 CDD between 
2040 and 2059 and 
996 CDD by the end 
of the century 
Residential and 
Hospital:  
Heat-related mortality 
is expected to rise 
from around 20 deaths 
per 100,000 in 2030 to 
56 deaths per 100,000 
by 2080 in the cohort 
over 65. The World 
Bank notes that the 
rise in temperatures 
expected is “likely to 
exacerbate respiratory 
diseases”, especially 
the increase of heat 
waves and heat 
islands in urban areas.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
15 The thermal comfort assessment method used for this document is the ‘ASHRAE 55-2017 Thermal 
Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy ’standard 
16 Working on a warmer planet : The impact of heat stress on labour productivity and decent work – 
International Labour organization, 2019 
health of vulnerable 
groups. Over the last 
50 years, temperature 
has increased at a 
rate of around 0.16°C 
per decade, with 
greater increases in 
minimum temperature 
2080-2099 (on a 
national level). 
Improved residential 
thermal comfort will 
relieve pressure to the 
healthcare system, 
while improved 
thermal comfort in 
hospital will improve 
productivity and its 
response to 
heatwaves. 
Adaptation benefits : 
Improved community 
health & Resilient 
Health System 
* Calculated as the number of degrees that a day's average temperature is above 18.3°C. Ensemble 
median over the period. Change compared to 1986-2005. Source: World Bank, Climate Change 
Knowledge Portal. 
Additional detail on information referred to in the table is included in the feasibility study annex – with 
in-depth analysis for each country.   
Figure 2 - Share of the population at risk because of a lack of cooling solutions (Source: SE4ALL). Note: each quartile 
includes one fourth of the countries. The percent represents the range of the share of population at high risk for each 
quartile. 
 
When outside temperatures are high, it is challenging to maintain thermal comfort in buildings.15 Due 
to climate change, buildings which are not mechanically cooled (such as low-income social housing 
units, waiting areas in healthcare centres or classrooms) will see an increase in indoor temperatures, 
and possibly an increase in the amount of time that indoor spaces are too hot to be used for their 
intended purpose. This trend has economic as well as health effects. Heat stress is projected to 
reduce total working hours worldwide by 2.2 per cent and global GDP by US$2,400 billion in 203016. 
Mitigation needs 
The construction and operation of buildings is responsible for 40% of all energy-related CO2eq 
emissions and consumes 36% of the global final energy. Due to population growth, rapid urbanization

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
17 https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-buildings-2020 
18 Passive measures can be defined as non-mechanical technologies, design elements and nature-based 
solutions that improve thermal comfort of buildings without using energy 
and economic development, final energy demand from buildings is predicted to increase by 50% by 
2050 compared with 2015 under business as usual scenarios. To be on track to meet global climate 
ambitions set forth in the Paris Agreement, the energy intensity per square meter of the global 
building sector needs to improve by 30% on average by 2030 (compared to 2015). This requires 
mainstreaming of highly energy-efficient new buildings and deep renovation of the existing building 
stock.  
 
The IEA has analysed building sector energy intensity at the regional level. It has scored different 
regions’ building sector energy intensity (all starting with a score of 100 in 2000). Currently, Central 
and South America scores 96.6, Africa 92.1, Europe 78.0, and Asia 71.3.17 The IEA’s Sustainable 
Development Scenario, which assumes a major transformation compared to the baseline, requires 
the energy intensity index to fall to 69.4 in Central and South America, 36.1 in Africa, 59.8 in Europe 
and 39.3 in Asia. The effort to be made is huge if the world is to achieve the Paris Agreement targets. 
 
A significant part of GHG emissions from the building sector is due to energy use for cooling. 
According to the IEA (The future of cooling, 2018), 2,021 TWh was used for space cooling in 2016, 
and in the business as usual scenario this is expected to increase to 6,200 TWh in 2050. CO2eq 
emissions generated by space cooling would then almost double, from 1,135 Mt in 2016 to 2,070 Mt 
in 2050. 
 
In the countries of the programme, GHG emissions from energy consumption in buildings are 
estimated at 419 million tCO2eq based on their most recent energy balances (out of total emissions 
of 1,620 MtCO2eq) (see Annex 22c for more).  
 
Various indices are used to indicate changes in temperature that affect thermal comfort and the need 
for mechanical cooling. One widely used index is cooling degree days. Projections for the impact of 
climate change on this index are described in the table above.  
II- 
Baseline and context 
 
The baseline for a specific Subproject describes the expected thermal performance and energy use 
for cooling by a conventional, business as usual design. By incorporating passive measures18 to 
maintain cooler temperatures than conventional buildings, so-called green buildings will decrease 
the indoor average temperature and reduce the requirement for mechanical cooling. As shown in the 
Feasibility Study, green buildings therefore reduce emissions and improve resilience to climate 
change, particularly in low-income countries where air conditioning or refurbishments are too costly.  
The baseline for estimating mitigation benefits is established by assessing the Business as Usual 
energy performance of a building. This has been done by modeling the building using the EDGE tool 
and using more detailed assumptions if they are available. In countries with an existing and effectively 
implemented building energy code, EDGE parameters have been assessed to ensure that they take 
into account the energy performance requirements of the building energy code.  
To estimate adaptation benefits and costs, the Business as Usual baseline is produced by using a 
thermal dynamic simulation software assessing thermal comfort outputs at an hourly timestep. Input 
data consists in reference buildings’ plans (per climate and type), and Energy Plus weather files.  
The With Subproject scenario involves:

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
• 
Mitigation Subprojects with an average of the two following possibilities (reflecting the 
programmatic nature of investments in each country that will cover more than just one sub-
investment) 
• 
Typical investments which result in 20% GHG emissions reduction compared to the 
baseline; and/or 20% energy consumption savings compared to the baseline; and/or 20% 
water consumption savings compared to the baseline (a minimum of 2 out of 3 criteria) if 
it is a new construction – the actual reductions per building vary according to the specific 
geography and outputs of the EDGE model. 
• 
Typical investments which result in 40% GHG emissions reduction or 40% energy 
consumption savings compared to the existing situation before renovation if it is a 
renovation Subproject / End-beneficiary project.– the actual reductions per building vary 
according to the specific geography and outputs of the EDGE model. 
• 
Adaptation Subprojects  
• 
building users (male/female) should experience an improvement in their indoor thermal 
conditions of at least 20% compared to the baseline or the existing situation. 
The current climate conditions were based on climate variables already included in EDGE software 
for each country. The comfort level and technologies needed to address future climate scenarios 
were based on a dynamic simulation of building conditions in the coming decades. The future climate 
conditions are generated by a weather file generator developed by University of Southampton, which 
turns Energy Plus weather files with current conditions to Energy Plus weather files with A2 IPCC 
scenario. 
This approach allows for flexibility and consistency between the different countries. Details on the 
context and the expected potential for impact in each country targeted by PEEB Cool is provided in 
the country forms (annex of the Feasibility Study) and in the section 2.4.2 of the Feasibility Study. 
The methodology to assess the baseline is described in section 4.3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study. 
PEEB Cool will address the need for green buildings in different sub-sectors which include the 
followings: 
 
Education facilities: In Africa a majority of schools are not cooled. Low budget construction with metal 
roofing is common, as is overcrowding, which further increases the overheating problems. These 
same countries have not yet reached 100% school enrolment and therefore need to build many new 
schools. 
 
Healthcare: The technical issues are similar for healthcare centres, with a majority of spaces 
uncooled. Hospitals, on the other hand, are often at least partially air conditioned.  
 
Housing: While middle-income housing will often have air conditioning, low-cost housing in the target 
countries mostly does not.  
 
One thermal dynamic simulation in a social housing investment in Latin America for example showed 
that with low tech and replicable solutions thermal comfort could be improved by 20% in single-family 
housing and between 27% to over 50% in multi-family housing compared to the baseline scenario. 
Social housing in many countries does not have heating or cooling systems, which means that 
although energy consumption is low, building design that provides thermal comfort is important for 
resilience. The construction cost of the baseline case for the single-family housing was 285 USD/m2, 
a low cost that is in keeping with the purpose of the buildings as low-income social housing. The 
improved case has a cost of 355 USD/m2, i.e. an additional cost of 24%, which is justified by the

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
19 Bringing embodied carbon upfront – coordinated action for the building and construction sector to tackle 
embodied carbon. World Green Building Council, 2019. Available from: 
https://www.worldgbc.org/sites/default/files/WorldGBC_Bringing_Embodied_Carbon_Upfront.pdf 
significantly improved indoor conditions, which will benefit the health of the residents and in particular 
of vulnerable groups such as the elderly. 
Green buildings have high impacts thanks to passive measures 
The design of the building is critical to improve thermal comfort by passive, non-energy consuming 
measures (bioclimatic principles) such as (i) properly orienting the building, (ii) reducing the window-
to-wall ratio, and (iii) insulating the roof.  
 
The Feasibility Study describes a case study of a school without mechanical cooling in a tropical 
climate. In the baseline building, in the 2020 climate, conditions inside were uncomfortable during 
72% of school hours, with a maximum indoor operative temperature reaching 49°C. In the green 
building in 2050, while the number of uncomfortable hours rose compared to 2020, the maximum 
temperature remained under or equal to 33°C. The cost of construction of a baseline classroom was 
evaluated at 370 EUR/m2, while the cost of the improved case was evaluated at 485 EUR/m2, 
bringing the incremental cost to 115 EUR/m2, or 31% of the cost of construction. 
 
How to mitigate GHG emissions due to cooling? 
A second lever to mitigate GHG emissions due to energy use for cooling is the efficiency of the 
cooling system itself. The best new equipment can be five times more efficient than old technology 
that is still widely used in Africa. The PEEB Cool Programme will include actions to promote efficient 
cooling systems, through a suite of policy interventions including, for instance, the use of energy 
labels. 
Finally, the third level is making use of renewable energy. This can be achieved both at the building 
level with PV panels on the roof or the facades, or at the neighbourhood level or in public buildings 
with the use of a renewable-based mini grid or with the development of a renewable-based district 
cooling system. The Programme will promote this third level by financing eco-districts and solar auto-
production of buildings.  
Both levels of solutions where considered in the design of a factory in a subtropical climate. It was 
assessed that integrating COP 6.09 chillers and PV panels would reduce the need for energy by 
41.7%.  
At construction stage, working on low carbon construction materials is a priority 
The raw resource extraction, manufacturing, transportation, usage, and end-of-life stages of building 
products (i.e. embodied energy) consume significant amounts of energy, each generating associated 
GHG emissions. GHG emissions (mostly CO2) released before the building begins to be used will be 
responsible for half of the entire carbon footprint of new construction between now and 2050.19 With 
passive measures and more efficient cooling systems, the embodied energy and emissions 
associated with building materials and construction will increase.  
PEEB Cool will support the use of low carbon materials where possible, allowing for high emission 
reductions. Such materials include, but are not limited to, compressed earth bricks, straw, wood, or 
bamboo. The Programme will promote those materials in the building design choices and through 
awareness raising activities. 
III- 
Most likely scenario in the absence of the Programme

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
In the absence of the PEEB Programme, it is likely that existing barriers to the inclusion of passive 
measures for green buildings will remain in place and a shift towards the construction of buildings 
with improved thermal comfort will not occur. The penetration of high efficiency cooling equipment 
into the market will be slow in the absence of the coordinated market transformation activities 
foreseen within the Programme. Finally, the market for low-carbon materials and construction 
methods will remain small due to the challenge of competing with the large and established markets 
for conventional construction materials and methods. 
IV- 
Related projects and interventions 
PEEB Cool is envisioned as an extension of an on-going PEEB Programme implemented by AFD 
Group and GIZ. It encompasses a wider geographical scope and additional eligible thematic and 
innovative tools. However, it embraces PEEB’s approach, which is a focus on implementation of 
green building projects (through investment), whose outcomes are generalised in updated 
regulations (enabling environment). Additional information on the PEEB Programme is available in 
Annex 18. 
An important multi-country initiative is the KIGALI Cooling Efficiency programme (K-CEP), which 
targets the improvement of air conditioning units. The PEEB Cool Programme will also be linked to 
national and multi-country initiatives dealing with the improvement of the building sector at large. 
Among the countries targeted for PEEB Cool, some have national programmes that will be taken 
into account to create complementarities.  
The Cooling Facility, implemented by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
and the International Development Association (IBRD-IDA) and which was subject to a GCF co-
financing approved on October 7th 2021, is also considered when defining the scope of PEEB Cool. 
Two countries will benefit from the two different programs: Sri Lanka and North Macedonia, with 
specific areas of focus identified by IBRD-IDA and AFD. After consultation with countries’ 
authorities and IBRD-IDA, it appears that overlaps can be avoided between the two programs, with 
PEEB Cool being able to focus on credit lines and support to the private sector in these countries. 
The technical assistance and enabling facility of PEEB Cool will also allow to coordinate between 
the programs and identify specific types of interventions for PEEB Cool in these two countries. 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus 
diagram) 
Only rapid decarbonisation of existing and new buildings and an increased focus on adaptive 
capacity will put the buildings and construction sector globally on a low-emission and climate resilient 
development path that is compatible with the goals of the Paris Agreement. This shift must be quick 
as 80% of the buildings that will exist in 2050 are yet to be built. 
Buildings are critical to delivering climate change mitigation and adaptation outcome. On the one 
hand, standard buildings do not allow to cope with future temperature increases and with the 
expected increase in the frequency, intensity and duration of extreme heat periods. Hundreds of 
millions of people in the PEEB Cool countries could face indoor heat stress. On the other hand, 
energy use for cooling is an increasing fraction of building energy use and related GHG emissions. 
The Programme addresses these challenges through the construction of buildings with reduced 
cooling needs by using passive design measures, efficient cooling technologies and local low carbon 
construction materials.  
Theory of Change

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
The Theory of Change diagram (Figure 3) presents the integrated approach that this facility adopts 
to combine investment in green buildings contruction anjd technical assistance.  The following 
describes the goal statement of this programme: If (i) Subroject stakeholders are supported 
technically and financially in their investments; (ii) green buildings frameworks, initiatives and policies 
are developed and; (iii) actors are enabled and supported, then the climate change resiliency of 
buildings will increase, emissions from buildings will decrease and the use of bioclimatic measures, 
efficient cooling systems and low carbon construction materials in residential, health, commercial, 
and education buildings will be scaled-up. This is because  investments in the green buildings market 
will be stimulated, regulatory frameworks will be improved and the capacity of stakeholders will be 
strengthened.  
The outcomes of this programme will include: 
• 
Stimulated investment in the green building market 
• 
Improved resilience of the most vulnerable populations as buildings are better adapted to 
climate change 
• 
GHG emissions will be reduced from buildings in the residential, education, health and 
commercial sectors 
• 
There will be improved regulatory frameworks including national energy efficiency 
regulations, construction standards and certification commitments by industry actors, as 
well as training and increased capacities of human resources.  
• 
A co-benefit of the creation of local, green jobs where local employement is promoted in 
green buildings 
The outputs of the programme have been designed to support project owners in the various phases 
of investment through the provision of technical assistance at design, construction and the 
operational phase. This includes developing the capacity of stakeholders in the green buildings 
sector. Investments for green buildings projects will be appraised and financing agreements will be 
signed. To improve the enabling environment, sectoral frameworks and intiatives will be established 
that demonstrate the potential for a green recovery. The programme will support the development of 
policies on energy efficiency in buildings to prepare the ground for building sector transformation. 
Training and awareness raising will be concucted to enable private and public sector actors to 
implement reformed policy. Finally, knowledge products will be developed and experiences shared 
to support rhe global transformation of green buildings.   
Barriers 
There are clear trends in the barriers for the construction of green buildings that exist in the 
programme countries. These trends underly the conceptual design of the Programme. At the same 
time, PEEB Cool has also been designed to flexibly mitigate specific barriers encountered in each 
country. The extent to which specific barriers affect a country is influenced by the existing regulatory 
framework and the level of experience in that country with energy efficient and resilient buildings.   
Technical barriers: Stakeholders lack technical knowledge and experience to build green 
buildings 
A technical barrier that remains present in the majority of the countries is that of limited knowledge. 
Sector stakeholders as well as Project / Programme stakeholders (developers, planners and 
construction companies) lack knowledge and awareness on energy efficient and resilient buildings, 
including the technical knowledge and experience in planning and implementing energy efficient and 
resilient building investments.  
PEEB Cool addresses the technical barriers by providing technical project assistance to the 
Subproject owners in partner countries on the feasibility, design and construction of energy efficient,

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
low carbon and resilient buildings (for instance social housing, schools, and health facilities). This 
assistance will be provided through the two Programme Facilities.  
The Investment Facility will conduct feasibility studies for a design with improved thermal 
performance and energy efficiency of Subprojects implemented by partner countries and private 
sector (i.e. private construction such as universities or data centres, or dormitories) (Activity 1.1.1). 
The Investment Facility will also assist Subproject implementation through direct supervision and 
monitoring activities during the construction and operation phases to ensure recommendations are 
implemented. It will provide onsite capacity development for completed Subprojects to ensure a low 
carbon operation and sustainability (Activities 1.1.2 and 1.1.3).  
The Enabling Facility provides trainings on the design and construction of energy efficient, low 
carbon and resilient buildings as well as meeting the building code requirements, and disseminates 
the acquired knowledge to the wider ecosystem of stakeholders (e.g. developers, planners, builders, 
and facility managers) (Activities 2.3.1 and 2.3.2). The facility disseminates good practice knowledge 
on green buildings within countries and internationally to strengthen institutional and regulatory 
systems for mitigation and adaptation in the building sector and contributes to assuring investment 
lifetime energy efficient operations, scaling and replicating of the solutions (Activities 2.4.1 and 2.4.2). 
Financial barriers: Building owners are reluctant to cover higher costs of building green 
buildings 
Across all geographies, we observe a strong reluctance of project owners to bear any extra costs 
associated with improved buildings. This financial barrier has increased in importance as a result 
of the economic downturn in many countries resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Many 
participating countries have suffered significant losses and a major drop in growth. This reduces 
the willingness to engage in green construction programmes, which often have higher upfront costs 
than conventional construction. Another typical financial barrier is a reluctance of banks to expand 
their portfolios towards green building finance. Banks do not offer tailored financial solutions, or the 
existing offers are too restrictive to be widely used. Industry actors are reluctant to adapt their 
services for the construction and operation of buildings because of the perceived risk generated by 
uncertainty about the strength and sustainability of the green building market. 
PEEB Cool addresses the financial barriers at the Subproject level and at the country level.  
The Investment Facility supports the Programme stakeholders in securing concessional financing 
to partly offset the higher debt service of green buildings (Activity 1.2.1).  
Financial barriers: Industry actors and banks are reluctant to adapt their services to support 
construction of green buildings 
Based on implementation experiences, the Enabling Facility develops sectoral frameworks for the 
broader transformation of buildings sector actors that assure competitiveness and reduced risk, 
which leads to the mobilization of further investments and the development of a local offer (Activity 
2.1.1). The development of private sector energy performance and building labels will also be 
promoted, as international experience shows that industry labels have a powerful impact on 
improving construction standards, paving the way for the adoption and enforcement of building 
energy codes. The Investment Facility, will support project owners and financial intermediaries in 
getting knowledge about the benefits of bioclimatic design (Activity 1.1.1). It will provide them with 
concessional loans to absorb the higher debt service incurred green building construction (Activity 
1.2.1). It is expected that the popularity of specifically designed products from the banking sector and 
related to direct investments will result in a longer-term paradigm shift from both the consumer side

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
- where the financial and non-financial / comfort benefits are realised, and the sources of finance - 
where it is recognized that these products are popular. 
Regulatory and institutional barriers: Lack of clear policies for building decarbonisation and 
insufficient building codes 
 
Regulatory and institutional barriers that are frequently seen include:  
- 
National and sectoral strategies and policies for the decarbonisation of sector lack clarity (e.g. 
lack of clear sectorial targets and specific actions).  
- 
Building codes lack specific requirements for energy efficiency in buildings and enforcement 
is often weak, mandatory for certain types of buildings only, or still under discussion. 
- 
Sector stakeholders are highly fragmented. 
Barriers are further described in the chapter 3.1 of the Feasibility Study on a program level. Country 
specific barrier analysis including market barriers are discussed in the country profiles located in the 
Annex of the Feasibility Study 
The Enabling Facility supports the building and construction sector stakeholders of the partner 
countries, including national public-private alliances for energy efficient buildings, through the 
proposal and development of relevant policies (e.g. national cooling strategies for buildings, cooling 
action plans) and the improvement and enforcement of energy efficient building codes (Activity 
2.2.1). It provides trainings to policy level actors (e.g. national and local governments, energy 
agencies, building sector associations) on the development and implementation of national building 
policies and energy efficient building codes (Activities 2.3.1 and 2.3.2). Because it takes its roots in 
the experience of the Investment Facility, the improvement of the policy framework will have higher 
chance to succeed and be met. This is a critical aspect of shifting the paradigm for standard practices 
in the building sectors – to ensure they account more fully for cooling demand / heat stress from both 
a mitigation and adaptation perspective. 
The following risks are present which might prevent the programme from being achieved (mitigation 
measures have been proposed in Section F of this Funding Proposal): 
• 
The political priorities of partner countries are not aligned with PEEB Cool objectives in terms 
of energy efficiency targets or climate change goals. 
• 
Insufficient availabilities and capacities among stakeholders at project and policy levels 
hinder or endanger Programme progress. 
• 
Contractor obligations of financing agreements are too restrictive 
It has been assumed during the design of the programme that market demand for bioclimatic 
housing will increase as prices decrease and stakeholders become more aware of the benefits. 
This is critical to stimulate demand.Training and experience gained will enable the local financial 
sector to offer suitable products to fund construction of cool buildings. This availablity of finance will 
be critical to overcome higher costs of green buildings.  It is also assumed that investors, 
developers and public sector actors will support initiatives to enable scaling up of the green 
buildings sector. Green buildings will complement and align with other priorities, such as national 
climate change strategies of the target countries, to enable transfornation at scale. This programme 
adopts an approach which will build on synergies between green buildings and other sectoral and 
development priorities to enable the mainstreaming of green buildings in the target countries,  
Further, it is assumed that women and girls are given equal and proportionate access to 
sustainable cooling options. Where gender gaps exist, the programme will pro-actively address 
these through its Gender Action Plan (Annex 8b).

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
20 Information and public health advice: heat and health, World Health Organization. 
(https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/heat-and-health/en/ ) 
 
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change 
The table below shows how each sectoral intervention will affect the mitigation and adaptation 
pathways depending on the specific climate risks and vulnerabilities (further country specific details 
can be found in Annex 2a): 
Sector (sub-
sector) 
Climate Risks 
Evidence of impacts 
Adaptation and 
Mitigation 
Interventions 
Adaptation and 
Mitigation Benefits 
Residential 
(mid-income 
housing and 
social 
housing 
Direct vulnerability 
due to increased 
risk from adverse 
health effects from 
high indoor 
temperatures.  
Countries are facing 
increasing 
urbanization rates. 
High temperatures 
are expected to 
increase pressues 
in urban zones. 
Adaptaing to 
heatwaves should 
According to the World 
Health Organization20 “the 
room temperature should 
be kept below 32 °C 
during the day and 24 °C 
during the night. This is 
especially important for 
infants or people who are 
over 60 years of age or 
have chronic health 
conditions. Electric fans 
may provide relief, but 
when the temperature is 
above 35 °C, this may not 
Mitigation: Wall 
insulation, higher 
efficiency split 
cooling system, 
higher efficiency 
fridge, nighttime 
natural ventiliation, 
solar domestic hot 
water production 
Adaptation: 
replacing sheet 
metal roof with 
recycled tetra pack 
roof, adding 
insultation with rock 
Mitigation: Morroco case 
study found a 33% 
reduction in energy 
consumption and 33% 
emissions reduction 
during building operation 
for new construction mid-
income housing 
Adaptation: A case 
study for social housing 
in a tropical climate 
resulted in a 42% drop in 
the number of 
uncomfortable hours and 
a reduction of 5.3oC of

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
21 Uejio CK, Tamerius JD, Vredenburg J, Asaeda G, Isaacs DA, Braun J, Quinn A, Freese JP. Summer indoor 
heat exposure and respiratory and cardiovascular distress calls in New York City, NY, U.S. Indoor Air 
2016;26(4):594e604. 
22 Li, M., Gu, S., Bi, P., Yang, J., & Liu, Q. (2015). Heat waves and morbidity: current knowledge and further 
direction-a comprehensive literature review. International journal of environmental research and public health, 
12(5), 5256-5283. 
also take into 
consideration aging 
power grids.  
 
prevent heat-related 
illness. 
Heat-related mortality is 
expected to rise from 
around 20 deaths per 
100,000 in 2030 to 56 
deaths per 100,000 by 
2080 in the cohort over 
65. The World Bank notes 
that the rise in 
temperatures expected is 
“likely to exacerbate 
respiratory diseases”, 
especially the increase of 
heat waves and heat 
islands in urban areas. 
Increased urbanisation 
and low-income housing 
causes infrastructure 
deficiencies and enhanced 
energy demands, 
especially during hot 
periods. 
wool under the roof, 
increasing roof 
overhangs, adding a 
drop ceiling 
the maximum indoor 
operative temperature.  
Improvement of 
residential thermal 
comfort will reduce health 
effects. Additional health 
co-benefits are expected 
from improved ventilation 
that will reduce the threat 
of indoor pollution.   
Health 
(hospitals 
and health 
centres) 
Vulnerability due to 
stresses to the 
health system: 
Increased 
emergency health 
services needs, 
especially during 
heatwaves 
Reduced 
productivity of the 
health professionals 
in hospitals 
 
Indoor temperatures 
higher than 26 have been 
associated with increased 
proportion of respiratory 
distress calls made to 
paramedics21. Moreover, 
heatwaves have been 
associated with increased 
emergency hospital 
admissions contributing to 
the stress in health 
systems 22. 
Countries with an under-
developed public health 
system are additionally 
vulnerable.  
High and low air 
temperatures significantly 
increased the participants’ 
heart rates and respiratory 
rates, which represent 
stress and high mental 
fatigue and negative long-
Mitigation: Roof 
insulation and 
rooftop PV, public 
awareness through 
noticeboards, 
information 
displayed on signs 
for visitors 
Adaptation: Paint 
the roof with light 
colours, add 
insulation on the 
concrete slab roof, 
replace cement 
blocks by rammed 
earth blocks, roof 
overhnags of 2m, 
provide proper 
shutters, ceiling fans 
in non-cooled 
spaces 
Mitigation: 53% energy 
savings across the 
renovation of 11 public 
buildings in Djibouti 
Measures in hopitals 
have the benefit of 
combining energy 
effiiciency in the buildings 
while also  raising 
awareness of energy 
savings 
Adaptation: A case 
study of a health centre 
in a tropical climate found 
a 3.3oC reduction in 
maximum indoor 
temperature, bringing the 
comfort zone and an 82% 
reduction in occupancy 
hours outside the comfort 
zone.  
Improved residential 
thermal comfort will 
reliver pressure to the 
healthcare system, while 
improved thermal comfort 
in hospital will improve

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
23 The effect of indoor office environment on the work performance, health and well-being of office workers, 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) 
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6377698/). 
24 30 May 2018, Hotter years 'mean lower exam results', British Broadcasting Corporation, this Study was 
conducted by the Harvard, the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) and Georgia State University, which 
analyzed the test results of 10 million high school students over 13 years in the United States, 
(https://www.bbc.com/news/business-44288982) 
25 2018, Heat makes workers less productive, impacts health, The Journalist's Resource, The included studies 
involved 447 million workers in over 40 different occupations, including outdoor and indoor jobs. 
(https://journalistsresource.org/environment/heat-productivity-health-climate-change/), in the study South Africa, 
Angola and Egypt are included. 
term impact on their 
health23. 
productivity and its 
response to heatwaves. 
Education 
Direct vulnerability 
due to reduced 
productivity in 
schools.  
 
A 2018 study on thermal 
comfort and air quality in 
university buildings found 
that mean hourly values of 
CO2 and temperature 
exceeded maximum 
values recommended by 
WHO guidelines. 
Moreover, humidity levels 
were significantly higher 
than regulations. Such 
characteristics can inhibit 
productivity and output, 
especially in a learning 
environment. 
Researchers have 
calculated that for every 
0.55°C increase in 
average temperature over 
the year, there was a 1% 
fall in learning24.  
Mitigation: Rooftop 
PV, low carbon 
materials for 
construction.  
Adaptation: 
External walls made 
of raw earth, light-
coloured over-roof 
protecting the ceiling 
from sunshine, deep 
overhangings to 
protect the external 
walls and windows 
from sunshine 
Mitigation: 53% energy 
savings across the 
renovation of 11 public 
buildings in Djibouti.  
Investments in low 
carbon materials can 
significantly contribute to 
avoiding emissions in the 
construction phase.  
Adaptation: A case 
study for a school in a 
tropical climate found a 
drop in 16oC of maximum 
indoor operative 
temperature, resulting in 
a 35% decrease in the 
number of uncomfortable 
hours. Investments in 
thermal comfort lead to a 
reduction in hours of 
discomfort felt by the 
occupants and an 
increase in schooling 
hours and student 
concentration.  
Offices 
Direct vulnerability 
due to reduced 
productivity in 
businesses.   
 
According to a study by 
ILO in Mali, by 2030 
industry will lose 3.90% of 
total working hours to heat 
stress, 7.45% in 
construction and 0.88% in 
services. This is a 
combined loss of over 
200,000 full-time jobs.  
According to a study 
performed in African 
countries, 30 percent of 
people working under heat 
stress reported 
productivity losses25. 
Mitgation: Roof 
insulation, 
replacement 
windows, light colour 
painting, rooftop PV, 
optimizing cooling 
system settings 
Adaptation: 
Optimising building 
orientation, 
minimizing 
window/wall ratio, 
maximizing solar 
shading (e.g. blinds), 
light coloured roofs 
and walls, 
landscaping around 
the building 
Mitigation: 53% energy 
savings across the 
renovation of 11 public 
buildings in Djibouti 
Adaptation: A study in 
Djibouti City found that 
natural ventilation creates 
a comfortable indoor 
temperature and would 
allow buildings to benefit 
from cooling without the 
need for energy 
inefficient cooling.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
Retail 
Direct vulnerability 
due to reduced 
productivity in 
businesses.   
 
Increased temperatures 
are expected to lead to 
lower productivity and loss 
of working hours. 
Mitigation: Low 
energy lighting, Air 
Handling Unit 
sensible cooling 
recovery, variable 
speed fans and 
pumps, high 
reflective roof 
coating, white colour 
painting, double 
glazed windows, 
solar rooftop PV 
Adaptation: The 
above measures 
also increase 
comfort 
Mitigation: A case study 
of a new construction of a 
shopping mall in an 
equatorial country found 
between 23-40% energy 
savings 
Adaptation: Improved 
thermal comfort in 
commercial spaces will 
safeguard the level of 
productivity in countries.  
  
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the 
contributing GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
Stimulated 
investment in 
the green 
building 
market 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
Improved 
resilience of 
the most 
vulnerable 
populations 
as buildings 
are better 
adapted to 
climate 
change 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 
Reduced 
GHG 
emissions 
from 
buildings in 
the 
residential, 
education, 
health and 
commercial 
sectors 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
Outcome 4:  
Improved 
regulatory 
frameworks 
including 
national 
energy 
efficiency 
regulations, 
construction 
standards 
and 
certification 
commitments
by industry 
actors, as 
well as 
training and 
increased 
capacities of 
human 
resources 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 4: 
Creation of 
local, green 
jobs 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
 
PEEB Cool objectives 
PEEB Cool aims to transform the construction sector by advancing less climate vulnerable and more 
energy efficient building design, construction and operation. PEEB Cool prioritises sub-sectors with 
significant potential for climate change adaptation and GHG reduction such as large-scale new 
housing schemes and commercial buildings, working with both the public and private sectors. The 
Programme will support primarily new constructions, but it will also address refurbishment of existing 
building stock. As a cross-cutting programme, objectives have been set for both mitigation and 
adaptation.  
The mitigation objective for the shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways is 1.563 
million tCO2 eq reduced or avoided direct emissions as a result of the lifetime impact of buildings 
constructed by the end of the Programme’s duration. 
The adaptation objective for reduced vulnerabilities is 1.133 million direct beneficiaries (561,373 
females). 
PEEB Cool approach 
PEEB Cool will bridge the theory to practice gap that exists in national and international programmes 
for transformation of the construction sector by supporting Subprojects in which local actors will

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
construct green buildings while also providing technical assistance for the creation of a sustainable 
enabling environment for a construction sector that increases the resilience to climate change and 
reduces GHG emissions.  
● In Component 1, the Investment Facility, PEEB Cool supports local actors in implementing 
more resilient and energy efficient building Subprojects / End-beneficiary projects with more 
efficient construction methods. This is achieved through (i) technical assistance at design 
phase to review plans and make recommendations, (ii) provision of finance (including 
concessional loans) to address the financial barrier linked to higher investment costs and 
related debt services induced by green buildings, and (iii) technical assistance at construction 
phase to monitor the proper implementation of bioclimatic design and energy efficiency 
measures and ensure the targeted direct impacts of the Programme are met.  
● Component 2, the Enabling Facility will support the adoption of policies and regulations to 
perpetuate and scale up these good practices, while ensuring that capacities for 
implementation and enforcement are built. Activities will catalyse the replication of these new 
performance requirements in public procurement and sectoral investments. 
Throughout its activities, PEEB Cool encompasses, where relevant, efficient cooling solutions, low 
carbon construction materials and involvement of construction ecosystem stakeholders (please refer 
to section 2.3 of the Feasibility Study for additional information on those three thematic areas). 
The two components and the associated budget are shown in the figure and table below.  
 
Figure 4: Programme structure 
Green: Investment Facility – AFD Group implementation.           
Blue: Enabling Facility – mostly GIZ implementation 
 
  
GCF 
AFD Group 
BMWK 
Total 
Type of 
financing 
  
EUR 
USD 
EUR 
USD 
EUR 
EUR 
USD 
  
C1. Investment 
Facility 
153.8 
45 
834 
281 
- 
987.8 
326 
Loan + 
Grant 
TA 
22.8 
- 
4 
- 
- 
26.8 
- 
Grant 
Investment 
Financing 
131 
45 
830 
281 
- 
961 
326 
Loan 
C2. Enabling 
facility 
19 
- 
- 
- 
2.5 
21.5 
- 
Grant 
C3. PMU 
2.2 
- 
1 
- 
- 
3.2 
- 
Grant 
TOTAL 
175 
45 
835 
281 
2.5 
1,012.5 
326 
Loan + 
Grant

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
Figure 5: Programme's budget 
 
Scope of activities and Subproject pipeline  
 
The two Programme components will be active in all countries targeted by PEEB Cool. The table 
below shows the key building types that will be supported in each country, based on the needs 
expressed by the country during consultations and on previous discussions held between AFD and 
country representatives. Hence, the selected sectors are in line with country policies and priorities 
as well as with AFD Group’s objectives.   
 
While no decision has been made yet on the specific Subprojects to be financed, consultations have 
been held with potential project owners. These are listed in Annex 7. The specific Subprojects to be 
financed will be decided upon over the course of 8 years – wherein subprojects will be defined and 
prepared along the whole programme implementation period. 
 
A pipeline of investment opportunities is being developed for PEEB Cool. In the Feasibility Study and 
in the Economic and Financial Analysis some sample eligible Subprojects are analysed. The public 
sector Subprojects described are all in the PEEB Cool pipeline, at various stages of development. 
For those Subprojects that are at earlier stages of development feasibility studies have not yet been 
completed. In those cases, the details for the Economic and Financial Analysis are based on similar 
Subprojects that were included in the ongoing PEEB program.  
Priority sectors have been identified in each country as presented in the table below. The Subprojects 
actually financed under the Programme in the PEEB Cool countries will be selected on the detailed 
eligibility criteria described in the FS and shall bear a climate target as presented under activity 1.1.1. 
 
  
Residential Hospital 
Education Offices 
Retail 
Transport 
Hotel 
Albania 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Argentina 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Costa Rica 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Djibouti 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Indonesia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Mexico 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Morocco 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Nigeria 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
N. Macedonia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Tunisia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Sri Lanka 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Priority PEEB Cool sectors in each country 
Programme description 
The content of the components are further detailed in the chapter 4.3 of the Feasibility Study.  
Additional information regarding the eligibility for use of GCF funds for both technical assistance and 
investment is included in Section 4.3.1.1. of the feasibility study.  
Component 1: Investment Facility

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
Key beneficiaries of the activities in component 1 include the followings. A longer list of beneficiaries 
is displayed in Section 6.1 of the Feasibility Study. 
● Subproject owners (including ministries, other public entities and private developers), 
architects/designers and construction companies, who will receive financial support and 
technical assistance that will build their capacity to design, construct and operate buildings 
that include bioclimatic and energy efficiency measures. 
● Financial intermediaries, including banks specialised in housing construction or generalist 
banks working in the service sector, who will gain knowledge of and experience with the 
financing of energy efficient buildings. 
Component 1 consists of the following output areas: 
Output 1.1: Project owners are supported in the various phases of their investment 
Specific eligibility criteria for technical assistance is included in Section 4.3.1.1.2. of the feasibility 
study. 
27,3 MEUR grant (22 MEUR from GCF and 4 MEUR from AFD Group) 
Activity 1.1.1 Technical assistance support at identification and design phases  
Technical Assistance at the design phase aims to review identified Subprojects and characterize 
their potential for climate impacts. PEEB Cool provides the expertise to identify the measures that 
can be taken to achieve adaptation or mitigation targets. The technical assistance will describe the 
recommended measures and evaluate the expected climate impacts of these measures compared 
to the baseline (baseline definition is explained in the section 4.3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study) as well 
as the related costs compared to the business-as-usual initial budget of the Subproject. Support 
offered to Subprojects at this stage consists of the preparation of technical, legal, and economic 
feasibility studies or pre-feasibility studies. The recommendations in the feasibility studies will aim to 
achieve the following targets for each Subproject type: 
- 
Adaptation, either renovation or new construction: The Subproject addresses a specific 
climate vulnerability compared to the baseline for new construction or to the existing situation 
for renovation. The target will be for building users (male/female) to have an improvement in 
their indoor thermal conditions of at least 20% compared to the baseline or existing situation 
(in buildings that are not mechanically cooled, an increase in 20% thermal comfort is a 
reduction in 20% of the hours of discomfort resulting from improvements brought to the 
building);  
- 
Mitigation targets in renovation Subproject: 40% GHG emissions reduction or 40% energy 
consumption savings compared to the existing situation before renovation; 
Mitigation targets in new construction: 20% GHG emissions reduction compared to the 
baseline; and/or 20% energy consumption savings compared to the baseline; and/or 20% 
water consumption savings compared to the baseline (a minimum of 2 out of 3 criteria). 
Eligibility for this activity is based on the estimated potential for climate related impact and replicability 
of the Subproject (eligibility criteria and detail of the TA activities are described in the Feasibility 
Study). 
 
PEEB Cool will help undertake the switch between fluor gases and natural coolants for clean active 
cooling. As this aspect will be a major challenge in some countries during identification phase, the 
Activity 1.1.1 will also finance an assessment of the natural coolants implementation opportunities 
for each country. This assessment will consist in a detailed and complete market potentials study for 
each country. This study will be made at the start of the implementation of PEEB Cool.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
Activity 1.1.2 Technical assistance at construction and operation phase  
All Subprojects that receive investment financing using GCF concessional loan co-financing (see 
Output 1.2) will receive technical assistance to support implementation. The TA will ensure that the 
adaptation and mitigation measures agreed on between PEEB Cool and the Subproject owner are 
effectively implemented at construction phase. The following types of technical assistance could be 
provided: 
o Project management assistance for the implementation of recommended measures to 
improve the performance of the Subproject, including specific technical expertise; 
o Support for verifications/certifications. 
 
Activity 1.1.3 Capacity reinforcement to Subproject stakeholders  
 
In addition, capacity reinforcement for project owners, financial intermediary and contractors will also 
be offered where this can result in significant value added and additional climate impacts for the 
Subprojects or future Subprojects, construction firms involved in the Subproject could benefit from 
training in the implementation of construction methods that are adapted to the climate context and 
local materials. This contributes to the upscaling of local actors and the development of a local offer 
of energy efficiency services.  
 
Gender gaps in the green building sector include a lack of ownership of and control over buildings 
and appliances, and a lack of voice and agency in finding solutions. In the energy sector, women’s 
roles as productive users, employees, entrepeneurs and leaders are weak. Actions and design 
interventions are required to improve gender outcomes and ensure gender mainstreaming in 
projects. PEEB Cool will seek to develop actions that improve the knowledge base of women and 
gender issues associated with accessing energy efficiency services.  According to the Programme 
Gender Action Plan, capacity building on gender related topics will also be provided to identify staff 
from each project owner. 
 
More comprehensive capacity development activities to favour local upscaling beyond the direct 
Project stakeholders for sectors in which financing Subprojects are identified, financed, or assisted 
in the construction phase will be provided through Output 2.3 in Component 2.  
 
The cap per country is set at 20% of the total grant amount made available by GCF. 
 
Output 1.2: Financing agreements for investments signed 
961 MEUR and 326 MUSD loan (131 MEUR and 45 MUSD from GCF, and 830 MEUR and 281 
MUSD from AFD Group) 
Activity 1.2.1 Investment funding 
Implementation of measures for bioclimatic and energy efficient design of buildings induces higher 
investment costs compared to the baseline Subproject on average 10% based on PEEB’s 
experience). PEEB’s international experience shows that project owners and end-users tend to be 
reluctant to accept incremental costs for green buildings. In order to address this barrier, it is 
proposed to blend AFD Group financing with a GCF concessional loan to lower the total costs (capex 
and financial costs) of the green building off-setting the incremental up-front costs of passive and 
energy efficient measures. The Programme will support the following types of Subprojects:

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
26 As per the No-Objection Letters provided by the countries, see Annex 1a: Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, 
Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia 
Type of Subproject 
Structuring 
Counterparts 
Example of this type 
of 
subproject 
presented in the case 
studies 
in 
the 
Feasibility 
Study 
(sections 
5.3 
and 
5.5.2) 
Investments in buildings 
implementing measures 
recommended in activity 
1.1.1 or within the green 
construction ecosystem* 
Direct financing to a public 
or private entity provided 
by GCF and AFD Group 
with potential additional 
financing sources and self-
financing from Project 
owners 
Ministry, 
Public entity, 
Private 
company 
Construction of a 
training center in 
Costa Rica 
Construction of a 
shopping mall in 
Nigeria 
Intermediated financing 
Financing to a financial 
intermediary, provided by 
GCF and AFD Group 
Financing 
institution 
Construction of 
housing in Morocco 
*Detailed eligibility criteria described in the FS and below. Information on how concessionality and 
the level of GCF investment will be established is included in Section B.5 under “Justification of 
concessionality of GCF concessional loans” 
The grant equivalent of the GCF contribution will be traced at the Subproject, credit line’s End-
beneficiary project, and Programme levels. 
Eligibility criteria 
Component 1 Subpprojects and End-beneficiary projects eligibility criteria is defined conforming to 
the following structuring and technical standards: 
1) Structural criteria 
a. Country:  
- 
Countries are part of PEEB Cool program.26 
 
b. Exclusion list 
- 
Subproject and End-beneficiary project activities included in AFD Group Exclusion list are 
excluded 
 
c. E&S category 
- 
Subprojects and End-beneficiary projects belong to E&S category B or C, Subprojects and 
End-beneficiary projects A are excluded 
 
d. Additional eligibility criteria for intermediated projects by Local Financing Partners 
(LFPs) 
- 
The LFP is a public or private financial institution existing under the laws of any Host Country 
and/or which has funding activities in any Host Country 
- 
The LFP satisfies with the Executing Entities’ (AFD or Proparco) financial, governance, risks 
management and compliance due diligences procedures (as defined in the AMA and in 
Annexes 6a, 8a, 9, 19 of the FP)

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
- 
The LFP has sufficient internal procedures and core capacities to be able to implement the 
Subproject with a Technical Assistance support (where relevant) 
- 
The LFP is capable of complying with the AFD Group’s procurement procedures  
- 
The LFP has AML/CFT risk management approach that are satisfactory to AFD Group 
- 
The LFP has an E&S risk management approach that is satisfactory to AFD Group as per the 
E&S Framework 
 
Depending on the local context, the project may target the following project owners: 
- 
Size and legal structure: large corporate, SMEs, micro enterprises, cooperatives, 
entrepreneurs, households/individuals, Government or other types of agencies/entities 
- 
Typology: public and/or private.  AFD will ensure that at least 10% of GCF loans will be signed 
between Proparco, the EE in charge of private sector financing, and private counterparts. 
- 
Geography: eligible countries 
 
The cap per country is set at 25% of the total loan amount made available by GCF. 
 
2) Technical criteria 
a. Project type:  
- 
Buildings construction or renovation 
- 
Efficient cooling / heating infrastructure 
- 
Credit line to a financial institution headquartered in one of the eligible countries that allows 
for the financing of one or several subprojects of the two types defined above  
 
b. Targeted sub-sector, technologies or actors 
- 
Housing - social (i.e. lower income) and middle income housing; 
- 
Education (school, universities, classrooms in rural areas, science complex, training centres); 
- 
Health (health centres, hospitals); 
- 
Public buildings and commercial buildings (public buildings, markets, shopping malls, offices); 
- 
Industrial buildings 
- 
Transportation (train and bus stations); 
- 
Tourism (hotels) 
 
c. Technology type: 
- 
Architectural solutions boosting natural ventilation and/or comfort inertia, thus passive 
cooling, and therefore the reduction of energy consumption linked to the cooling of buildings 
(e.g.: "Canadian system", "Solar tower", “natural ventilation openings, use of biosourced 
materials with good thermal properties, etc.) 
- 
Sub-trade equipment (technical trades) promoting cooling with low energy consumption (air 
handling units with energy recovery, smart ventilation units, cold loops & sharing, etc.). 
- 
"Clean" active cooling using systems with an excellent coefficient of performance (compared 
to systems used in PEEB Cool countries), using clean coolants and, if possible, an low and 
renewable energy supply 
 
d. Minimum performance targets for investment criteria (for direct investment and 
intermediated financing): 
- 
Adaptation: The target will be for building users (male/female) to have experienced an 
improvement in their indoor thermal conditions of at least 20% compared to the baseline or 
existing situation (in buildings that are not mechanically cooled, an increase in 20% thermal 
comfort is a reduction in 20% of the hours of discomfort resulting from improvements brought 
to the building)

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
- 
On Mitigation for renovation: 40% GHG emissions reduction or 40% energy consumption 
savings compared to the existing situation before renovation 
- 
On Mitigation for new construction = 20% GHG emissions reduction compared to the 
baseline; and/or 20% energy consumption savings compared to the baseline; and/or 20% 
water consumption savings compared to the baseline (a minimum of 2 out of 3 criteria) 
 
e. Technical assistance eligibility criteria  
- 
Technical assistance at the design phase of a construction/renovation Subproject 
- 
Technical assistance at the construction and operation phases of buildings 
- 
Technical assistance for efficient cooling/heating infrastructure design and implementation 
- 
Technical assistance to green construction ecosystem actors 
- 
Technical assistance for intermediated Subprojects 
 
The TA for intermediated Subprojects will be provided to the LFI, and includes: 
- 
Support for the identification and development of eligible and bankable climate-related 
Subprojects 
- 
Support in the definition and implementation of LFPs’ energy efficiency strategies 
- 
Assistance in the management of environmental and social risks 
- 
Support in the definition and implementation of a gender policy 
- 
Support for marketing and communication activities 
 
Additionally, while not the primary focus for the programme, AFD will also aim at funding Subprojects 
which reduce leakage of coolants. AFD is currently developing a proposal with the Fonds Français 
pour l’Environnement Mondial (FFEM) to support “innovative” actions within buildings cooling (with 
studies and investments) – including related to “clean refrigerants” with no global warming potential 
nor ozone impacts as part of these innovative actions.  
A total of EUR 176 million of concessional loans is requested from GCF for the Investment Facility. 
These loans are necessary to address the financial barrier of integrating bioclimatic and energy 
efficient measures in buildings. GCF’s contribution will be used to off-set additional expenses from 
recommended bioclimatic and energy efficient measures, so that green building comes at almost no 
additional cost to the Subroject owner. Additional elements in the use of GCF concessionality are 
described in Section B.5 and below. Those funds will be blended with EUR 1,111 million loan from 
AFD Group. It is expected to finance at least 10 Projects (e.g. loan transactions from the facility).  
Intermediated financing 
Financial system stakeholders have a key role to play in financing investments that integrate energy 
efficiency and bioclimatic technology in all sectors (construction, industry, tertiary sector, 
infrastructure projects). PEEB Cool will work with local financial intermediaries that are active in 
PEEB Cool eligible sectors to catalyse development of financial products for this market. The funds 
under the Programme will be on-lent by partner financial institutions (LFPs) to the end-beneficiaries 
for financing projects which technical specifications are common to all end-beneficaries projects and 
are defined with the financial intermediary. Eligibility criteria for financial institutions and on-lending 
activities are provided in the section 4.3.1.1 of the Feasibility Study.  
End-beneficiaries are the clients or prospects of the LFPs (public or private-owned MSMEs, leasing 
companies, microfinance institutions, …). 
For intermediated financing, the allocation of the funds to final beneficiaries are decided upon two 
possible ways: ex-post and ex-ante decisions.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
- 
In ex-ante, the End-beneficiaries projects pipeline is decided during formalization process, as 
in direct financing. The LFP has to comply with the End-beneficiaries projects pipeline. 
- 
In ex-post, the investment process fully belongs to the LFP. The LFP is audited during 
appraisal process regarding E&S aspects, procurement, gender inclusion, ..., and the 
eligibility criteria of End-beneficiaries projects is formalized. During implementation, the LFP 
reports a complete information of projects financed under the credit line to AFD (with 
impacts, project owners, etc...). On the base of these reports, the LFP has to submit an 
allocation request to the EE for every End-beneficiaries projects. The EE either gives a "no-
objection" to the allocation of the credit line to the End-beneficiaries projects which financing 
is required by the LFP to the EE, or refuses to finance the End-beneficiaries projects. In 
case a potential End-beneficiary project proposed by the LFP is declared non-compliant 
with the Subproject's eligibility criteria, this proposed End-beneficiary project is financed by 
other funds made available by the LFP. The EE funds are not directly financing the End-
beneficiaries projects; the EE funds are financing the LFPs, which are financing the End-
beneficiaries projects. The LFP is entirely managing the financing of End-beneficiaries 
projects. 
Voluntary prepayment is going to be allowed. In case the funds are not invested within a certain 
amount of time (decided by the LFP), the prepaid amount will be deployed a second time on 
eligible financings. 
Further details on intermediated financing with PEEB Cool are provided in the section 4.3.1.4 of the 
Feasibility Study. 
Determination of GCF funding support and concessionality for each Subproject (direct and 
intermediated financing) 
To encourage and allow adoption of the bioclimatic and energy efficiency measures, PEEB Cool 
offers to mobilize GCF concessional loan as co-financing of AFD Group debt investment, both in 
direct and intermediary Subprojects. The amount of GCF loan blended with AFD Group debt will 
respect two stringent criteria 
a. 
Determination of GCF level of blended finance based on the calculation of a grant-
equivalent concessionality: The grant equivalent of the GCF contribution is defined as 
the difference in financial costs (interest and repayments) between GCF financial 
terms (see proposed terms below) and AFD Group financial terms (or commercial 
terms available local). The grant-equivalent concessionality provided to each 
Subproject will be capped based on calculation of the debt service for the Subproject 
owner to avoid any unjustified use of this financial incentives. The proposed 
mechanism aims to reduce the debt service related to the financing of the green 
building to un-lock the investment. It shall however never become lower than the initial 
debt service the owner would have covered for a standard building before 
improvements to green building standard. This will size the GCF blended contribution 
for each Subproject. In other words, the GCF debt contribution will be calculated so 
as to strictly off-set the additional debt service which is due to the incremental costs 
of bioclimatic and energy efficient measures without the support of the investment 
facility. 
b. 
GCF debt contribution will be capped based on AFD Group climate finance principles 
for energy efficiency in buildings: AFD Group has developed a detailed, stringent and 
ambitious methodology to evaluate the share of its financings bearing a climate co-
benefit for buildings. It is more ambitious than the MDBs methodology as high level of 
energy efficiency shall be achieved to be classified as climate finance. This 
methodology is provided in the section 4.3.1.5 of the Feasibility Study. It is proposed

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
27 12 years is the maximum amount of time before the 1st repayment of the latest loan that could be approved 
within PEEB Cool. The programmatic approach allows to approve subprojects until year 5, then to implement 
this subproject until year 10, then to allow for 2 more years before repayments after the subproject generates 
incomes. Therefore, 12 years is the longest grace period that is possible in the program. 
that the share of GCF debt financing shall never be higher than the share of climate 
co-benefit of the Subproject financings.  
The conditionalities will be maintained by adjusting the share of co-financing from the GCF 
contribution, while offering 5 applicable fixed interest rates, based on whether the country is an LDC 
and whether the lender is sovereign, a public entity or a private-owned entity. The remaining debt 
will be provided either by AFD for public-led Subproject or by PROPARCO for private-led 
Subprojects. 
In all cases, the maturity will be up to 25 years and the grace period of the whole program up to 12 
years27. The loan size will be capped based on climate accounting of the Subproject.  
For intermediated financing,  AFD ensures that the concessional financing will pass to the end users 
in terms of pricing. The pricing of loans provided by Local Financing Institutions (LFI) supported by 
AFD is formalized in a framework agreement. Either the interest rate of end-users loans is capped 
itself according to an agreement made between AFD and LFIs, or the margin of the LFI is capped. 
 
Component 2: Enabling Facility 
Component 2 consists of four output areas that are closely interlinked with the Investment Facility in 
component 1 and will run for five years. They contribute to setting a frame for a healthy and future-
proof building sector development, further green building investments and encourage the replication 
of good practices implemented in component 1. 
Key beneficiaries of the activities in component 2 include the following. A longer list of beneficiaries 
is displayed in chapter 4.3.2 of the Feasibility Study. 
● Sectoral actors such as national federations, alliances and their industry members or other 
public-private interest groups that will be supported in developing sectoral frameworks or 
other industry commitments 
● Public sector representatives who receive support in designing and implementing regulations, 
standards, and programmes. 
 
Component 2 consists of the following output areas; 
Output 2.1: Sectoral investment frameworks unlock investment potential for green recovery 
6.5 MEUR GCF grant, on average 0.59 MEUR per country. 
This output supports further green buildings investments in the sectors targeted by the Investment 
facility. This is enabled through sectorial roadmaps and actions plans. Thus it will support economic 
recovery and enable green job creation. The output contributes to removing the financial barriers of 
(i) high perceived risk, lack of market information, and limited experiences with efficient and resilient 
building design, finance and implementation; and (ii) reluctance of industry actors to adapt their 
services for the construction and operation of energy efficient (EE), low carbon and resilient buildings, 
specifically in times of economic crisis

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
Sectoral frameworks or initiatives notably also ensure that Subproject stakeholders and market 
participants are able to provide the necessary products and services for the financing Subprojects 
(Output 1.2.), while developing future business opportunities.  
Activity 2.1.1. Development of sectoral frameworks or initiatives 
Within this activity, the development of sectoral investment frameworks or initiatives with industry 
commitments will be supported. Construction-industry actors, represented by their federations are 
supported to define commitments (e.g. green labels of construction sector products or services), 
action plans and investment roadmaps for green buildings that will bring them on the track to 
decarbonation of their businesses. Such commitments, roadmaps etc. are the elements that form the 
sectoral investment frameworks. Higher ambition of the regulations was often preceded by 
professional organisations encouraging the adoption of more demanding construction methods 
through labels and certifications (Effinergie, E + C-, Passivhaus, HQE, DGNB, LEED, BREEAM, 
etc.). Likely sectors concerned by the investment roadmaps and action plans, are summarized as 
follows: 
- 
Investment roadmaps for the hospitals sector (Albania), public buildings (Djibouti, North 
Macedonia), residential buildings (Indonesia, Nigeria, Tunisia), educational buildings 
(Indonesia), district cooling sector (Tunisia), or the construction industry including local 
building materials (Argentina, Nigeria); 
- 
Action plans for strengthening industry labels (Morocco). 
Planned sub-activities include the following: 
Decision on sector(s) to be targeted according to investment projects in a respective country: 
Starting with the pipeline and feasibility study stage of the financing projects, the sectoral 
stakeholders and socio-economic context will be mapped and analysed in order to identify the 
potential for additional investment, job creation, and decarbonization possibilities in this sector in the 
near to mid-term future and to understand how these could be furthered by coordinated sectoral 
action and industry commitments. General appetite and conditions for investments in the sector will 
also be gauged. At the end of this sub-activity stands the confirmation of collaboration with the 
industry sector partner federation, association, alliances etc.  
Support in investment roadmap or industry initiative development: Based on the potential 
identified, the proposals for appropriate actions will be elaborated jointly with the federations, 
alliances, or other groups that represent a significant share of the respective industry through studies, 
interviews, and further consultations. For example, if the building material sector is identified for 
support, this sub-activity will help the industry actors to develop joint (voluntary) industry standards 
such as the disclosure of climate footprint of their products. If an owner of a large building stock is 
supported, this sub-activity would analyse the mitigation and adaptation as well as financial 
optimization potential in the existing and future buildings stock and develop an investment pipeline, 
with a more detailed business case preparation of the most promising and ambitious green projects 
for further financing. The outcomes of the support in the development of the initiative or framework 
will be presented in a national workshop co-organized with the national partner organizations.  
Relevant national and international financiers will equally be invited to this workshop, with the aim of 
early stage setting up of contacts that could lead to financing of projects. Private sector companies 
building a business around the potential identified will equally be invited. 
Output 2.2: Policy proposals prepare the ground for building sector transformation 
8.8 MEUR grant in total, out of which 6.8 MEUR GCF and 2 MEUR BMU/BMWK funding, on 
average 0.8 MEUR per country in total.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
The enhanced implementation of green buildings needs a supportive and incentivizing policy. 
Therefore, it is of utmost importance to support the development of policies that enable and stimulate 
green buildings in order to achieve sector transformation. The experiences from the financing of 
construction projects will also feed into the development of policy proposals and their integration into 
the national contexts, providing valuable “on the ground” experiences for better public policies, 
national incentive mechanisms, and improved public procurement criteria. The improved policy 
framework will expand existing and create new markets for services or products and stimulate 
investment. 
The output contributes to removing institutional and regulatory barriers such as lack of clear policies 
for building decarbonisation and incomplete or non-existing building code and lack of knowledge on 
green buildings. 
This output directly contributes to indicator 2.2. It supports partner countries with advice on public 
policies in sectors in which the Investment Facility intervenes with financing Subprojects to anchor 
the Programme in an enabling framework and to deliver climate impact beyond the Programme 
duration (output 2.1) 
Activity 2.2.1. Support for development of policies on energy efficiency in buildings 
An important policy tool for the transformation of the building sector towards more sustainable, 
resilient and energy efficient construction is the adoption of building codes. However, in developing 
countries, even where building energy codes exist the application rate remains extremely low (less 
than 10%). International experience shows that successful building energy codes that are fully 
applied, are based on construction standards mastered by a large majority of players. Within this 
activity, public policies will be developed (or updated), particularly in sectors in which Subprojects 
are financed by the Investment Facility in order to deliver long-term climate impact. Within this 
activity, public policies will be developed (or updated), particularly in sectors in which Subprojects 
are financed by the Investment Facility in order to deliver long-term climate impact. Public hearings 
/ consultations for policies open to civil society organizations will be encouraged. 
There will be a strong focus on application and enforcement, e.g. through: capacity building of 
government/municipal agents and developers ; development and use of software tools to facilitate 
the application of building codes ; linking existing or new building codes with national incentive 
programs to increase their uptake. 
Examples of likely policies/regulations concerned by this activity are summarized as follows: 
- 
Certification of buildings (Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Argentina); 
- 
Improvement and enforcement of building code (Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Nigeria, Vietnam); 
- 
Establishment of energy efficiency requirements for building sub-sectors such as health 
establishments (Albania), self-assisted construction (Morocco), residential buildings 
(Indonesia), or social housing (Tunisia) 
Planned sub-activities for this activity are as follows: 
Agreement on support areas:  National meetings among all project stakeholders will confirm the 
previously identified policy gaps in each of the countries and sectors and prioritise intervention as 
well as assess concrete steps. This may be done through a checklist based on the WB RISE scores, 
and own experiences.  
Provision of support: The PEEB Cool enabling facility team will set up a pool of consultants and 
mobilize expertise from the pool as requested and needed for the implementation of the identified

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
support areas. This will complement their own expertise.  For two “policy” types, necessary 
background steps that will be included in the PEEB Cool support are explained below. 
• 
Support with enforcement of a building code: analysis of the most important obstacles 
(including through market stakeholder survey), review of existing legislative texts and 
potential unclarities, proposal for legislative enforcement mechanisms, development of 
internal guidelines for line authorities such as municipalities delivering the permits, etc. 
• 
Preparation of national investment incentive programs: this requires estimating the 
current demand and supply for efficient and resilient buildings, analysing types of potential 
incentives, the  cost-optimal incentive level that would lead to a higher uptake of a set of 
pre-identified measures (which also have to be validated in the context of this activity), as 
well as the type of beneficiary (i.e. end customer, intermediary, etc.), incentive pay-out or 
tax recovery options, administration of the national program, approval by the relevant 
fiscal government authorities etc. 
 
Output 2.3: Private and public sector actors are enabled to work towards building sector 
transformation 
5.2 MEUR GCF grant, on average 0.47 MEUR per country. 
The capacity development by PEEB Cool helps partner governments and sector stakeholders in 
achieving long-term climate impacts beyond the direct effects of financing Subproject interventions. 
It also makes sure that investment roadmaps (output 2.1.) or policies supported (output 2.2) are 
implementable by both civil servants and building sector professionals; and it makes sure that 
capacities required for the implementation of investments (output 1.2) supported by PEEB Cool are 
available at the sectoral/national level.  
This output directly contributes to indicator 2.3. (number of persons trained), indicator 2.1 (sectoral 
investment frameworks), indicator 2.2 (policy proposals). It also strengthens indicators 1.1 (TA at 
Subproject level). 1.2 (investments) on a sectoral/national level.  
This output contains the following activities:  
 
Activity 2.3.1 Development of training and awareness raising modules  
The PEEB Cool trainings, specifically targeted at the intersection of finance, business, architecture, 
engineering and politics, increase competences and awareness of sector actors through concise 
programmes related to financing, design, construction and operation of energy efficient and resilient 
buildings  
The following list represent clustered examples of preliminarily identified training needs:   
- 
Bioclimatic building design including financial impact (Argentina, Costa Rica, Indonesia, Mali, 
Mexico, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Vietnam); 
- 
Building energy performance certification (Argentina); 
- 
Eligibility criteria and verification procedures for financing of low-carbon buildings based on 
an energy performance system (Costa Rica, Indonesia). 
For more details regarding the tentative modules, full list of examples, targets groups and training 
objectives within this activity, please refer to the Feasibility Study and to section C.3. 
Planned sub-activities include the following:

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
Continuous coordination with investment projects and updating of relevant sectoral/national 
training offer: Taking into account the diversity of participating countries and sectors in PEEB Cool, 
the existing training needs analysis will be continuously updated and clustered in order to provide a 
useful and relevant training offer to the participating countries, linked to the sectors of intervention of 
the Investment Facility.  
Development of 10 new training modules: Based on the continuous monitoring of the training 
needs, tailored trainings will be developed with internal and external expertise. The trainings will be 
developed with international best-practises and benchmarks, but will leave designated room for 
additional content to be adapted to country specific circumstances. Where useful, international 
standards such as DGNB, HQE, LEED will be taken into consideration for use or adaptation into the 
national context. Examples from specific PEEB Cool investment subprojects that lead by example 
and apply i.e. HQE standards will be included, thus create practical learning opportunities for the 
sector.  
Transfer of some training modules to national authorities/institutions: Since all training 
modules will be developed in an “open-source” mode, the training content will be, where possible, 
handed-over to interested and relevant national authorities to continue offering trainings beyond 
PEEB Cool. They could also be used as starting points for more elaborate training programs or 
developed further by technical and vocational training activities that are ongoing in the respective 
country and sector. 
 
Activity 2.3.2 Implementation of training and awareness raising measures  
The implementation of the developed trainings follows the logic defined by each country intervention 
and the most pressing market needs. To ensure further long-term usage and value to the partner 
countries, the content of training events shall be integrated, where possible, in national training 
programmes or developed further by technical and vocational training activities that are ongoing in 
the respective country and sector.  
Sub-activities to be implemented include the following: 
Setting up of a training schedule: A training schedule will be agreed upon with the partner 
organisations for implementation in accordance with the investment subprojects, investment 
roadmaps, and public policies to be supported. 
Local adaptation:  While the overall modules will be developed from an international best practice 
standard point of view, a number of content elements will have to be adapted by the 
national/regional/international consultants that will implement the trainings, with the support of the 
local PEEB Cool teams.  
Implementation of trainings: The trainings will be implemented locally in a face-to-face setting 
where possible. Online formats may complement but not replace certain trainings if the 
circumstances are favourable. Due to past experiences on the effectiveness and learning outcomes 
of participants, trainings are scheduled to have relatively small training groups of 15-20 persons per 
training. This allows for very tailored learning but requires a careful selection of participants. This 
selection of participants will be done in collaboration with the partner governments and managed by 
the PEEB Cool team locally. Evaluation sheets, that in particular look at relevance of the training for 
market development of energy efficient and resilient buildings, will be administered and evaluated. 
As to enable the implementation of Component 1, participants of the trainings and capacity 
strengthening can include 1) project owners (including ministries, other public entities and private 
developers), architects/designers and construction companies and 2) financial intermediaries,

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
28 Further explanation on the concept of de-risking is presented in the section 4.3.2 of the Feasibility Study 
including mortgage companies specialised in housing construction or generalist banks working in the 
service sector. 
 
Output 2.4: Programme experience supports the global building sector transformation 
1 MEUR grant, 0.5 MEUR from GCF and 0.5 MEUR from BMU/BMWK 
This output will build upon the Programme’s experience and make information available regionally 
and internationally to speed up building sector transformation. This output covers knowledge transfer 
and dissemination at the level of the entire Programme (components 1 and 2). Another envisaged 
result is an increase in the availability of information regarding the identification and financing of 
energy efficient and resilient buildings investments, as well as information about financial models 
and de-risking28 and upscaling tools. This output contributes to the indicator 2.4. 
Activity 2.4.1 Development of knowledge products:  
PEEB Cool activities in both the Investment and Enabling Facilities will generate a wealth of 
experiences that will be channelled in different knowledge products and thus made accessible to a 
wider audience. It is envisaged to put a focus on experiences that successful de-risk investment in 
energy efficient and resilient buildings, and to prepare knowledge products that show the variety of 
financial instruments available to national governments and development finance institutions at the 
example of concretely implemented investments. 
Planned sub-activities include the following: 
Continuous monitoring of project results and experiences worth transforming into knowledge 
products: regular meetings at HQ at PMU level will serve to consolidate local PEEB Cool 
experiences and to establish a knowledge product pipeline. 
Development of knowledge products: The knowledge products will be developed based on the 
different program activities. These build the foundation for making project experiences available 
within and beyond PEEB Cool. 
Activity 2.4.2 Dissemination of experience:  
 PEEB Cool will feed its implementation experience into the joint effort to decarbonise the buildings 
and construction sector at the national and international level by making its knowledge products 
and experiences accessible to Subproject implementers and investors, and a wider audience via 
regional and/or global platforms (e.g. International Development Finance Club, GlobalABC, 
UNFCCC events, COPs)  
Planned sub-activities include the following: 
Monitoring of dissemination occasions: This will be a continuous activity in order to identify the 
most impactful events and formats in which PEEB Cool experiences and knowledge products could 
be presented. 
Preparation and presentation of inputs in diverse formats: The PEEB Cool PMU or local staff 
will regularly participate in relevant formats and disseminate relevant experiences throughout the 
entire duration of PEEB Cool. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
Programme implementation 
 
Implementation structure 
 
PEEB Cool will be implemented jointly by the following three institutions:  
 
● AFD, as accredited entity, executing entity and co-financier for the Investment Facility 
(financial incentives and technical assistance) targeting public sector Subproject owners 
(Component 1); 
● PROPARCO, as executing entity and co-financier for the Investment Facility (financial 
incentives) targeting private sector Subproject owners (Component 1); 
● GIZ, as executing entity for activities within the Enabling Facility (Component 2). 
 
The following table sums the list of activities and the executing entities responsible for each activity. 
Component 
Output 
Activity 
Responsible 
executing entity 
1  
Investment Facility 
1.1   
Project owners are supported in 
the various phases of their 
investment 
1.1.1  
Technical assistance support 
at identification and design 
phases 
AFD 
1.1.2 
Technical 
assistance 
at 
construction 
and 
operation 
phase  
AFD 
1.1.3  
Capacity reinforcement to 
project stakeholders 
AFD 
1.2  
Financing agreements for 
investments signed 
1.2.1 (i)  
Investment funding for public 
sector Borrowers 
AFD 
1.2.1 (ii) 
Investment funding for private 
sector Borrowers 
Proparco 
2  
Enabling Facility 
2.1  
Sectoral investment frameworks 
unlock investment potential for 
green recovery 
2.1.1  
Development of sectoral 
frameworks or initiatives 
GIZ 
2.2  
Policy proposals prepare the 
ground for building sector 
transformation 
2.2.1  
Support for development of 
policies on energy efficiency in 
buildings 
GIZ 
2.3  
Private and public sector actors 
are enabled to work towards 
building sector transformation 
2.3.1  
Development of training and 
awareness raising modules 
GIZ 
2.3.2  
Implementation of training and 
awareness raising measures 
GIZ 
2.4  
Programme experience supports 
the global building sector 
transformation 
2.4.1  
Development of knowledge 
products 
GIZ 
2.4.2  
Dissemination of experience 
GIZ 
3  
Programme 
Management 
Component 
 
 
AFD

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
As accredited entity, AFD will host the Programme Management Unit (PMU) and manage the 
contractual relation with the GCF. The three entities will closely coordinate through the Steering 
Committee and PMU (see governance arrangement below). In addition, AFD will be in charge of the 
PEEB Cool investment facility implementation within the public sector. AFD project teams will be 
responsible for the identification, appraisal, implementation and evaluation of eligible investments. 
The Subprojects’ appraisal process will follow AFD’s procedures. 
 
PROPARCO will be in charge of PEEB Cool implementation within the private sector. As per AFD 
projects, PROPARCO project teams will be responsible for the identification, appraisal, 
implementation and evaluation of eligible investments and appraisal process will follow 
PROPARCO’s procedure.  
In particular, task team leaders from AFD Group will carry out due diligence and appraisals on each 
Subproject in accordance with AFD Group standards and procedures. Due diligence includes, KYC 
and anti-money laundering policies, and E&S standards.  
 
GIZ will be responsible for the implementation of activities within the Enabling Facility (component 
2). GIZ will ensure the implementation of activities using a combination of own staff based in 
headquarters and respective partner countries as well as independent consultants. All will report to 
the PEEB Cool Programme Management Unit. 
 
Governance arrangement and programme management 
 
A Programme Management Unit will coordinate the overall implementation of the Programme, while 
a Steering Committee will ensure that PEEB Cool remains consistent across Subprojects. The 
Programme Management Unit will be supported by a Programme Team which will bring technical 
expertise.  
 
● PEEB Cool will be monitored by a Programme Management Unit (PMU) established at 
AFD’s headquarters in Paris. The Programme Management Unit will consist of three full time 
programme officers. 
The PMU will be responsible for structuring, implementing and monitoring the Programme 
and will ensure: 
o Technical and administrative supervision of the Programme; 
o Coordination of the Programme’s activities; 
o Support in implementation of eligible Projects via expertise and technical assistance 
mobilization; 
o Communication activities. 
 
● Programme Team the PMU will be supported by a team of AFD Group experts consisting of 
an environmental and social specialist, a climate specialist, an energy efficiency specialist, a 
private sector specialist, a legal expert, a procurement expert, and a finance specialist. They 
will not be part of the PMU and will not be fully dedicated to the Programme but will act as 
part of a pool of experts, providing advice in their field of expertise when needed.  
 
● AFD and PROPARCO staff based in Paris or in local offices will follow up preparation and 
implementation of each eligible Subproject identified under the Investment Facility. GIZ will 
mainly implement the Enabling Facility with staff based in Germany (for coordination) and 
locally in each country of intervention. Expertise France (EF), AFD’s affiliate for technical 
cooperation, may also intervene in the implementation of the Enabling Facility.

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
PEEB Cool’s PMU will receive guidance from PEEB Cool Steering Committee (SC). The SC will be 
responsible for making the strategic decisions required for the execution of the Programme. The 
steering committee meets at least once per year. Its members are representatives of the executing 
entities (PROPARCO, GIZ, and AFD). The SC shall notably review and approve Programme annual 
budget and work plans, discuss implementation issues and identify solutions, and ensure 
coordination and communication between implementing entities.  
 
Implementation arrangements 
 
Implementation arrangement for direct financed Subprojects and Component 2 are illustrated 
below: 
 
 
Figure 7: Implementation arrangement for direct financed Subprojects 
Implementation arrangement for intermediated Subprojects (Component 1): 
 
Figure 8: Implementation arrangement for intermediated financed Subprojects

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
● Contractual arrangements 
 
● The GCF and AFD will sign a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and all GCF funds, whether 
reimbursable or non-reimbursable funds, will be transferred from the GCF to AFD according 
to the provisions set in the FAA.  The FAA will be a grant and sub-participation. 
● AFD will sign a subsidiary agreement with GIZ and will channel GCF funds to GIZ for the 
purpose of component 2 implementation. 
● AFD will sign a subsidiary agreement with PROPARCO, which will take the form of a mandate 
agreement and will define the fiduciary and implementation arrangements between AFD and 
PROPARCO. 
 
● Financing agreement between AFD or PROPARCO and the beneficiaries 
 
For direct financing 
Eligible Subprojects within AFD’s scope (public sector) and PROPARCO’s scope (private sector) will 
benefit from financial support extended by AFD and PROPARCO through the Investment Facility 
(Component 1) on a subproject-by-subproject basis. For this purpose, PROPARCO and AFD will 
sign financing agreements with the respective implementing bodies (developers, ministries, etc.). 
Financing agreements will describe the provisions and modalities for disbursing and using the funds 
for the purpose of implementing the Subprojects, and will be developed and negotiated according to 
AFD Group templates and procedures.  
 
For intermediated financing 
Loan agreements will be signed between AFD and public financial intermediaries, and between 
Proparco and private financial intermediaries. The loan agreement will specify the eligibility criteria, 
including the targeted final beneficiaries. 
 
The eligibility criteria will be defined at conception stage by the technical assistant (Output 1.1) but 
will at least abide by the eligibility criteria of direct financing Subprojects. Based on the targeted 
beneficiaries and local context, the technical assistant will prepare technical specification for eligible 
investments. The financial intermediary will assess the creditworthiness of potential eligible 
investments (construction for developers or acquisition for households) and structure a financial offer 
in line with the need to reduce the barriers to investment in the country.  
 
For example, in Peru, AFD and Fondo Mivivienda have launched a new product called a “green 
mortgage” which allows households to benefit from a subsidy if their home is certified, making the 
price of green housing equal to the price of conventional housing for certified homes. 
 
AFD will work in priority with national accredited entites, wherever and whenever it is suitable. It 
includes, but not limited to, the following national accredited entities identified in PEEB Cool 
countries: 
● Agency for Agricultural Development of Morocco (ADA_Morocco) 
● Moroccan Agency for Sustainable Energy S.A. (MASEN) 
● CDG Capital S.A. (CDG_Capital) - Morocco 
● Fondo Mexicano para la Conservación de la Naturaleza A.C. (FMCN) 
● Nacional Financiera, S.N.C., Banca de Desarrollo (Nafin) - Mexico 
● Kemitraan bagi Pembaruan Tata Pemerintahan (Partnership for Governance Reform) - 
Indonesia

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
● PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (PTSMI) - Indonesia 
● Unidad Para el Cambio Rural (UCAR) - Argentina 
Technical assistance to these entities is eligible to PEEB Cool financing for the implementation of 
credit lines under Component 1. 
 
Additional intermediaries will be added to the list during the course of progamme preparation and 
implementation.  
 
For public sector financing, the state authority is the counterpart which borrows and backstops the 
obligation. 
 
● Service contracts between AFD and consultants 
 
AFD will hire consulting companies to implement the Subproject technical assistance activities 
(Component 1) in addition to AFD internal program team. In order to implement Component 1 of 
PEEB Cool, a pool of consulting firms hired after a call for tender, shall be mobilized through the 
issuance of purchase orders by the PMU.  
● Service contracts between GIZ and consultants 
 
In order to deliver the results of the Enabling Facility (Component 2), GIZ will partially rely on 
additional technical expertise for specific topics within the Enabling Facility output areas, as per 
country needs and priorities. Consultant pools will be recruited for this purpose according to GIZ 
procurement standards. In accordance with clause 10.04 of the AMA, this Funding Proposal provides 
that GIZ might formalize services contracts with Expertise France, an affiliate of AFD Group, for 
fulfilling some activities when it is required by GIZ. 
 
● Co-financiers 
 
Co-financiers to the Programme include AFD Group and the German Government.  
● AFD Group will co-finance the Programme through a grant and loans. AFD Group intends to 
co-finance the Programme with a grant reaching 5 MEUR and loans up to 830 MEUR and 
281 MUSD. 
● The co-financing of 2.5 MEUR by the German Government will be complementary to activities 
included in Component 2 of PEEB Cool and subject to a separate bilateral contractual 
arrangement between GIZ and the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Protection 
and Nuclear Safety. 
 
Another investment grant is currently being identified, but not included in the Programme budget as 
it is still under discussion: 
● Fonds Français pour l’Environnement Mondial (FFEM) - AFD has submitted an application 
for FFEM funds that would allow to benefit from additional 3 MEUR grants to support 
Subproject financing. If approved, the funds should be committed in Q4 2022. Should this 
request be successful, FFEM funds would be used to promote innovative cooling solutions 
within PEEB Cool. 
 
 
Some eligible Subprojects financed under PEEB Cool, both in the public and in the private sector, 
might be financed together with other financiers, as yet unidentified. 
 
Experience and track record of AE and EE

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
AFD 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) / French Development Agency is a financial institution 
and the main implementing agency for France’s official development assistance to developing 
countries and overseas territories. In 2019, AFD engaged a record volume of EUR 14.1 billion of 
commitments, 6.1 billion of which are designed for positive impact on the climate. Regarding energy 
efficiency in construction sector, AFD has implemented two large-scale programmes (SUNREF and 
PEEB) that have shown encouraging results worldwide.  
Energy efficiency constitutes one of the three focuses of AFD’s energy transition strategy 2018-2020. 
In 2019, AFD has committed EUR 1,650 million in energy efficiency including EUR 546 million of 
direct financed subprojects, EUR 660 million public policy lending with energy efficiency component 
and EUR 444 million of intermediated financing. 
AFD has local offices in 12 of the 13 PEEB Cool countries included in this proposal and has 
construction and retrofitting experience (education, health, energy sectors) in most of them. 
 
 
PROPARCO 
PROPARCO (société de Promotion et de Participation à la Coopération économique) is an affiliate 
of AFD focused on private sector development. It has been promoting sustainable economic, social 
and environmental development practices for the past 40 years. As a development finance institution, 
PROPARCO provides funding and support to both businesses and financial intermediaries, and aims 
to boost the contribution of the private sector to achieving the sustainable development goals. 
 
In 2018, PROPARCO approved EUR 2.5 billion, increasing its outstanding portfolio at EUR 4.6 billion 
with over 500 clients in 115 countries. With a growing interest to embed energy efficiency in projects, 
PROPARCO is able to tap into a vast pipeline of opportunities and mobilise its expertise in financing: 
constructions of buildings within health, education, tourism, infrastructure, and industrial sectors; 
Green credit lines and guarantees for financial institutions; and expansions of production capacities 
or greenfield projects with actors in the construction ecosystem. 
 
PROPARCO is financing operations in all PEEB Cool countries and has physical presence in 5 of 
them (Morocco, Nigeria, Tunisia, Mexico, and Indonesia). The remaining countries are coordinated 
from the closest regional office ensuring on-the-ground presence. 
 
GIZ 
As a service provider in the field of international cooperation for sustainable development and 
international education work, GIZ has over 50 years of experience in a wide variety of areas, including 
economic development and employment promotion, energy and the environment, and peace and 
security. GIZ works with businesses, civil society actors and research institutions, fostering 
successful interaction between development policy and other policy fields and areas of activity. In 
2017, GIZ generated a business volume of around 3 billion euros and employed 20,726 persons, 
almost 70 per cent of whom are national personnel in 120 countries. 
 
GIZ is present with national and international staff in the 13 PEEB Cool countries included in this 
proposal. In 7 of the PEEB Cool countries (Costa Rica, Morocco, Tunisia, Vietnam, Nigeria, Mexico, 
Indonesia), ongoing GIZ bilateral projects in the energy sector advise partners in the area of energy 
efficiency, renewable energies, or rural electrification. A further 6 countries are involved in regional 
or global projects in or related to the energy sector, implemented by GIZ and its partners (Argentina, 
Albania, Djibouti, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Mali).

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
GCF’s support is critical to address barriers to energy efficiency in buildings.  
GCF funding is essential to address the key barrier to energy efficiency in buildings and 
move towards a paradigm shift: access to affordable finance  
Despite their enormous mitigation and adaptation potential, measures to reduce overheating and 
increase energy efficiency in buildings currently attract only a small proportion of climate investment, 
particularly in developing countries. The PEEB Cool Feasibility Study highlighted the fact that the 
market for cool and energy efficient buildings, as well as for efficient cooling systems in PEEB Cool 
countries is not mature enough to expand without financial incentives. These activities are still 
perceived by Subproject owners as complex and unattractive and the environmental advantage and 
wider benefits of more resilient buildings and practices is not well understood. In addition, energy 
efficiency investments are often subject to split incentives when the entities making the investments 
in buildings are different from the entities using the building (and experiencing the benefits of reduced 
energy bills and increased comfort). 
GCF concessional loans address this financial barrier by enabling PEEB Cool to lower the total cost 
of the improved building debt service to a cost close to that of the business-as-usual Subproject, 
which will be essential to initiate large investments in bioclimatic buildings. Furthermore, GCF 
resources will incentivise the public sector in particular to invest in more sustainable and environment 
friendly buildings. Combined with technical assistance to develop new green public procurement 
standards, this will send a strong signal to the market. The Feasibility Study shows that in order to 
reach a portfolio of buildings of the scale of PEEB Cool with on average 30% energy savings 
compared to baseline performance, 315 MEUR in grants would be needed to cover the incremental 
costs of construction and refurbishment. PEEB Cool ensures minimum concessionality by financing 
these incremental costs through concessional loans rather than grants This grant element derives 
from the high concessionality of GCF loans. Further description of the way the financial structure, 
including the GCF concessional loan, is calculated is presented in the Feasibility Study and in the 
explanatory note annexed to the Economic and Financial Analysis. 
Synergies between activities financed by grants and those financed by debt 
Investments alone are not sufficient to achieve the transformation of the building sector at a national 
level. In order to deliver such a transformation, investments need to be combined with the 
development of a sectorial investment framework, adapted public policies, technical assistance and 
capacity building. The GCF is the only source of funding that can provide both debt and the amount 
of technical assistance required to achieve paradigm shift. With the assistance of the GCF, PEEB 
Cool will provide countries with both financial and technical tools to invest in a low-carbon building 
sector development.  
A critical mass of investments is needed for market transformation /paradigm shift to green 
buildings  
In the past, energy efficiency investments have been made on a case-by-case basis, treating each 
project in isolation. The ongoing PEEB programme approached the issue differently by pooling 
knowledge and experience into a common platform.  
In addition, by allowing the application of this approach on key transformative Subprojects, the GCF 
funded Programme will enable a further scaling up of the market transformation that has been 
initiated by PEEB. PEEB Cool will thus be able to achieve a critical mass of bioclimatic investments 
which, supported by the creation of an enabling environment in the targeted countries, will lead to 
the desired paradigm shift. Without the scale and concessionality of finance that the GCF provide,

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
investments would remain far below what is required to reach the Paris agreement goals in terms of 
climate performance. This sets up a basis for paradigm shift in financing, where it is realized that 
specific investments / products related to green buildings and efficiency in cooling can be popular 
and used by end-users.  
A programmatic approach gives investors the flexibility needed for mobilizing co-finance 
By allowing AFD to adopt a flexible, programmatic approach, GCF funds make it possible to develop 
a significant Subproject pipeline while being adaptive to Subproject needs. In the countries targeted 
by PEEB Cool, there is a high risk that some early-stage subprojects will fail to materialise, for a 
variety of reasons. GCF funding modalities allow to address this risk by providing a confidence in the 
availability of funds for Subprojects meeting the Programme’s eligibility criteria.  
Justification of concessionality of GCF concessional loans 
GCF concessional loans will be blended with AFD and Proparco funding to address the financial 
barrier (composed of incremental investment cost and risk premium) of EE investments. The co-
financing amount as well as the amount of concessional loans requested is based on AFD’s 
evaluation of the development of the Subproject pipeline in the next four years. The diagram below 
displays past and current PEEB projects committed between 2018 and 2020. The climate finance 
amount corresponds to the declared projects’ share that is accounted as climate finance according 
to AFD’s methodology (summarized in the section 4.3.1.5 of the Feasibility Study). This methodology, 
which is dedicated to buildings, establishes costs considered as eligible Climate Costs, based on 
certain impacts thresholds. The forecast includes projects that are under appraisal and identification 
at AFD and that AFD has committed in 2021. The diagram shows the steady increase in finance 
committed, which is the basis upon which the co-financing amount was determined. 
 
Figure 9: AFD projects supported by PEEB 
To encourage and allow adoption of the bioclimatic and energy efficiency measures, PEEB Cool 
offers to mobilize GCF concessional loan as co-financing of AFD Group debt investment. Minimum 
concessionality of the GCF contribution is ensured through the following considerations (further detail 
in the chapter 4.3.1.4 of the Feasibility Study): 
a. 
Determination of GCF level of blended finance based on the calculation of a grant-
equivalent concessionality: The grant equivalent of the GCF contribution is defined as 
359
490
785
933
4
116
356
?
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
2018
2019
2020
2021
in MEUR
AFD group projects supported by PEEB 
Financial commitment and climate finance in 
building sector
Commitment
incl. Climate

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
the difference in financial costs (interest+repayments) between GCF financial terms 
(see proposed terms below) and AFD Group financial terms (or commercial terms 
available local). The grant-equivalent concessionality provided to each Subproject will 
be capped based on calculation of the debt service for the Subproject owner to avoid 
any unjustified use of this financial incentives. The proposed mechanism aims to 
reduce the debt service related to the financing of the green building to un-lock the 
investment. It shall however never become lower than the initial debt service the 
owner would have covered for a standard building before improvements to green 
building standard. This will size the GCF blended contribution for each Subproject. In 
other words, the GCF debt contribution will be calculated so as to strictly off-set the 
additional debt service which is due to the incremental costs of bioclimatic and energy 
efficient measures without the support of the investment facility 
b. 
GCF debt contribution will be capped based on AFD Group climate finance principles 
for energy efficiency in buildings: AFD Group has developed a detailed, stringent and 
ambitious methodology to evaluate the share of its financings bearing a climate co-
benefit for Buildings. It is more ambitious than the MDBs methodology as high level 
of energy efficiency shall be achieved to be classified as climate finance. This 
methodology is provided in the section 4.3.1.5 of the Feasibility Study as well as in 
Annex 3c. It is proposed that the share of GCF debt financing shall never be higher 
than the share of climate co-benefit of the Subproject financings.  
The conditionalities described above will be maintained by adjusting the share of co-financing from 
the GCF contribution, while offering 5 applicable fixed interest rates, based on whether the country 
is an LDC and whether the lender is sovereign, a public entity or a private-owned entity (the proposed 
rates are listed in section B.3). The remaining debt will be provided either by AFD for public-led 
Subproject or by Proparco for private-led Subprojects. 
The diagram below illustrates how GCF concessional loans will be blended with AFD groups’ debt 
instruments to reduce the incremental cost of the integration of bioclimatic and energy efficiency 
measures. This will enable the Programme to offer financing conditions under which green building 
Subprojects will be viable while avoiding crowding out other investors.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Investment Facility approach to incremental cost of bioclimatic and energy efficient measures integration 
 
The AFD Group loan conditions will be tailored to the financial specificities of Subprojects and to the 
credit risk, taking into consideration the country, type of contracting authority (these could include 
direct sovereign or non-sovereign, municipalities, bankable public bodies, non-profit organisations, 
private companies, and financial intermediaries).  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The Subprojects are designed in close consultation with the sector and Subproject stakeholders 
(developers, planners and construction companies), to ensure their ownership of the Subproject both 
during the implementation and after its completion.  The Enabling Facility is designed to future-proof 
the building sector development and drive further investment.  
 
The programme will be using private sector organisations for the building works. Since the GCF 
funding will enable green buildings to be available at more affordable prices, this will help stimulate 
the market by increasing demand and encouraging more private companies into the sector. 
Competition will further improve the development of low carbon materials and efficient cooling 
systems, driving prices down further and establishing a new norm in the green buildings market once 
the programme has ended. As transaction costs fall, there will be lower entry costs for Subproject 
developers, improving the capacity of the green building sector (such as engineering, materials 
supply, knowledge and expertise). The programme would therefore expect to see an acceleration of 
the green buildings market as the programme closes.  
 
Mobilising private sector actors such as construction companies, with the support of policy and 
institutional changes, will help create a paradigm shift that is lasting in the sector. The establishment 
of sectoral frameworks and initiatives, such as green labels of products and services, will support 
long-term changes in the industry. By enabling passive measures in green buildings, GHG emissions 
from the cooling sector will continue to decline after the Subproject has closed.  Policy and 
institutional changes will ensure emissions reductions are also expanded going forward.  
 
Financial intermediaries and banks will gain expertise and knowledge during Component 1 
(investment facility), enhancing opportunities for long-term, sustainable investments. The real-life 
implementation of green buildings will help improve the perception of the measures and benefits they 
deliver, driving demand. This will stimulate banks to increase the availability of financing options. The 
market will be kick-started and transformed during and after the programme completion.   
 
Pre-screening of loan applications, and evaluation of progress and monitoring of repayments will 
ensure the financial risk is minimized post completion of the programme. Qualifying Subprojects will 
need to meet the eligibility criteria to ensure the long-term viability of the Subproject, including 
financial assessments, strategic fit, regulatory, compliance, environmental, social and gender 
considerations. AFD/PROPARCO will report on the disbursement of the loans to the GCF, and the 
input required from GCF will be minimal. The exit risk is minimal. (Maturity of loans is usually 20 years 
with a 5 year grace period and the implementation period is usually 6 years).

=== PAGE 53 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
175 
million euro (€)  
45 
million USD ($) 
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
131 million euro 
(€) 45 million USD 
($) 
25 years29 
12 years30 
Public 
sovereign/LDC: 
0.25% 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Public non-
sovereign/LDC, 
public 
sovereign/not 
LDC: 0.50% 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Public non-
sovereign/not 
LDC: 0.75% 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
Private sector: 
1.5% + Spread 
Commitment fee: 
Up to 0.5% p.a 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
44  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
837.5 
million euro (€) 
281 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & grace 
Pricing 
Senio
rity 
AFD Group 
Senior 
Loans 
 
830 
281 
million euro (€) 
million USD  
20 years22 
5 years23 
Enter% 
pari 
pass
u 
 
AFD 
Grant 
 
5 
million euro (€)  Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Optio
ns 
 
German 
Government 
Grant 
 
2.5 
million euro (€)  Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Optio
ns 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
1,012.5 
million euro (€)  
 
29 The tenor depends on the size of the loan, the economic profile of the subproject and the profile of the 
beneficiary. The tenor is calculated subproject by subproject. A tenor of 25 years is the maximum tenor possible 
for AFD loans.  
30 The programmatic approach allows to approve subprojects until year 5, then to implement this project until 
year 10, then to allow for 2 more year before repayments after the project generates incomes. Therefore, 12 
years is the longest grace period that is possible in the program.

=== PAGE 54 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
326 
million USD ($) 
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Some eligible Subprojects financed under PEEB Cool, both in the public and in the private 
sector, might be financed together with other financiers, as yet unidentified. These sources 
of finance are not considered co-financing but rather leveraged or parallel financing. 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate by source of 
financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the summarised cost estimates in the 
table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
 
 
 
 
Componen
t 
Output 
Indicati
ve cost  
million 
euro (€) 
Indicati
ve cost  
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amoun
t 
million 
euro (€) 
Amoun
t 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Amou
nt 
million 
euro 
(€) 
Amoun
t 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Name 
of 
Institu
tions 
Component 
1: 
Investment 
Facility 
   
Project 
owners are 
supported in 
the various 
phases of 
their 
investment 
26.8 
0 
22.8 
0 
Grants 
4 
0 
Grants 
AFD 
Investment 
appraisal 
961 
326 
131 
45 
Senior 
Loan 
 
830 
 
281 
Senior 
Loan 
AFD 
Group 
Component 
2: Enabling 
Facility  
Sectoral 
investment 
framework 
demonstrates 
potential for 
green 
recovery 
6.5 
0 
6.5 
0 
Grants 
0 
0 
Grants 
      
Policy 
proposals 
prepare the 
ground for 
building sector 
transformation 
8.8 
0 
6.8 
0 
Grants 
2.0 
0 
Grants 
Germa
n 
Gover
nment 
Private and 
public sector 
actors are 
enabled to 
work towards 
building sector 
transformation 
5.2 
0 
5.2 
0 
Grants 
0 
0 
 
 
Programme 
experience 
supports the 
global building 
sector 
transformation 
1 
0 
0.5 
0 
Grants  
0.5 
0 
Grants  
Germa
n 
Gover
nment

=== PAGE 55 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
Programme 
Manageme
nt Unit 
PMU 
3.2 
0 
2.2 
0 
Grants 
1 
0 
Grants 
AFD 
 
Indicative total cost 
(MEUR) 
1,012.5 
326 
175 
45 
 
837.5 
281 
 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity 
building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
 
The Programme includes extensive stakeholder engagement, notably through knowledge transfer and 
capacity building. Stakeholders involved directly in capacity building include Subproject owners and 
other Subproject stakeholders, building sector professionals such as architects and engineers, civil 
servants responsible for building regulations, policy makers and national and local government 
officials, representatives of financial institutions, representatives of companies in the buildings and 
construction value chain and verification offices. 
 
Capacity building activities will be conducted at Subproject level and policy level: 
 
● At Subproject level, project technical assistance will be hired for the whole Programme and will 
be mobilised through purchase orders to perform tailor-made activities for Subproject owners. 
Among those activities, it will be possible to mobilise those consultants to ask for a diagnosis 
of Subproject owner capacities and, if needed, technical assistance activities to improve 
technical knowledge of Subproject owners and stakeholders such as local companies directly 
involved in the Subproject’s implementation. 
 
● At policy level, capacity building will be offered to representatives from both the public and the 
private sector, to complement the activities in the Investment Facility and in particular to ensure 
sufficient implementation and enforcement capacities for successful public policies. Sectorial 
investment frameworks will be combined with capacity building activities for stakeholders such 
as architects, engineers. Previous training needs analyses in PEEB countries have already 
led to the development of short training and awareness raising modules, which will be 
expanded within PEEB Cool. Local authorities are targeted notably with trainings related to 
their authority of enforcement of national buildings regulation (i.e. through issuance and 
controlling of building permits). Together with partner institutions representation of all genders 
will be assured in the capacity building measures, 
As an example, Subprojects benefiting from PEEB Cool financing often require compliance 
with national and/or international certifications or building standards. In this case, this output 
may support the national capacity building process for that particular building or industry 
standard. Where useful, international standards such as DGNB, HQE, LEED will be taken into 
consideration for use or adaptation into the national context. Specific investment Subprojects 
will lead by example and apply i.e. HQE standards and thus create practical learning 
opportunities for the sector. 
The Enabling Facility (Component 2) includes the following capacity building activities for which GCF 
funding is requested:

=== PAGE 56 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
● Development and delivery of training and awareness raising measures as described above – 
on average less than 0.47 MEUR per country 
Stakeholder engagement more broadly will also target interested civil society organizations, the 
construction ecosystem and other interested parties who choose to participate in activities such as 
the national consultation meetings that will be encouraged to be held within output 2.2. In output 2.4, 
information will be made available regionally and internationally through a variety of knowledge 
products that will be disseminated via regional and global platforms. 
PEEB Cool is expected to provide technology transfer through the following actions (included within 
output 1.1): 
● Sharing knowledge on implementing bioclimatic design adapted to the climate context of the 
Subproject owner.   
● Sharing knowledge on implementing low carbon materials taking into account local material 
available in the Subproject owner’s country. 
● Sharing knowledge on implement efficient cooling technologies in hot climates. 
● Sharing know-how on simulation tools, for instance thermal dynamic simulations.

=== PAGE 57 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
As a cross-cutting programme, PEEB Cool will contribute to both mitigation and adaptation. The 
Programme will contribute to the following outcomes:  
• 
Outcome 1: Stimulated investment in the green building market 
• 
Outcome 2: Improved resilience of the most vulnerable populations as buildings are better 
adapated to climate change 
• 
Outcome 3: Reduced GHG emissions from buildings in the residential, education, health, and 
commercial sectors 
• 
Outcome 4: Improved regulatory frameworks include national energy efficiency regulations, 
construction standards and certification commitments by industry actors, as well as training and 
increased capacities of human resources.  
 
Below we describe the envisaged mitigation and adaptation impacts of the Programme. 
 
Given the fact that PEEB Cool is a multi-country programme, its impact in terms of both mitigation and 
adaptation was analysed following a portfolio approach. The analysis is based on an existing portfolio 
of large-scale building construction/renovation projects currently financed or to be financed by the AFD 
Group. The building types included in the analysis are social and mid-income housing units, healthcare 
centers, hospitals, schools, small office buildings, hotels and retail. Countries targeted for the analysis 
were assigned one of seven main climate zones (equatorial, tropical, humid subtropical, arid, 
Mediterranean, continental, and mountain climate).  
 
Mitigation impact - GHG emissions reduction at the scale of the whole Programme: 
 
● Direct impacts 
 
Direct mitigation impacts are due to reduced GHG emissions from buildings whose construction or 
renovation is financed by the PEEB Cool Programme. 
 
Baseline: The baseline for a specific Subproject describes the expected thermal performance and 
energy use by a conventional, business as usual design. The principles behind the baseline are further 
described in Section 4.3.1.2 of the Feasibility Study. Building simulation in the EDGE App31 or other, 
more detailed building thermal dynamic simulation software is then employed to model both the baseline 
case and an improved building.   
 
Methodology for estimation of the mitigation benefits: 
Baseline scenario: The analysis first estimated the emissions per m² by building type in each of 
the climate zone of the countries covered by PEEB Cool based on the baseline / standard 
construction and technology uses. This baseline is informed by an analysis of the common practices 
in construction in each country. This included ongoing electricity demand, ongoing natural gas 
demand, and the embedded energy in the construction materials. In some countries, there are 
common practices that include a certain consideration of energy efficiency, while in others there is 
no “common practice” that take efficiency considerations into account for cooling and materials use.  
 
With Programme scenario: The analysis then estimated the emissions per m2 for the same 
buildings using more energy efficient design practices, equipment, and lower-emissions construction 
 
31 https://edgebuildings.com/

=== PAGE 58 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
materials. Two cases were examined – where the ongoing energy consumption was approximately 
20% less and where the ongoing energy consumption was 40% less. The “with Programme” 
scenario involved averaging these two cases – assuming that across the portfolio there will be a mix 
of the two. 
 
Both the Baseline and With Programme energy consumption (in kWh/m2) and GHG emissions (in 
CO2/m2) were scaled up according to an estimate of m2 for each type of building to have 
investments – assuming full utilisation of the investments from the Subproject. For ongoing energy 
consumption, it is assumed that the energy and GHG values would be calculated for a period of 15 
years - which is less than the typical lifetime of a new building but reflective of the GCF’s 
recommendations. 
 
The avoided emissions are then calculated as the difference between the Baseline and With 
Programme scenarios.  
 
The construction phase accounts for anywhere from 42% to 46% of emissions reductions based on 
the feasibility analysis carried out for programme preparation. This shows that low carbon materials 
can play a significant part and represent short-term GHG emission reductions. 
 
A summary of the baseline emissions and emissions reductions from the Subproject list studied is 
provided below.  
Country 
Building 
type 
m2 
impacte
d 
Total GHG emissions over buildings lifetime 
(15 years) 
Emission reductions 
over buildings lifetime 
(average of 20% and 
40% reduction cases) 
  
  
  
Baseline 
20% 
reduction 
case 
40% reduction 
case 
  
  
  
m2 
tCO2  
tCO2  
tCO2  
tCO2  
Djibouti 
Office 
60,000 
138,431 
94,141 
58,664 
51,477 
Morocco 
Residential 
1,217,50
0 
1,423,934 
1,066,049 
977,457 
402,181 
Morocco 
Education 
11,250 
6,569 
5,633 
5,198 
1,153 
Nigeria 
Residential 
75,000 
72,650 
54,021 
50,643 
20,318 
Nigeria 
Retail 
14,000 
23,692 
19,510 
16,272 
5,801 
Tunisia 
Residential 
340,000 
346,089 
261,838 
237,098 
96,621 
Tunisia 
Hospital 
68,779 
169,495 
144,181 
128,399 
33,206 
Argentina 
Residential 
525,000 
514,227 
391,223 
346,625 
145,303 
Mexico 
Residential 
191,250 
168,320 
125,811 
117,196 
46,817 
Mexico 
Office 
60,000 
82,694 
58,227 
50,748 
28,206 
Indonesia 
Residential 
207,778 
253,965 
190,092 
181,452 
68,193 
Sri Lanka 
Office 
15,000 
27,355 
18,733 
15,995 
9,992 
Albania 
Hospital 
393,700 
424,307 
282,609 
266,907 
159,018 
Costa Rica 
Education 
72,800 
30,751 
26,663 
26,346 
4,246 
North Macedonia 
Retail 
393,700 
983,887 
796,345 
648,054 
261,687 
Total CO2 
reductions 
(tCO2/year) 
  
3,645,75
7 
4,666,366 
3,535,073 
3,127,054 
1,334,220 
 
Figure 11: Total GHG emissions reductions for Subproject pipeline studied 
 
The table above is based on the Subproject pipeline studied (1,099 MEUR of building infrastructure 
investment). In total, direct GHG emissions avoided extrapolated to the PEEB Cool program amount 
(1,287 MEUR and USD eq) are estimated at 1,562,759 tCO2eq over 25 years.

=== PAGE 59 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 
● Indirect impacts 
 
 
PEEB Cool approach is based on a scale up of good practices implemented in the Investment 
Facility. Thanks to the Enabling Facility, those new performance requirements can be generalized 
at national level.  
 
It is assumed that PEEB Cool will support the improvement of the building code of each country that 
have one 32, since the favorable regulatory environment of those countries makes it easier to 
replicate a subproject meeting the PEEB Cool specifications.  
 
 
 
Adaptation impact 
 
As described in Section B.1, temperature increases as a result of climate change in the targeted 
countries, which will affect thermal comfort in buildings. Current building infrastructure is sensitive to 
such climate-induced changes, meaning indoor temperatures often reach levels above the comfort 
threshold, as measured using the ‘ASHRAE 55-2017 Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human 
Occupancy ’ standard.  
 
To minimize vulnerability, adaptation measures such as bioclimatic design to improve ventilation and 
cooling can naturally lower indoor temperatures with limited energy consumption. Both actions can 
reduce health risks, heat exposure and economic loss.  
Concerning the overall pathway, improved thermal comfort will decrease climate vulnerability in the 
morbidity and mortality rates due to increased heat, fewer days for hospitalization, increased productivity 
in the commercial sector, as well as fewer days lost from education.   
Climate vulnerability in the residential sector is associated with increased indoor temperatures leading 
to respiratory, core temperature, blood glucose, mental health, and physical functioning clinical health 
effects.33 
Improvement of the thermal comfort will lower such impacts that have also been associated with an 
increased proportion of respiratory distress calls. 
Concerning adaptation benefits in the health sector, the improvement of thermal comfort helps maintain 
patients’ moods and improves their healing and moreover. Temperature is one of the major factors that 
influence the transmission and survivability of potential airborne pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, 
and fungi, which can pose severe health risks.34 
In a case study in Senegal,35 in the collective bedroom of a healthcare centre, in the baseline building 
82% of occupancy hours are outside the comfort zone with a ceiling fan in the 2020 climate. In a green 
building, a ceiling fan is sufficient to maintain comfort throughout the year. Should air conditioning be 
 
32 Albania, Argentina, Indonesia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka Tunisia, and Vietnam. 
33 . S. Tham, R. Thompson, O. Landeg, K.A. Murray, T. Waite, Indoor temperature and health: a global 
systematic review, Public Health, Volume 179, 2020, Pages 9-17 
34 Feng Yuan, Runming Yao, Sasan Sadrizadeh, Baiyi Li, Guangyu Cao, Shaoxing Zhang, Shan Zhou, Hong 
Liu, Anna Bogdan, Cristiana Croitoru, Arsen Melikov, C. Alan Short, Baizhan Li,Thermal comfort in hospital 
buildings – A literature review, Journal of Building Engineering, 
Volume 45, 2022, 103463, ISSN 2352-7102      
35 Source: Programme for mother and children health, financed by AFD for the design of three health centres, 
PEEB, Terao France, June 2020. Further details on this case are provided in the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 60 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
installed, the cooling power required would drop from 71 W/m2 to 47 W/m2. In a 2050 climate, in the 
baseline building the maximum indoor operative temperature reaches almost 36°C and almost all 
occupancy hours are uncomfortable, while in a green building the maximum temperature is reduced to 
32°C with about a third of occupancy hours outside the comfort zone. The construction cost of the 
baseline health center is 572 EUR/m2 and the construction cost of the improved project is 613 EUR/m2, 
bringing the incremental cost of the energy efficiency measures to 7%.  
As far as education and commercial uses are concerned, the main benefits are linked with increased 
productivity due to increased thermal comfort. Nevertheless, it must be said that both the level of 
productivity and the range of temperatures on thermal comfort may differ36. 
 
Number of direct and indirect beneficiaries 
 
Direct beneficiaries are defined as the users of buildings whose construction or renovation is financed 
by the PEEB Cool Programme. According to the Programme targets, in buildings without mechanical 
cooling PEEB Cool support will lead to an increase of at least 20% in thermal comfort of users of the 
building, and often this number will be much higher. 
To assess the number of beneficiaries for PEEB Cool, the Subproject portfolio that was analyzed was 
broken down by building type after having defined the direct beneficiaries for each building. The 
expectation is that any new building built will have a lifespan of 25 years – but with a direct impact from 
the Programme only lasting 15 years. 
In the residential sector the beneficiaries were calculated based on the number of households to be 
built/retrofitted in each country multiplied by the members of household in each country taking into 
consideration the assumption that a household will reside in a house for 15 years. The number of direct 
beneficiaries is the number of dwellings assuming 60 m2 per dwelling (i.e. m2 / 60) x number of people 
per household in specific countries . 
Education direct beneficiaries were assessed based on an average occupancy density of 5m2/person. 
It is assumed that a child will remain in the same school for 5 years so for a period of 15 years the 
number of direct beneficiaries is the (number of m2 / 5 m2 per person) x 3.  
 
Direct beneficiaries of the health sector were assessed based on the number of people served by 
health center/hospital per country. Beneficiaries correspond to the population covered and therefore 
are unique, even though they could use the healthcare services several times in the 15 year 
programme period.The calculation of direct beneficiaries is therefore the total population of the 
country / number of hospitals = population served per hospital (i.e. direct beneficiaries). 
 
Similarly to the case of education, for commercial use (retail buildings), beneficiaries have been based 
on the default occupancy density from the EDGE app of 28 m2/person. It was further assumed that 
during the 15 years period 1 business would use the same space. The number of direct beneficiaries 
is the (number of m2 / 28 m2 per person). 
 
For offices beneficiaries have been based on the default occupancy density the EDGE app of 28 
m2/person. It was further assumed that during the 15 years period 2 different people would use the 
same space (i.e. approximately 12 year average usage). The number of direct beneficiaries is the 
(number of m2 / 28 m2 per person) x 2. 
 
 
36 Bueno, A.M.; de Paula Xavier, A.A.; Broday, E.E. Evaluating the Connection between Thermal Comfort and 
Productivity in Buildings: A Systematic Literature Review. Buildings 2021, 11, 244.

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
While the direct beneficiaries have been accounted for withint a timeframe of 15 years (from year 1 to 
year 15), the indirect beneficiaries have been accounted for within the following 10 year timeframe (from 
year 16 to year 25). For example, taking the education beneficiaries example in Costa Rica: 
Direct: (number of m2 / 5 m2 per person) x3 i.e. over 15 years from year 1 to 15= 72,800/5*3=43,680 
 
Indirect: (number of m2 / 5 m2 per person) x2 i.e. over 10 years from year 16 to year 25= 
72,800/5*2=29,120 
 
The same approach is  adopted for residential, office and retail beneficiaries. For health, indirect 
beneficiaries are assumed as zero.  
The number of indirect beneficiaries has been computed only for the education sector – as the impacts 
are only modeled for a 10 year period after the first 15 years of implementation. While additional indirect 
impacts could occur (especially in the residential sector), this was not estimated so as to use a 
conservative approach.The total number of direct beneficiaries of the PEEB Cool Programme has been 
estimated at about 1.133 million people. The total number of indirect beneficiaries of the Programme is 
33,620 people. 
 
Further details on the methodologies used to calculate both the mitigation and the adaptation impact at 
the Programme level as well as detailed examples of assessments made of individual Subprojects are 
provided in the Feasibility Study (chapter 5), in Annex 22b and in Annex 22c. 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Programme will contribute to a paradigm shift across a number of different countries and even 
globally – wherein increasing attention will be paid to cooling and heating needs when designing and 
financing building construction. The programme offers a huge opportunity for a paradigm shift, at a 
time when demand is increasing for cooling as temperatures rise. PEEB Cool will reduce emissions 
from the cooling sector through the development of bioclimatic buildings, whilst also improving the 
thermal comfort of its beneficiaries and consequently their climate resiliency.  
Specifically, the programme will target clean cooling in developing countries and emerging economies 
in hot climates, using sustainable building construction materials that make the most out of locally 
sourced materials and construction techniques. By creating demonstrable Subprojects in its target 
countries, the potential of PEEB Cool can leveraged across other parts of the developing world, 
learning from its approach and best practices. By incorporating passive (bioclimatic) measures to 
maintain cooler temperatures than conventional buildings, cool buildings can increase the resilience to 
temperature increases of inhabitants and users of buildings which are not mechanically cooled. Such 
building design also reduces cooling demand (on average 20 to 30% reduction in hot climates). Aside 
from bioclimatic design, other innovative strategies of the PEEB Cool programme include integrating 
energy efficiency programmes, such as through an energy labelling programme, the use of renewable 
energy to power cooling systems, and low carbon district cooling networks. Energy efficiency 
requirements can further reduce the consumption of passive buildings by 30 to 40%. This will be done 
through a few main mechanisms as detailed below: 
Scaling up and replication of financing - As shown in the theory of change (section C.2), by 
demonstrating the financial and technical feasibility of buildings incorporating bioclimatic design, 
energy efficient air conditioning and appliances, and on-site renewable energy production, the 
Investment Facility (Component 1) will remove barriers related to lack of experience with and 
awareness of the benefits of green building.  The Programme is designed to facilitate the creation of a 
replicable and scalable financing model for green buildings. In Component 1, credit lines especially 
through local banks combined with technical assistance will generate a pipeline of bankable

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
Subprojects, demonstrating the potential of this market segment to local financial institutions. 
Component 2 supports sustainable financing through awareness raising and capacity building of the 
financial sector on the subject, together with the creation of partnerships that can support the 
developed financial products, for example with consultants. The moderate extra cost of PEEB Cool 
Subprojects can be absorbed by the market without the use of subsidies once the initial “triggering” 
effect has been achieved. For the paradigm shift, it is critical that finance institutions, building 
professionals, and consumers recognize that investment in green buildings – with a special focus on 
cooling demand and materials use – are beneficial from a financial perspective and in terms of 
increased comfort and value of real estate. This paradigm shift can be expected to occur in the 
products offered by financial institutions and in the considerations for future investment. There is a 
large potential for scaling up. In most countries in the Programme, especially in Africa, there is an 
urgent need for more public facilities such as schools and clinics. Population growth and rapid 
urbanisation mean that the need for construction of new housing and new facilities such as healthcare 
and educational buildings is only going to intensify in the coming decades. At the same time, a 
transformation is needed, since in many of the Sub-Sahara African countries even the short-term 
needs are hardly met by current programmes. A programme and financing such as that provided by 
PEEB Cool are essential to show the way to addressing climate mitigation and adaptation objectives.  
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning - With a 50% increase in global floor area expected 
by 2050, much of which in countries targeted by PEEB Cool (including large, fast growing countries 
such as Indonesia and Nigeria), the change in construction practices encouraged by the Programme 
will impact the future emission footprint and adaptive capacities of a large number of buildings and 
users. Output 2.4 of PEEB Cool is dedicated to dissemination of PEEB Cool Programme results at the 
national and international levels. This ensures knowledge sharing and learning not only among PEEB 
Cool partner countries but also in the global buildings and construction industry, through participation 
in international conferences, networking events, publications, webinars, and through partnerships with 
other global networks with a large reach (such as the International Development Finance Club, Global 
Alliance for Buildings and Construction, NDC Partnership, World Green Building Council, World 
Resources Institute, and International Real Estate Federation). In other PEEB Cool Programme 
activities, the technical assistance teams of the Investment Facility will provide training sessions for 
the local actors involved in the Programme with results shared on social media and dedicated internet 
sites. The GIZ team in each country involve buildings and construction sector networks such as 
national alliances to build momentum and ensure a widespread replication of PEEB Cool activities 
and results nationally. The existing PEEB social media presence (website, Twitter, etc.) will be 
adapted and grow to reflect this scaling up. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment - Through the PEEB Cool Enabling 
Facility’s activities, incomplete regulatory frameworks, implementation capacities for operation of 
buildings and energy management over their lifetime, or market distortions, will be addressed and 
removed at national levels – with long-lasting impacts on the paradigm in construction beyond the 
duration of PEEB Cool. By changing the incentives for market participants through reduced financing 
costs for energy efficiency projects, the risks and barriers around deployment of low-emission and 
climate-resilient solutions in the buildings and construction sector are directly targeted.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies - PEEB Cool’s Enabling Facility explicitly 
addresses the need to introduce, enforce, and raise the ambition of regulations and policies to 
decarbonise the building sector and improve its adaptive capacity. Thanks to longstanding GIZ 
experience and relationship with line ministries in the PEEB Cool partner countries and the 
embedding of the Enabling Facility’s activities in established bilateral cooperation projects, PEEB Cool 
will contribute to improvement of the regulatory framework and transfer experiences internationally. 
This policy level work with will complement construction Subprojects financed within the Investment

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
Facility, allows for the demonstration of the feasibility of technical ambition raising, application of 
building energy efficiency labels, etc. 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant 
national climate change adaptation strategies and plans - During PEEB Cool implementation, the 
performance of all financed Subprojects will be studied under future climate conditions using climate 
models. This will enable achievement of the aim to construct buildings which will still be comfortable in 
the 2050 climate. The models and technical findings will be used in the Enabling Facility to support the 
updating and developing of national regulations, minimum standards or other commitments that 
ensure a national sector-wide application of improved climate-resilient building standards, without 
increasing the cost base. The models showing the future improved thermal comfort and resilience of 
building users as well as the experiences with technical and regulatory changes will be transferred 
among PEEB Cool partner countries and internationally through dissemination activities, essentially to 
de-risk investment in better building design and better building technologies. 
Sections describing the expected paradigm shift in each country are included in Annex 2b (the feasibility 
study annex). 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The construction of cool, energy efficient buildings has wider benefits for health, the environment, 
economic co-benefits, other social co-benefits as well as gender-sensitive development. In addition to 
SDG 13 Climate Action the Programme will contribute to the following SDGs: 
● 3 Good health and wellbeing 
 
For example, Indicator 3.4 – Mortality rate attributed to cardiovascular disease or chronic 
respiratory illnesses. High indoor temperatures exacerbate these diseases. Constructing 
buildings with improved thermal comfort could contribute to achieving country targets for this 
indicator. 
 
● 5 Gender equality 
 
The Programme’s gender action plan includes activities that aim to increase the number of 
women benefiting from gender sensitive housing, commercial or social infrastructure and the 
number of women gaining access to long-term formal employment.  
 
● 7 Affordable and clean energy 
 
For example, the Programme will support the installation of rooftop solar PV on buildings, thus 
contribute to access to affordable and clean energy. 
 
● 8 Decent work and economic growth 
 
By supporting the construction of buildings that are also workplaces (administrative, commercial, 
industrial, health and education facilities), the Programme will contribute to decent work and 
increased productivity. 
  
● 9 Industry, innovation and infrastructure 
 
For example, Indicator 9.1 – Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure 
and Indicator 9.4 – Upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with 
increased resource-use efficiency and the adoption of clean technologies and processes.

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
The Programme will support actors in the construction value chain to improve their processes, 
contributing to the increased penetration of clean technologies and processes in the industry. 
 
● 11 Sustainable cities and communities 
 
The Programme will support the construction of public buildings such as schools and medical 
facilities as well as social housing. Ensuring access to affordable housing and basic services will 
strengthen communities and make them more inclusive  
 
The specific sustainable development impacts of each Subproject under the PEEB Cool Programme 
will depend on the local circumstances (climate, country type of project). Below we describe the 
observed co-benefits of cool, energy efficient buildings. 
 
● 
Environmental co-benefits 
Air quality will be improved as a result of the reduced demand for grid electricity due to the supported 
Subprojects, which will decrease the emission of other pollutants to the air as well as CO2 eq. Air, 
water and soil quality will be improved due to a reduction in pollution as a result of better sorting and 
disposal of construction waste and waste linked to the operation of buildings. Buildings will also be 
designed to use less water and for a reduction in light pollution through a better design of exterior 
lighting, a reduction of noise pollution, and improvement of indoor air quality.  
We will select some Subprojects in PEEB Cool which will have an environmental certification (HQE, 
EDGE, BREEAM, LEED or a national certification) to maximise those environmental co-benefits.  
● 
Social co-benefits 
While quantitative data is scarce, especially in developing countries, the health impacts of high indoor 
temperatures are known to include heat stress and heat strokes, headaches, dizziness, sleep 
disturbance and an increase in respiratory illnesses. As most people spend the vast majority of their 
time indoors, improving indoor thermal comfort will reduce the number of deaths associated with high 
temperatures and limit the stress on healthcare systems that may struggle for capacity, as well as 
spending on health care. Thermal comfort in hospital buildings in particular is essential. Studies have 
shown that a good thermal environment is beneficial to both professional and patients.37 
Benefits to education are hard to quantify. However, many studies reinforce the point that high 
classroom temperatures yield undesirable impacts, both on academic performance and perception of 
comfort. For example, in Costa Rica, a study of students completing tasks under different classroom 
temperature conditions found that those in lower temperature environments performed better.38 In 
environments where ventilation is higher, temperatures are cooler and classrooms are more 
comfortable, the quality of education and results are higher.  
In the long run, these benefits mean that PEEB Cool’s work at the public policy and Subproject levels 
improves equality of living conditions, a major aspect of social justice. 
 
● 
Economic co-benefits 
Economic co-benefits include poverty alleviation due to a reduction in energy bills for the users of 
buildings. For example, energy consumption for cooling of social housing in Tunis in 2050 will be 50% 
 
37 Broady, P. Xavier, A. (2020). Thermal comfort applied in hospital environments: A literature review.  
38 Porras-Salazar, J. W. (2018). Reducing classroom temperature in a tropical climate 
improved the thermal comfort and the performance of elementary school pupils.

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
higher in a business-as-usual housing unit than in a well designed housing unit, with a corresponding 
saving in energy costs for residents. 
It is expected that the Programme will create 27,000 jobs primarily in construction activities. PEEB 
Cool is designed to boost partner countries’ efforts in their economic recovery from the impacts of the 
COVID-19 pandemic.39 Since a large share of the value added in the construction sector occurs 
domestically, policies for low carbon buildings can also contribute to creating future-proof jobs in this 
sector. Jobs will be created within the entire construction and building value chain: as a result of the 
use of local materials or the re-use of building materials, through development of building renovation, 
and more broadly since environmentally sound buildings are more labour-intensive than conventional 
buildings. The Programme will be a catalyst for the development of a building-oriented economy 
involving local actors and less dependent on imported materials and know-how.  
Comfortable office and indoor working environments are essential to employee well-being and health, 
overall team and/or organisation performance and hence contribute to financial performance and 
enhancement of incomes. A more comfortable environment promotes productivity and reduces 
absenteeism. For example, in Singapore, with a tropical climate, systems improvements that 
increased ventilation rate cost less than 1% of the wages of an office worker. When we consider that 
the benefits were increased productivity, less sick building syndrome symptoms, reduced sick leave, 
the incremental cost of ventilation was significantly less than the benefits.   
● 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
The Programme targets a sector where women are under-represented. The Programme will support 
local private or public partners to improve women’s working conditions, women’s leadership and 
entrepreneurship amongst others. Further details are provided in annex 8, gender assessment and 
action plan. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
As the effects of climate change become increasingly more visible and disruptive, all the target 
countries face the threat of temperature increases. This, therefore, shines a spotlight on the 
infrastructure in these countries that currently is not fit for purpose. Inefficient cooling and heating 
systems and/or ineffective building design mean that in future buildings will see higher indoor 
temperatures and limited thermal comfort. This is especially the case in areas of low-income 
residential housing and working environments with limited cooling – areas targeted within the 
Programme. With continued population growth expected, especially rapid urbanisation in already large 
cities, more people are at risk from the impacts of climate change combined with buildings that are 
unfit for purpose.  
As most people spend the majority of their time indoors, ensuring building environments are at a 
comfortable temperature allows for thermal comfort to be regulated. In turn, this can limit the risks of 
health impacts associated with high indoor temperatures (dizziness, headaches, loss of concentration, 
exacerbation of pre-existing respiratory illness, heatstroke), increase the productivity of indoor workers 
and enhance learning and attainment for children in classrooms.  
In densely populated cities, hotter temperatures and the heat island effect pose a dual threat. Mexico 
City, for example, expects to experience maximum temperature increases of 6 degrees Celsius under 
a high emissions scenario. Considering studies have already shown that dwelling in Mexico with 
 
39 According to IEA (Sustainable Recovery, July 2020), close to 10% of the global workforce today is involved in building 
activities (construction, manufacturing, etc.). Construction and investments in the building sector have been directly 
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in 25 million of jobs lost or at risks in the sector. National incentives to 
improve the efficiency of buildings and appliances can be implemented quickly and would create 10-15 jobs per million 
dollars invested.

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure deficiencies can be 5 degrees hotter than ambient temperature, future heat could 
become unbearable.   
Vulnerability and exposure of beneficiary groups to climate change risks and impacts: 
The Programme will invest in Subprojects addressing climate change impacts on low-income families 
(related to social housing), children (related to schools, especially those in rural areas), and sick 
people (related to healthcare centres and hospitals). In many countries in the Programme, the 
population is very young, meaning that many new education facilities need to be built. This is 
particularly the case in Sub-Sahara African countries, as illustrated for example by the population 
pyramid for Nigeria below. 
 
Figure 12: Age pyramid in Nigeria (2017) 
 
The socio-economic resilience of all social strata of the 
targeted communities will be strengthened as a result of 
PEEB Cool investments, but the focus will be on low- and 
middle-income groups. Green buildings and energy 
efficiency in buildings provides a wide range of benefits, 
including improved health, increased local spending and 
employment, less energy subsidies, higher property 
values, etc. Green buildings used by low-income groups 
also address social inclusion by providing comfortable 
housing and better quality educational and health 
facilities. 
 
Potential of the proposed Programme or project to strengthen institutional and implementation 
capacity 
In many countries there are no effective energy efficiency building codes that would help enforce 
requirements that prevent climate change vulnerability. The development of energy efficiency building 
codes and other related standards is important to set requirements for private investment. Such public 
policies are developed within the Programme, based on the lessons learned from demonstration 
projects to make sure they are adapted to the local context and create a momentum. They are further 
complemented by capacity building measures to ensure sound application of said public policies for 
the concerned stakeholders (architects, engineers, municipal officers, etc.). Moreover, on the 
Subproject level, the Programme provides excellent opportunities to deliver information and training to 
local stakeholders, especially the departments in the sectoral ministries (e.g. health, education) that 
are in charge of managing operational projects. We usually find that sectoral stakeholders are very 
interested in these approaches but have little to no knowledge of the concepts of energy efficiency 
and bioclimatic architecture, which means there is a great progress potential. 
Absence of alternative source of financing 
Despite the importance of improving energy efficiency in buildings in the fight against climate change, 
the financing of energy efficiency in buildings remains marginal. Indeed, energy efficiency investments 
amounted to around 250 billion USD in 2018 whereas 1,090 billion USD would be needed each year 
between 2016-2050 to meet the objective of the Paris Agreement of staying below an increase of 
2°C40.  
 
40 IRENA, 2019

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
While targeted investment amounts had not been reached in the past, the COVID-19 crisis has led to 
a dramatic worsened of public finance. The IMF41 projects global public debt to increase to more than 
100 percent of GDP this year. This will even more hinder countries’ means to finance investments in 
climate adaptation and mitigation. 
Moreover, in many of the PEEB Cool countries, “factors such as the stability of local currencies and 
the creditworthiness of national financial institutions can be critical in the availability of finance.” 
Political risk and unrest, as well as weak enforcement of binding contracts can put off potential 
investors.42 Equally, weak institutions and limited capacity for funding research and development, 
technological innovation and educational initiatives often hinder government or national finance.  
The IFC states in its report “Green Buildings – A finance and policy blueprint for emerging markets” 
that “Many emerging markets face the urgent need to meet the shortfall in affordable housing. The 
priority has been placed on building fast and at scale, while the attention on green construction has 
been lagging. The green buildings market is currently too nascent to scale and compete with the cost 
margins of conventional practices. Development finance institutions can help demonstrate the viability 
of affordable green housing finance through their own investments in partnership with private lenders 
for the market to follow.” 
• 
For information on the vulnerability of each of the countries that are part of PEEB Cool see the 
country forms in the annex of the Feasibility Study. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The table below summarises some important elements of country ownership: 
 
 
Country 
Existing 
national 
strategy 
for 
EE 
Alignment with NDC 
Building 
energy 
code 
Cool 
Coalition 
partners 
Albania 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
- 
Argentina 
X 
Not explicit mention 
Yes 
Yes 
Costa Rica 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
No 
 
Djibouti 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
No 
(under 
preparation) 
Yes 
Indonesia 
X 
Not explicit mention 
Yes 
(but 
limited 
scope) 
- 
Mexico 
X 
Not explicit mention 
Yes 
- 
Morocco 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
Yes 
Nigeria 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
(but 
limitied 
scope) 
Yes 
North 
Macedonia 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
Yes 
 
41 IMF, Investing in a green recovery, September 2020 
42 UNEP Finance Initiative (2016). Demystifying adaptation finance for the private sector.

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
Sri Lanka 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
(but 
limited 
scope) 
Yes 
Tunisia 
X 
NDC 
mentions 
buildings 
Yes 
- 
 
 
Country ownership, including existing strategies and policies on energy in the building sector and 
adaptation, is described more in detail for each country in the respective country form. 
The Programme development has involved consultations with stakeholders, which are detailed in 
Annex 7. The Programme has been designed based on the needs that emerged from countries and 
experience of PEEB programme. For this reason, some consultations have also taken place with 
potential Subproject owners, such as in Indonesia. These potential Subproject owners include banks, 
health care providers, educational institutions and government organisations at all levels. 
AFD will involve NDAs during the implementation phase of PEEB Cool by providing information on 
activities carried out and Subprojects financed. 
All countries covered by the PEEB Cool Programme have a national strategy or plan for energy 
efficiency with varying levels of precision and advancement. Many countries on that list have included 
specific commitments to GHG mitigation in the building sector in their NDCs. 
Some countries of PEEB Cool, such as Mexico, Nigeria and Indonesia, participate in the KIGALI multi-
country programme regarding the energy efficiency of cooling systems, which includes actions such 
as the replacement of cooling systems with poor performance, the elimination of HFC refrigerants, and 
the energy performance labelling of equipment.  
Many countries seek to develop the use of renewable energy, mostly through decentralised PV 
systems and mini grids. The labelling of energy performance for cooling systems and home 
appliances is often part of a national action plan. Among the countries of PEEB Cool, only twelve have 
or are developing building energy codes (with various degrees of application).  
We have found very few countries with a national plan to develop local materials or low carbon 
materials. 
One of the unexpected outcomes of the ongoing PEEB programme has been the extent of country 
ownership resulting from synergies between the policy and project level activities, and how this 
supports sustaining the country ownership post-programme. In many PEEB countries, there are 
programmes in the building sector such as those oriented towards the construction of social housing 
units, schools and healthcare centres, which involve various stakeholders including government 
agencies, NGOs, private or public multilateral funds.  
In Tunisia, where AFD is financing the renovation and extension of a hospital, as well as the 
construction of another hospital. Both of them integrate energy efficiency measures discussed with 
local actors. In addition, GIZ has prepared a guide for energy efficiency in health facilities that will 
enable employees of the Ministry of Health (that have benefited from training activities) to apply 
energy efficiency solutions not only in those two projects but also in the other projects planned for the 
next years. The Ministry of Health is planning more than a dozen large regional hospitals, meaning 
that the impact of PEEB’s support will extend well beyond the project itself. 
In short, since the Programme team works on both project and policy level activities, this enables the 
identification of opportunities where policy level support can build on the momentum created by 
successful investment projects to create a lasting impact on certain sectors.

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
The Programme will work with local financial intermediaries in the PEEB Cool countries including banks 
and housing developers. Section 6.1 on the Feasibility Study lists financial intermediaries that have 
already been identified. Additional intermediaries will be added to the list during the course of progamme 
preparation and implementation.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency regarding financial and non-financial aspects 
The financial model has assessed the annual debt service for a Subproject owner of a business-as-
usual building Subproject (without EE measures) financed by AFD Group loan (“business-as-usual” or 
“BAU”). The BAU was compared to the annual debt service of the same Subproject taking into account 
EE measures financed by GCF and AFD (“green building scenario”). The question in the analysis was 
whether the increase of annual debt service with energy efficiency measures was compensated by 
GCF concessionality, compared to BAU, and to which extent. 
During Programme implementation, the share of GCF co-financing will be calculated in order to cover 
the incremental debt service cost. This structure will address the financial barrier at investment while 
providing the minimum concessionality. 
The Programme is designed to address efficiently the various bottlenecks restraining EE investments in 
buildings: financing barriers, technical barriers and regulatory barriers. The use of concessional loans 
will encourage the Subproject owners to engage into greener buildings.  
By developing a local offer as detailed in section B.3 the Programme will not crowd out private 
investment but instead pave the way by creating an enabling environment so that private sector can 
take lead at the end of the Programme and ensure sustainability of the impacts. 
 
Cost-effectiveness 
 The table below shows the cost effectiveness per tCO2eq 
reduction and per beneficiary of GCF contributions. 
Total budget (MEUR or USD eq) 
€1,338.50 
GCF contribution (MEUR or USD eq) 
€220.00 
GCF grant (MEUR or USD eq) 
€44.00 
Mitigation 
GCF allocation for mitigation 
35% 
Direct emissions reductions (tCO2eq - lifetime) 
1,562,759 
Total programme cost per tCO2eq reduced (lifetime) – EUR or 
USD eq 
€299.77 
GCF contribution per tCO2eq reduced (lifetime) – EUR or USD eq 
€49.27 
GCF grant per tCO2eq reduced (lifetime) - EUR or USD eq 
€9.85 
Adaptation / beneficiaries 
Total direct beneficiaries 
1,133,261 
Total indirect beneficiaries 
33,620 
GCF allocation for adaptation 
65% 
Total program cost per beneficiary (EUR or USD eq) 
€1,181.10 
GCF contribution per beneficiary (EUR or USD eq) 
€194.13 
GCF grant per beneficiary (EUR or USD eq) 
€38.83 
 
It is important to note that that PEEB Cool is a cross-cutting programme as c. 65% of total investment 
will be directed towards adaptation Subprojects (i.e. social housings, education) that are low energy 
intensive. In those Subprojects, the added value of PEEB Cool is to provide resilience to climate

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
change by improving living and studying conditions (and lowering climate change impact on those 
conditions).  
Programme financial viability and other financial indicators 
Economic internal rate of return (EIRR) has been assessed in Annex 3 by taking into account financial 
savings, GHG avoidance and improved comfort of buildings. In total, EIRR for the Programme is 
assessed at 48.5%. This is strongly influenced by the estimated positive impact per direct beneficiary 
(estimated at 76 EUR or USD eq/beneficiary-year). This shows the economic viability of the envisaged 
energy efficiency investments. This ratio is well above the GCF benchmark. 
Several Subprojects were analysed representatives of the main types of Subprojects figured out in the 
Programme (social housing, public or private buildings financing) combined with different profiles of 
energy efficiency savings and climate change types (mitigation/adaptation), and low or middle-income 
Subproject owner. Specific data sets were constructed on the basis of inputs provided by AFD and 
Proparco and IFC’s EDGE Buildings App. 
With GCF blending, the incremental debt service costs for green buildings are reduced to a value that 
stakeholders in the targeted countries are willing and able to invest at the current nascent stage of the 
market for such buildings. 
In all cases, the involvement of GCF finance makes an important difference. The over cost triggered by 
the EE measures in the annual debt service is considerably offset, when there is GCF concessionality 
– making an important difference in improving the ratio of financial savings from energy to increased 
debt service in all cases where the goal is climate change mitigation.  
The level of concessionality of GCF used in the model vary depending on the counterpart (private, 
sovereign or non (or quasi-sovereign) and level of development of country (least developed countries 
(LDC) or not), and takes into consideration some cases where the level of concessionality from AFD 
Group is already high. The level of share of GCF financing shall be higher in some cases to maximize 
the impact of the concessionality and in the example cases below shall be up to 50%. The detailed 
methodology for calculation of the degree of concessionality is described in the section 4.3.1 on the 
Feasibility Study. 
This table below shows the main outcomes of the model analysis: 
 
Case 
Summary of investments 
Adaptation/mitigatio
n case 
Simple payback period
(Years) 
1 
Djibouti - Office, Credit lines for energy efficient renovation 
Mitigation 
3 
3 
Morocco - Mid-income social housing (mitigation), Credit lines for mortgages 
for construction. Impact examined per mortgage at a retail level from the 
point of view of the homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Mitigation 
5 
4 
Morocco - Education, Direct lending for energy efficient construction 
Adaptation 
>20 
5 
Nigeria - Residential, Credit lines for mortgages for construction. Impact 
examined per mortgage at a retail level from the point of view of the 
homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Mitigation 
12 
6 
Nigeria - Mall (mitigation), Direct lending for construction. Calculated per 
transaction from the point of view of the property owner 
Adaptation 
6 
7 
Tunisia - Residential, Credit lines for mortgages for construction. Impact 
examined per mortgage at a retail level from the point of view of the 
homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Adaptation 
3 
8 
Tunisia - Hospital, Direct lending for energy efficient construction 
Mitigation 
3 
9 
Argentina - Residential, Credit lines for mortgages for construction. Impact 
examined per mortgage at a retail level from the point of view of the 
homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Adaptation 
13

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
10 
Mexico - Residential, Credit lines for mortgages for construction. Impact 
examined per mortgage at a retail level from the point of view of the 
homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Adaptation 
20 
35%
11 
Mexico - Office, Direct lending for energy efficient construction. 
Mitigation 
4 
108
12 
Indonesia - Residential, Credit lines for mortgages for construction. Impact 
examined per mortgage at a retail level from the point of view of the 
homeowner (60 m2 per dwelling). 
Adaptation 
6 
103
13 
Sri Lanka - Office, Direct lending for energy efficient construction 
Mitigation 
3 
84%
15 
Albania - Hospital, Direct lending for energy efficient renovation. 
Mitigation 
10 
63%
16 
Costa Rica - Training center (adaptation), Direct lending for energy efficient 
construction. 
Adaptation 
7 
33%
17 
North Macedonia - Retail, Direct transactions for potentially numerous 
buildings in one transaction - renovation. Calculated per transaction from the 
point of view of the property owner. 
Adaptation 
19 
36%
 
 
Co-financing, co-leveraging ratio and mobilised long-term investments 
The co-financing ratio is calculated based on GCF, AFD Group and German Government financing 
amounts.  
(i) 
GCF financial contribution: 175,000,000 EUR and 45,000,000 USD 
(ii) 
Total co-financing contributions: 837,500,000 EUR and 281,000,000 USD 
(iii) 
GCF co-financing ratio : 17% on the EUR part and 14% on the USD part 
 
The leverage effect on the GCF resources equals 4.79 for EUR part and 6.24 for USD part. 
The expected indirect/long-term low-emission investment mobilised as a result of the implementation of 
Programme activities, notably within Component 2, is significant, as the public policies supported will 
deliver climate impact beyond the Programme’s lifespan through generalisation of minimum standards 
or practices. 
Because of the expertise and capacity building that accompany the financing projects and the public 
policies to be implemented, know-how and expertise will by acquired in energy efficiency by the local 
actors of the building sector, which will ensure the construction of high quality low-emission buildings in 
the future. Moreover, when relevant, the Programme will prepare sectoral energy efficiency guides for 
developers to help them promote energy efficiency measures in their future investments. Coupled with 
the investment frameworks to be developed in key related sectors, market and therefore business and 
investment opportunities will be identified to set the scene for mobilising long-term investments 
independent of the Programme. 
 
Application of best practices 
The Funding Proposal has been prepared by the PEEB secretariat, which works under the umbrella of 
the Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (Global ABC). Being a member of the Global ABC 
steering committee, PEEB is fully aware of the latest developments in the building sectors.  
Component 2 is based on the vast experience of GIZ in supporting partner governments in their energy 
transition. All activities, in particular the public policies proposed, will therefore be based on the best 
available information and practices in OECD countries and in international development cooperation.

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential 
scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the 
project/programme will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section 
B.2(a) (theory of change).        
 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Cooling in the building 
sector is currently reliant 
on mechanical systems 
which contribute to 
GHG emissions. 
Moreover, due to the 
increased cost of 
bioclimatic and green 
building measures, 
mechanical cooling is 
favoured. As 
temperatures increase 
Low 
Paradigm shift would result in a move 
away from mechanical cooling towards 
green buildings that are designed using 
the principles of passive cooling. 
Behaviour change would result in less 
uptake of mechanical cooling and a shift 
towards the use of low carbon materials 
for construction and buildings that are 
bioclimatic in design.  
Describe key applicable outputs and or 
resulting outcomes relevant to increasing 
(scaling up) quantifiable results within and 
beyond the scope of the intervention. 
 
The intervention is projected to deliver 
1,562,759 tCO2eq from reduced or 
avoided direct emissions.

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
with climate change, 
this will result in even 
more GHG emissions.  
Replicability 
Some knowledge 
sharing and 
communication activities 
have taken place 
including PEEB 
publications on their 
experiences, best 
practices and case 
studies.  
Demonstration projects 
of energy efficiency 
buildings are lacking.  
Medium 
PEEB cool Subprojects will have a high 
demonstration effect and will create a 
local demand for energy efficiency 
services. 
The cumulated effects of the increase of 
local demand due to the demonstration 
effect of flagship Projects, trained actors, 
enabling regulatory environment, and 
knowledge of best practices will lead to 
the development of the local market for 
energy efficiency materials / services. 
 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be 
replicated to other sectors, markets, 
geographical regions, or countries. 
Technical and financial success factors 
will be identified with the programme 
team and stakeholders, and 
incorporated into PEEB’s future 
publications.  
 
International awareness on replicable 
projects will also be fostered by 
dissemination of the Programme’s 
impact at international events. PEEB 
Cool’s results will benefit from 
knowledge sharing and communication 
activities as well as current PEEB’s 
international presence. 
 
PEEB Cool will allow energy efficiency 
projects to be implemented in the 
Programme’s countries. It is expected 
that the majority of projects will be led 
by public actors with high replicative 
effect. 
Sustainability 
There is little appetite to 
pay the high upfront 
costs for green buildings 
and a lack of willingness 
to invest. Financing is 
hard to obtain and there 
Low 
Paradigm shift would see sustainable 
governmental support for green buidlings 
accompanied by a profitable market 
where incentives clearly favour the 
development of green buildings. 
Behaviour change across the countries 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be sustained 
beyond the project/programme period. 
The availability of the necessary 
technologies will be increased as a 
result of the demand created by the 
Programme investments and capacity

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
is limited availability of 
the necessary 
technologies due to a 
lack of demand.  
would support this, where beneficiaries 
demonstrate a preference for bioclimatic, 
passive cooling measures.  
building provided to the construction 
sector. 
The enabling environment will 
generate an appetite among project 
owners for developing the portfolio of 
green buildings, leading to a growing 
market for such investments. The 
financial incentives offered by the 
Programme, the involvement of 
financial intermediaries in the 
Programme and capacity building of 
financial institutions, will make it easier 
to obtain finance.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected 
as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final43 
 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
 
Ex ante building (or 
industry) simulation / 
energy audits 
Data from energy 
monitoring system  
 
0 
Lifetime impact 
of buildings 
constructed at 
the 6 year 
mark (mid 
term): 
1,562,759 
tCO2 eq – 
direct 
emissions 
 
Methodology44 further 
described in the chapter 
5 of the Feasibility Study. 
 
43 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective. 
 
44 The avoided GHG emissions estimated cover emission reduction derived from both the construction phase,  as well as from the energy savings during the operational phase 
of the buildings, over a period of 15 years. IFI Guidelines for a Harmonized Approach to Greenhouse Gas Accounting, IFC EDGE are applied.

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
Independent ex-ante 
and ex-post verifications 
conducted by a 3rd party 
contractor  
Independent surveys 
conducted by a 3rd party 
contractor 
 
807,208 tCO2 
eq direct 
emissions 
 
 
Please refer to Annex 22 
in addition to the 
feasibility study.  
Main assumptions: 
- Uses the emission 
factors of electricity for 
each country and a 
single gas emission 
factor for all countries 
- Building lifespan 
considered: 15 years.   
Construction finished on 
time to conduct ex post 
analyses during the 
Programme duration 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings 
Ex post energy 
bills/survey 
 
0 
139,960 MWh 
per year 
233,267 MWh 
per year 
Energy savings of 30% 
are assumed for 
electricity and natural gas 
for each type of building 
in each country. Refer to 
annex 22c for the 
calculations.  
It is assumed that 60% of 
the programme will be 
rolled out after 7 years. 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
 
Independent surveys 
conducted by a 3rd party 
contractor 
 
 
0 building users 
experience 
better thermal 
conditions of 
585,361 direct 
beneficiaries 
(295,396 
males / 
289,965 
females) and 
17,366 indirect 
beneficiaries 
1,133,261 
direct 
beneficiaries 
(571,888 
males / 
561,373 
females) and 
33,620 indirect 
Improved thermal comfort 
and/or a generally higher 
quality of buildings is 
considered to lower 
exposure to climate risks

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
improved 
buildings 
(8,699males / 
8,667 females) 
have 
experienced 
an 
improvement 
in their indoor 
thermal 
conditions of at 
least 20% 
 
beneficiaries 
(16,842 males 
/ 16,778 
females) 
building users 
have 
experienced 
an 
improvement 
in their indoor 
thermal 
conditions of at 
least 20% 
 
Depending on the climate 
zone, a suitable 
international thermal 
comfort norm is used (ie. 
ASHRAE 55 or Givoni’s 
charts). These norms 
define a range of indoor 
perceived temperatures 
for a given relative 
humidity level and 
average air speed, within 
which 90% of building 
users feel comfortable 
and outside of which 
building users feels 
discomfort. 
In buildings that are not 
mechanically cooled, an 
increase in 20% thermal 
comfort is in fact a 
reduction in 20% of the 
hours of discomfort 
resulting from 
improvements brought to 
the building.  
In buildings that are 
mechanically cooled, 
improvements brought to 
the building will result in 
decreased cooling needs. 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
Supplementary 2.6: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) living in 
Subproject operation 
documents 
0 
679,956 
(343,133 
males / 
336,824 
1,133,261 
(571,888 
males / 
561,373 
Improved thermal comfort 
and/or a generally higher 
quality of buildings is

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buildings that have 
increased resilience 
against climate hazards 
females) 
building users 
have 
experienced 
an 
improvement 
in their indoor 
thermal 
conditions of at 
least 20% 
 
females) 
building users 
have 
experienced 
an 
improvement 
in their indoor 
thermal 
conditions of at 
least 20% 
 
considered to lower 
exposure to climate risks.  
49.5% females relative to 
total population.  
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
Subproject 
documentation 
disaggregated by sector, 
type of asset and action 
(constructed or 
strengthened) 
Number:  
0m2 of buildings 
that are made 
more resilient to 
climate change 
 
 
Number:  
21,041.4 
(Dwellings - 
20,915, 
Hospitals – 1, 
Education 
centers – 1, 
Small-scale 
offices – 11, 
Retail spaces -  
110) 
2.10 million m2 
Value: 767 
MEUR / USD 
eq 
 
Number: 
35,069  
(34,859 
houses,  2 
hospitals, 1 
Schools, 20 
small office 
buildings, 187 
retail spaces) 
3.57 million m2 
Value: 
1,287MEUR / 
USD eq 
 
      
Assets defined as “more 
resilient” are assets with 
at least 27% 
improvement in the hours 
of occupancy outside the 
thermal comfort zone for 
2050 (scenario A2)45 . 
 
Construction finished 
within Programme 
duration and according to 
climate-adapted 
bioclimatic design 
The entire Programme 
(all Subprojects financed) 
contributes to both 
mitigation and 
 
45 See feasibility study section 5.5.2

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
adaptation. Therefore, 
100% of the 
Programme’s financing 
contributes to mitigation 
and adaptation. 
We assume that 75% of 
the extended credit lines 
are allocated to 
construction costs  
The breakdown between 
strengthened and 
constructed buildings will 
be provided at 
implementation stage 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
National and sectoral 
strategies and policies 
lack clear targets and 
specific actions.  
Regulations are 
fragmented, and 
mandatory standards 
and buildings codes are 
weak.  
low 
Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
low-emission planning 
and development and 
their effective 
implementation.  
  
Via the Enabling Facility, 
public policy will be 
supported to complete 
regulatory frameworks 
regarding minimum 
energy performance in 
buildings, labeling or 
creating incentive 
mechanisms to foster 
faster adoption of 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 Authorities are aware of 
the challenges and 
opportunities.    
energy efficiency 
measures. Develop 
roadmaps, investment 
plans and initiatives to 
target EE buildings. 
 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Stakeholders lack 
knowledge and 
awareness on energy 
efficient and resilient 
buildings. 
low 
Awareness among 
developers, building 
managers, construction 
companies and 
consumers of design 
measures and benefits 
of green buildings.  
Develop training for and 
raise awareness to 
sector actors, investors, 
developers and 
financiers. Support 
knowledge sharing of 
policies, roadmaps and 
action plans.  
Multi-countries 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
 
 
 
 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
Output 1.2:  Financing 
agreements for 
investments signed  
 
Number of 
Subprojects for which 
investments secured 
 
Decision of board 
 
Signature of financing 
agreement 
Number of 
Subprojects: 
0 
 
 
Number of 
Subprojects: 6 
 
 
Number of 
Subprojects: 
10 
 
 
 
All Subproject financing is 
committed in the first 5 
years of the Programme

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 IMF, 2022. The Direct Employement Impact of Public Investment. Available at: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2021/05/06/The-Direct-
Employment-Impact-of-Public-Investment-50251 
47 https://www.international-construction.com/news/why-the-pandemic-is-encouraging-more-women-to-work-in-construction/8016892.article 
Quality Subprojects to be 
financed emerge in the 
selected countries 
 
Output 2.1 Sectoral 
frameworks or 
initiatives demonstrate 
the potential for green 
recovery  
Number of sectoral 
investment 
frameworks or 
initiatives developed  
 
(for example 
investment roadmaps 
for sectoral 
decarbonization, 
industry standards, 
product or service 
labels, green building 
certifications)  
 
Documentation of 
deliverables 
 
Official communication in 
the media or in other 
public documents 
 
Minutes and participant 
lists of meetings 
 
 
 
0 
+6 
+10 
Building sector actors 
demonstrate their 
willingness to cooperate 
and grow their markets  
 
Data availability allows for 
reliable market 
development estimates to 
be made for the building 
sector  
                                            
Investments can be 
mobilised based on better 
market information and 
framework conditions 
 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1 – Creation 
of local, green jobs 
Number of jobs in 
green building 
construction jobs 
Construction association 
reports 
0 
15,000 
(12,000 male / 
3,000 female) 
27,000  
(21,600 male / 
5,400 female) 
21 jobs created for every 
$1m of public investment 
in schools and hospital 
infrastructure in 
developing countries46  
 
11% of construction jobs 
globally are currently held 
by women. Target of 20% 
female held jobs. 47

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Output 1.1  Project stakeholders are supported in the various phases of their investment 
Activity 1.1.1. Technical assistance at 
design phase 
TA will perform a mission and carry out 
the requested activities. They will 
prepare a report including the energy 
efficiency measures to be performed. 
 
  
Planning of TA support 
Monitoring of TA mission 
25 Requests from project owners 
 
25 Purchase orders for TA 
intervention 
 
25 TA report feasibility study 
Activity 1.1.2 Technical assistance at 
construction and operation phase 
Activities to be carried out by the 
consultant include monitoring of the 
implementation of the bioclimatic and 
energy efficiency measures, support 
for verifications/certification. 
 
 
Planning of project TA mission 
 
Monitoring of Subproject 
implementation according to AFD or 
PROPARCO procedures 
10 If applicable, request from project 
owner for TA monitoring support 
 
10 If applicable, TA reports 
 
10 Project completion report 
Activity 1.1.3 Capacity reinforcement 
to subproject’s stakeholders 
The TA will provide training activities to 
subproject stakeholders 
 
.  
TA diagnostic of subproject 
stakeholder capacities 
 
TA preparation and implementation of 
a training programme 
70 Training presentations 
 
500 Attendance record 
Output 1.2 Financing agreements for investments signed 
Activity 1.2.1. Investment appraisal 
Once the subproject is approved by 
AFD Group, financing agreement will 
be signed between the borrower (or 
investees) and AFD or PROPARCO. 
Subproject submission to AFD or 
PROPARCO board 
 
Signing of the financing agreement 
with the borrower (or investees) 
Subproject approvals by the board 
 
Financing agreements 
 
 
Output 2.1 Sectoral investment frameworks demonstrate potential for green recovery

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.1.1. Development of sectoral 
frameworks or initiatives 
Within this activity, the development of 
sectoral investment frameworks or 
initiatives with industry commitments 
will be supported. 
 
 
Decision on sector(s) to be targeted 
according to investment Subprojects 
beneficiaries in a respective country 
 
Support in investment roadmap or 
industry initiative development:   
Investment roadmaps for sectoral 
decarbonisation 
 
Voluntary 
sectoral 
initiative 
(e.g. 
industry standard, product or service 
label, green building certification)  
 
Output 2.2 Policy proposals prepare the ground for building sector transformation 
Activity 2.2.1. Support for 
development of policies on energy 
efficiency in buildings 
Public policies will be developed (or 
updated), especially in sectors in 
which Subprojects are financed by the 
Investment Facility in order to deliver 
long-term climate impact. in order to 
prepare sound public policies 
 
Agreement on support areas 
   
Provision of support 
 
24 policy proposals relating to efficient 
and resilient buildings will have been 
prepared and be at the hands of the 
national partner governments for 
implementation and enforcement  
Output 2.3 Private and public sector actors are enabled to work towards building sector transformation 
Activity 2.3.1. Development of training 
and awareness raising modules 
The PEEB Cool trainings, specifically 
targeted at the intersection of finance, 
architecture, engineering and politics, 
provide an entry point for sector actors 
through short and concise 
programmes. 
Continuous coordination with 
investment Subprojects and updating 
of relevant training offer   
 
Development of new training modules  
10 developed trainings for flexible use 
across PEEB Cool partner countries  
 
Activity 2.3.2. Implementation of 
training measures 
The implementation of the developed 
trainings follows the logic defined by 
each country intervention from the 
joint investment and enabling facilities’ 
perspective  
 
Setting up of a training schedule  
 
Local adaptation   
 
Implementation of trainings  
 
1350 persons will have completed a 
training  
 
Output 2.4 Programme experiences support the global building sector transformation 
Activity 2.4.1. Development of 
knowledge products 
PEEB Cool activities in both the 
Programme and the Enabling Facility 
will generate a wealth of experiences 
that will be channelled in different 
Continuous monitoring of Programme 
results and experiences worth 
transforming into knowledge products 
 
Development of knowledge products   
20 additional knowledge products are 
developed, where a knowledge 
product could be a best practice paper 
on different PEEB Cool experiences, a 
sectoral publication, or similar

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge products and made 
accessible to a wider audience. 
Activity 2.4.2. Dissemination of 
experiences 
PEEB Cool will be feeding its 
implementation experiences into the 
joint effort to decarbonise the 
buildings and construction sector by 
making its knowledge products 
accessible to Subproject 
implementers and investors, and a 
wider audience via regional and/or 
global platforms 
Monitoring of dissemination occasions 
 
Preparation and presentation of inputs 
in diverse formats 
PEEB Cool investment and enabling 
facility experiences are disseminated 
globally at least at an additional 20 
occasions, picked for their relevance  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
At Investment Facility level 
During the disbursement period, AFD or PROPARCO will receive implementation reports from Subproject owners to track progress and identify 
potential issues, as well as improvement opportunities. In this document, Subproject owners will report at least on an annual basis on performance 
indicators (tCO2 eq avoided for instance). 
 
AFD or PROPARCO local offices will ensure the day-to-day monitoring by overseeing the implementation of Subprojects, meeting with Subproject 
owners on a regular basis, ensuring coordination with TA, exchanging with local government, etc. Every semester, they will review Subproject 
performance and assess any potential risks. The local agency staff will be able to check the validity and robustness of the Subprojects’ results thanks 
to their proximity, strong knowledge of the situation on the ground, and these regular exchanges and visits. 
 
Task team leaders (based in AFD’s or PROPARCO’s Paris headquarters) will visit Subprojects and meet Subproject owners regularly. For AFD, 
these missions take place on average once a year, resulting in a Subproject implementation report being shared with all the Subproject stakeholders 
(Subproject owner, local authorities, and other parties involved). For PROPARCO, field missions are usually organised every two years, but frequent 
remote interactions with the borrowers (or investees) take place throughout the year. Task team leaders will be responsible for overseeing Subproject 
implementation and for approving funding disbursements. AFD Group’s monitoring process foresees an annual internal quality review process. 
Subprojects’ performance are assessed against several indicators (technical implementation, disbursement, procurement, outcomes, etc.) which will 
be measured both quantitavely and qualitatively, as appropriate. Red flag Subprojects that meet any kind of difficulties are subject to a specific 
monitoring process before returning to a regular implementation pathway. This review contains confidential information and cannot be disclosed.

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
As per AFD’s procedures, and depending on the disbursement modalities selected at the Subproject level, controls will be performed before every 
disbursements, either by AFD Group’s staff or by an independent third party. 
 
At the end of the disbursement period, AFD will prepare a Subproject completion report summarising the main events of the implementation phase, 
the results achieved, and the lessons learned. In addition, about a year after the drafting of the completion report, the Evaluation department of AFD 
may conduct an ex-post evaluation of Subprojects or appoint a local consultant to do so. The consultant will be tasked with evaluating the impact of 
the Subproject and writing a report. Findings and conclusions will be checked for credibility and robustness, and methodologies reviewed to ensure 
they are replicable (in-line with GCF evaluation principles).  
 
It is worth noting that the evaluation function within AFD refers to the same evaluation principles and criteria developed by the OECD Development 
Assistance Committee (DAC) and its evaluation protocols are similar. AFD adheres to its principles for evaluation, which are impartiality and 
independence, credibility, usefulness, participation (of local partners) and coordination (with other donors). The evaluations aim to improve future 
Subprojects and programmes by deriving lessons from experience and to find ways to make aid more effective. AFD will also adhere to the GCF 
principles of impartial, objective and unbiased evaluations, upholding the highest ethical standards. Evaluations have been designed to be relevant 
to the programme through the engagement of local agency staff who have strong on the ground knowledge, and the assignment of task team leaders 
will ensure accountability and decision-making.  
 
At Enabling Facility level 
 
The Enabling Facility will monitor and report its progress through established monitoring systems and a dedicated monitoring and reporting focal 
point within the policy implementation team. Country activities will be closely coordinated between country staff and headquarter coordinators in 
monthly coordination meetings and bi-annual Enabling Facility level monitoring calls. This allows for a close following up of progress.  
 
Through the policy team representative in the PMU, GIZ as EE will be able to give direct input into the reporting activities of the AE, in addition to 
legally agreed upon technical and financial reporting procedures between AFD and GIZ. 
 
GIZ’s projects are internally randomly selected for independent external evaluation. Financial audits take place at yearly intervals. OECD DAC criteria 
are a core element in these evaluations.  
 
At Programme level 
 
An annual performance report (APR) will be submitted to the GCF following reporting requirements under the AMA and the FAA. The APR will be 
submitted to the Secretariat for the period ending on 31 December within 60 days after the end of the relevant annual period. The first APR will be

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
submitted following the end of the calendar year in which the Parties enter into the relevant FAA and the last APR will be submitted within six months 
of the end of the relevant reporting period. The implementation reporting period of the Programme will start from the date of effectiveness of the FAA 
until the Programme implementation end date.

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), 
sanctions, prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. 
Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Insufficient availabilities and capacities among stakeholders at subproject and policy levels hinder or 
endanger Programme progress. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
At policy level, policy technical assistance will work towards better coordination through clear and 
adaptive communication with all involved parties and carry out capacity reinforcement activities to 
improve technical capacities of partner countries. 
At Subproject level, subproject technical assistance will be selected on an experience and technical 
capacity basis to lower risk of misfit design. PEEB Cool will assist Subproject owners to ensure that 
EE measures are properly implemented. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
The political priorities of partner countries are not aligned with PEEB Cool objectives in terms of energy 
efficiency targets or climate change goals. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Partner countries selection will be thorough and only those with higher potential will be chosen. PEEB 
Cool countries are characterised by the fact that sectors with high energy efficiency or adaptation 
potential (education, health) are key priorities for those countries. 
In addition, PEEB Cool will work with the private sector, which, to a certain extent, evolves 
independently from public strategy. 
The portfolio approach adopted by PEEB Cool allows for risk diversification through targeting a large 
number of countries. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Low 
Description 
A counterpart is not able to reimburse PEEB Cool loans.

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
At Subproject level, AFD Group is already mitigating this risk through thorough analysis of counterpart 
credit risk. This is achieved through deep knowledge of public and private counterparts and regular 
internal rating of their credit risk. If needed, AFD can ask for sovereign guarantee to mitigate this risk. 
Credit risk of the portfolio overall is mitigated through diversification (country, sector, counterpart, 
subproject type, etc.). Maximum PEEB Cool amounts per country will catalyse geographical 
diversification even more. 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Low 
Low 
Description 
A borrower is not able to service the loan reimbursement in case of a local currency devaluation. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
AFD Group is usually lend in EUR or USD. If AFD or PROPARCO identifies this risk at appraisal 
level, it can advise the counterpart to mitigate this risk through a foreign exchange hedge. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Construction activities supported by PEEB Cool directly or indirectly result in the (forced) displacement 
of a population. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Subprojects that bear too high environmental and social risks (project type A) will not be eligible to 
PEEB Cool financing. In case of projects B with population displacement, the ESMP that will be 
elaborated and PEEB Cool will propose a framework to mitigate this risk. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
PEEB Cool activities contribute to money laundering or financing of terrorism. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
AFD and PROPARCO appraisal processes involve ML/FT diligences. 
In addition, AFD, PROPARCO and GIZ staff perform a mandatory annual ML/FT training that allow 
them to keep in mind the stakes of this risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Sanctions 
Low 
Medium

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
Description 
Counterparts that are part of PEEB Cool are subject to international sanctions. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Appraisal and disbursement processes include verification with EU, France and World Bank exclusion lists 
that exclude any business with listed counterparts. Portfolio approach allows to focus on those 
counterparts with whom activities are possible. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Contractual obligations related to AFD Group and/or GCF financing instruments are too restrictive 
(cost/benefit analysis from teams and/or Subproject owners). 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Programme will hire a PMU to support Subproject owners in following their contractual obligations, such 
as reporting.

=== PAGE 89 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
 
In line with the World Bank Group E&S Framework, the E&S risks and impacts taken into account by AFD 
in its due diligence are subproject-related. For the PEEB Cool Programme, the E&S Standards and ESRM 
of AFD, PROPARCO and GIZ will apply. 
 
Eligibility criteria as stated in the Feasibility Study exclude Subprojects with a risk level A. 
 
For minimal, moderate and substantial risk Subprojects (C, B and B+), international standards, World Bank 
standards, and national regulations apply. However, as regulations in the countries where AFD operates are 
sometimes incomplete or under development, AFD uses as a reference a number of rules, good practices 
and directives produced by international standard-setting organisations with more than 70 years of 
experience in the financing of development projects. 
 
The Programme level Environmental and Social Management Framework is provided in Annex 6a. The 
ESMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the environmental and social risks 
and impacts. The ESMF dedicated for the PEEB Cool Programme presents the framework which guides 
production of ESIA, ESMP and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) of future projects. A full ESIA and 
ESMP including a stakeholder engagement plan will be produced for all future projects. 
 
The institutional-level Grievance redress mechanism is presented in the Annex 6a, section 4.2. E&S 
Grievance redress mechanisms. 
 
In terms of E&S risk management, AFD Group applies World Bank Group Standards, including the World 
Bank E&S Framework 48 and IFC Performance Standards and the related Guidance and Interpretation 
Notes.49 
 
The Reference E&S Standards for the PEEB Cool Programme will be national legislation and IFC 
Performance Standards and related Guidance Notes. 
 
The E&S risk management approach for the Programme follows the IFC Interpretation Note on Financial 
Intermediaries50 and is in line with the Equator Principles.51 
The applicability of IFC Performance Standards for the PEEB COOL Programme is summarised in the 
ESMF. 
  
Under the Programme, a Subproject will be understood as: 
 
o Direct financed subproject: loans or grants to finance and support investments with potential to 
integrate bioclimatic and energy efficiency measures in buildings or within the construction 
ecosystem. The Implementing Entities correspond to public entities, civil society organisations or 
private companies. 
 
o Intermediated subprojects: the partnership between AFD or PROPARCO and a Financial 
Intermediary (FI), meaning a credit facility. The credit facilities will then be divided into several loans 
 
48 https://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-framework 
49 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/Sustainability-At-
IFC/Policies-Standards/Performance-Standards 
50 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability-at-
ifc/publications/publications_policy_interpretationnote-fi 
51 https://equator-principles.com/

=== PAGE 90 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
granted by the FI to local companies. Such loans are referred to as ‘End-beneficiary projects’. Any 
End-beneficiary projectsconsidered under the Programme will have demonstrated potential to 
integrate bioclimatic and energy efficiency measures in buildings or within the construction 
ecosystem. 
 
o “Policy” projects, i.e. the technical assistance delivered within PEEB Cool under Component 2 of 
the Programme (Enabling Facility). 
 
With regards to intermediated Subprojects, the E&S due diligence is integrated by AFD Group into the review 
and the monitoring of the Subproject as a whole around the four main steps: 
● Subproject categorization based on the level of E&S risk of the FI portfolio; 
● Review of the FI’s environmental and social management system (ESMS); 
● If gaps are identified with AFD’s requirement and the FI’s ESMS, definition of an environmental and 
social action plan (ESAP) to strengthen the FI’s ESMS; 
● E&S monitoring. 
 
The ESMF describes the Programme approach to E&S risk management in each of the above cases. For 
each Subproject, the E&S risk management principles that will apply will depend on the implementing entity 
(AFD, PROPARCO, GIZ) involved. 
 
An indicative list of E&S risks and impact per sector eligible for the Programme is detailed below. 
Sector  
Examples of projects  
Environmental 
risks/impacts  
Social risks/impacts  
Social housing 
and housing 
improvement  
Greenfield construction of 
housing facilities.  
Renovation of existing housing 
(e.g. energy efficiency in 
housing projects)  
Changes in surface 
water runoff.  
Impacts on water 
quality.  
Release of pollutants.  
Generation of 
hazardous and non-
hazardous waste 
materials.  
Impacts on resource 
consumption (energy 
and water)  
Contribution to 
climate change (GHG 
emissions).  
Impacts on 
biodiversity and 
natural areas.  
Impacts on cultural 
heritage  
All risks related to labour 
and working conditions. 
Increase of noise 
pollution.  
Impacts on existing 
infrastructure and 
networks.  
Enhanced exposure to 
health and safety risks.  
Risks related to projects 
and local governance, 
stakeholder 
engagement, local 
communities.  
Environmental disease 
(e.g. exposure to lead, 
asbestos).  
Pressure on land tenure 
and increase of land cost 
or rent cost), social 
acceptance.  
Involuntary 
displacements.  
Changes in social habits 
and social organisation.  
Health  
Construction or extension of 
health centre or hospitals. 
Refurbishment of health centre 
or extension 
Education  
Construction of schools, 
universities, classrooms in rural 
areas, science complexes, etc. 
Refurbishment of training 
centre. 
Extension of university 
Public buildings 
Energy efficiency measures in 
public buildings and 
administrative centres

=== PAGE 91 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
Industry 
Improvement of energy or water 
consumption within the 
construction ecosystem (cement 
plant, transportation etc.), or in 
industrial sectors (textile, etc.) 
Improved waste management 
practices (re-use and recycling 
of materials), waste-to-energy 
activities 
Transportation 
Greenfield or brownfield project 
of energy efficiency in train 
station, bus station 
Other building 
sector 
Energy efficiency in market, 
shopping mall, offices, 
ecosystem innovation support, 
etc. 
 
At Subproject and End-beneficiary project level, grievance mechanisms must be designed to receive and 
facilitate potential concern or conflict resolution, in relation with E&S risks and impacts of the Subproject. 
The need or relevance of such mechanisms shall be assessed during Subproject appraisal phase and E&S 
evaluation. Grievance mechanisms must be tailored to the level of Subproject E&S risks and impacts, with 
the purpose of resolving concerns or conflicts through an understandable and transparent consultative 
process consistent with Subproject and/or local context. The mechanism shall be free, and shall not impede 
access to judicial or administrative remedies. Subproject owners must communicate on the existence of 
such mechanisms and inform Subproject stakeholders accordingly. Grievance mechanisms at Subproject 
and End-beneficiary project level are developed firstly in order to allow amicable resolution of a dispute or 
complaint. If not possible, then the complaint has to be solved through a formal legal process. 
 
Stakeholder consultations are conducted at local agency and subproject-by-subproject scales. They are 
described in the country forms and in Annex 7. 
 
In the framework of the Programme and in line with GCF approach to stakeholder engagement, AFD requires 
implementing entities to ensure the effective engagement of communities, vulnerable populations, groups 
and individuals, indigenous peoples, local communities and other marginalised groups of people and 
individuals that are affected or potentially affected by Programme activities. Information related to E&S 
issues on activities financed in the framework of the Programme is made available in compliance with the 
GCF Information Disclosure Policy, and shall be disclosed on AFD’s website. This includes the present E&S 
Framework, which is made available in the languages of the partner countries. 
 
All necessary measures to ensure that activities financed by the GCF are developed and implemented in 
such a manner that aligns with the SEAH provisions of the GCF E&S Policy, as well as with the AE and EEs 
policies will be taken. SEAH safeguarding will apply to all Subprojects and End-beneficiary projects, including 
direct and indirect financed Subprojects. 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 92 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
The PEEB Cool programme will seek to develop women’s roles as consumers, employees, and 
entrepreneurs in the green building sector, improving their access to bioclimatic housing and their economic 
participation. The main gender issues evident in the green buildings sector are: 
• 
Due to existing gender inequalities, women often participate to a limited extent or are excluded from 
decision-making processes concerning buildings at all levels (households, local communities, 
sectoral policies) 
• 
Women have difficulty accessing finance and training to learn the trade and skills required in the 
buildings sector 
• 
Unbalanced power relations between men and women (including spending decisions on buildings) 
• 
Social norms that reduce women’s access to education, gainful employment and economic resources 
• 
Increased vulnerability of women in accessing decent housing 
• 
Limited rights of women to own, control or inherit the land and property 
• 
Issue accessing credit to own or rent housing 
• 
Differentiated gender impacts regarding the spatial design of housing 
• 
Negative attitudes or perceptions of women employed in companies 
 
The PEEB Cool Programme targets a variety of sectors. AFD has developed Sectoral gender toolkits (SGT) 
which promote a crosscutting approach and provide a resource for technical experts and task team leaders. 
These toolkits tackle gender related issues in all the sectors targeted by the Programme and provide 
sensitive, responsive and transformative measures to integrate in the Subproject activities. PEEB Cool 
Subprojects can belong to the following sectors: 
• 
Housing (housing facilities, social and intermediary housing programmes) 
• 
Education (schools, universities, classrooms in rural areas, science complex, training centres) 
• 
Health (health centres, hospitals) 
• 
Public buildings and other building sector (public buildings, markets, shopping malls, offices) 
• 
Industry (improvement of energy consumption or water consumption in industrial processes) 
• 
Transportation (e.g. train and bus stations) 
For each of those sectors, the gender assessment annexed provides a summary of the main gender issues, 
as well as good practices for gender integration. 
 
Regarding intermediate financing, AFD formalizes an initial diagnosis of the situation of the financial 
institutions (consistency of the ESMS and compliance with the standards of the WB Group, assessment of 
professional equality internally and in the product approach, etc.). During the appraisal process, AFD 
elaborates with the partner FI an Environmental & Social & Gender action plan, which is integrated into the 
financing agreement. The content of these E&S action plans and the gender measures is designed in relation 
to the initial diagnosis / gaps identified in regards to AFD's expectations, the FI's ambition for progress, the 
volume of TA available to support this ambition, etc...  
 
Specific commitments govern the implementation of the E&S action plan and of measures on gender by the 
partner FI during the implementation of the subproject, as well as the reporting methods (E&S + gender 
reports integrated into the half-yearly reporting of the subproject). AFD supports these changes and the 
reporting through the technical assistance financed as part of the global financing of the subproject. 
 
In addition to the annexed gender assessment and action plan, at the level of the Enabling Facility, the 
gender mainstreaming concepts of GIZ will be applied during implementation. This includes at least a gender 
screening and possibly an in-depth sectoral gender analysis at individual country level in case no recent 
relevant sectoral analysis is available within the GIZ country portfolio. These analyses are conducted in a 
combination of local stakeholder consultations and legal and regulatory framework review and aim to identify

=== PAGE 93 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
the ways in which the Enabling Facility’s intervention may be used to work towards gender equality. Based 
on the results, a gender action plan for each country will be supplemented with gender-related activities and 
points of attention for the Enabling Facility’s activities.   
 
Impact Statement:  
Increased resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative impacts of climate 
change, and increased involvement and access of women in sustainable building, efficient cooling system 
and improvement of industrial processes subprojects and their benefits.  
 
Outcome statement: 
The Programme will enhance and support gender mainstreaming within the financed Subprojects. It will 
participate in increasing the awareness and building the capacity of the Implementing Entities at national, 
regional and local level. The Programme will promote and supervise the equal participation and access to 
the benefits of the Subprojects for women and girls.  
 
Output statement: 
The Gender Approach for the Investment Facility in the Programme is Subproject-specific. Specific indicators 
and activities are therefore defined on a case-by-case basis according to the framework established in the 
Gender Action Plan. 
Considering the objectives and sectors targeted by the Programme, gender-related activities can be 
addressed through: 
 
Cross-cutting approaches to gender equality:  
• 
Gender-based analysis of climate change exposure: 100% of the Subprojects will have integrated 
a gender analysis 
• 
Capacity-building of Subproject owners on gender related topics: 100% of the IEs involved in 
the Programme have built capacity on gender. 
 
Specific thematic approaches: 100% of the Subprojects developed through the Programme include a 
gender equality objective through:  
• 
Women’s economic participation: promotion of gender equality at work within IEs and their clients, 
women’s empowerment and economic participation on End-beneficiary projects, support to women 
entrepreneurship, financial inclusion of women, etc. 
• 
Equal access to services: access to Subprojectbenefits 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Financial management 
The detailed provisions regarding financial management of the GCF resources by AFD will be described in 
the FAA. Reporting will be provided by AFD to the GCF specifying among others: 
● The amounts already committed and disbursed by AFD Group to local partners by country and by 
Subproject; 
● The amounts already committed and disbursed by GIZ by country; 
● The remaining amount on different GCF accounts; 
● A provisional disbursement schedule on a one-year rolling horizon; 
● For the loan component, a list of the incidents recorded during the repayment period of the loan 
provided to local partners.

=== PAGE 94 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
Subsidiary agreements will be signed between AFD and PROPARCO and AFD and GIZ.  
For non-sovereign borrowers, credit risk monitoring will be carried out by AFD through the assessment of 
the financial statement of the borrowers, monitoring of financial covenants, etc.  
Due diligence for each financing (direct or intermediated) will be carried out by AFD's local agencies staff 
during the appraisal processes of the subprojects. AFD has agencies in 85 agencies and 17 regional hubs 
all over the world. There is a local agency involved for each country where the programme is implemented. 
Each subproject and end-beneficiary project will go through AFD appraisal process cycle, which was 
reviewed by the GCF during AFD accredidation process. For further details please see section V of AFD 
application to the GCF to become an accredited entity. 
Audit arrangements will be carried out in accordance with terms of the FAA and AMA, and performed as per 
AFD’s internal guidelines. Disbursement 
At AFD level, disbursement will concern: 
- 
Direct payments for project TA entity; 
- 
Loan disbursements on Subprojects, either by 1) refinancing, 2) direct payment or 3) advance on 
subproject account. Disbursement conditions will be defined on a subproject-by-subproject basis and 
will be described in the financing agreement signed between AFD and the borrower; 
- 
Fund transfers to GIZ and PROPARCO whose disbursement will be reported to AFD. 
If AFD has granted a loan at a low rate and the rate rises, increasing the cost of its financing, or in case of 
foreign exchange risk, AFD conducts hedging operations, also known as swaps, when granting loans at a 
fixed interest rate or in foreign currencies. In terms of interest rates, all assets and liabilities are economically 
equivalent to loans or borrowing at variable interest rates. Thus, if market rates were to rise sharply and 
suddenly, raising the cost of AFD's borrowing - on the liabilities side - the interest accrued on loans granted 
- on the assets side - would follow the same trajectory. 
 
Procurement 
AFD’s procurement rules are in line with international standards provided by the World Bank Group. The 
AFD procurement guidelines as detailed in Annex 19 will apply to public-owned local partners that will be in 
charge of implementing the Programme. For instance, local partners will recruit the construction companies 
in accordance with AFD procurement rules. For a detailed presentation of AFD procurement rules, see the 
Procurement Guidelines for AFD Financed Contracts in Foreign Countries available on AFD’s website. 
For private-owned Subprojects sponsors, PROPARCO will apply the procedures applicable to the 
specificities of the PROPARCO private sector Subprojects clients. 
GIZ procurement and awarding rules apply for procurement within component 2 for which GIZ is the 
procuring agency.  
 
AFD, PROPARCO and GIZ are accredited to the GCF; as such their procurement rules and procedures 
were assessed and evolutions are communicated on a yearly basis during the AEs’ self-assessment 
exercise. 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.

=== PAGE 95 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 96 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
52 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☐ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☒ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)52 
☒ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 97 ===
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 102 ===
MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.kemenkeu.go.id
Ref.
:
S-133/KF/2020
13 November 2020
 
 
 
 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund (GCF)
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
 
Subject: Funding Proposal for the GCF by Agence Française de Développement (AFD) regarding
Programme of Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
 
We refer to the Programme of Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool in Indonesia as
included in the Funding Proposal submitted by Agence Française de Développement (AFD) to us
on 9 October 2020.
 
The undersigned is the Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance as the National
Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the Funding Proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the programme as included in the Funding
Proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the Funding Proposal is in conformity with Indonesia’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the Funding Proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the Funding Proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 
Yours faithfully,
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
 
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman

=== PAGE 107 ===
Scanned with CamScanner

=== PAGE 108 ===
Scanned with CamScanner

=== PAGE 111 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Agence Française pour le Développement (AFD) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, and Tunisia 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 15, 2022 
Languages of disclosure 
Albanian, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, English, French, 
Macedonian, Sinhala, Spanish, and Tamil 
Explanation on language 
Albanian is the relevant of Albania. 
Arabic and French are the relevant language of Djibouti, 
Morocco and Tunisia. 
Bahasa Indonesia is the relevant language of Indonesia. 
English is the relevant language of Nigeria. 
Macedonian is the relevant language of North Macedonia. 
Sinhala and Tamil are the relevant languages of Sri Lanka. 
Spanish is the relevant language of Argentina, Costa Rica 
and Mexico. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/programme-energy-
efficiency-building-peeb-cool 
Albanian:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-41-
38/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_albanese.pdf 
Arabic:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-23-
51/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_arabic.pdf 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-42-
33/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_indonesian.pdf 
French:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-23-
22/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_french.pdf

=== PAGE 112 ===
Macedonian:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-24-
34/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_macedonian.pdf 
 
Sinhala:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-16-
36/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_Sinhala.pdf 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-25-
15/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_spanish.pdf 
 
Tamil:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-17-
44/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_tamul.pdf* 
Other links 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework".*  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 15, 2022 
Languages of disclosure 
Albanian, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Macedonian, 
Sinhala, Spanish, and Tamil 
Explanation on language 
Albanian is the relevant of Albania. 
Arabic and French are the relevant language of Djibouti, 
Morocco and Tunisia. 
Bahasa Indonesia is the relevant language of Indonesia. 
English is the relevant language of Nigeria. 
Macedonian is the relevant language of North Macedonia. 
Sinhala and Tamil are the relevant languages of Sri Lanka. 
Spanish is the relevant language of Argentina, Costa Rica 
and Mexico. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/programme-energy-
efficiency-building-peeb-cool 
 
Albanian:  
https ://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-41-
38/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_albanese.pdf 
 
Arabic: 
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-23-
51/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_arabic.pdf 
 
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-42-
33/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_indonesian.pdf 
 
French:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-23-
22/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_french.pdf

=== PAGE 113 ===
Macedonian:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-24-
34/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_macedonian.pdf 
 
Sinhala:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-16-
36/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_Sinhala.pdf 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-25-
15/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_spanish.pdf 
 
Tamil:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-17-
44/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_tamul.pdf* 
Other links 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”*. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other links 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 15, 2022 
Language of disclosure 
Albanian, Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, French, Macedonian, 
Sinhala, Spanish, and Tamil 
Explanation on language 
Albanian is the relevant of Albania. 
Arabic and French are the relevant language of Djibouti, 
Morocco and Tunisia. 
Bahasa Indonesia is the relevant language of Indonesia. 
English is the relevant language of Nigeria. 
Macedonian is the relevant language of North Macedonia. 
Sinhala and Tamil are the relevant languages of Sri Lanka. 
Spanish is the relevant language of Argentina, Costa Rica and 
Mexico. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/programme-energy-
efficiency-building-peeb-cool 
 
Albanian:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-41-
38/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_albanese.pdf 
 
Arabic: https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-
23-51/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_arabic.pdf

=== PAGE 114 ===
Bahasa Indonesia: 
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-09-42-
33/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_indonesian.pdf 
 
French:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-23-
22/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_french.pdf 
 
Macedonian:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-24-
34/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_macedonian.pdf 
 
Sinhala:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-16-
36/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_Sinhala.pdf 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-25-
15/PEEB_Cool_ESMF_spanish.pdf 
 
Tamil:  
https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2022-09-10-17-
44/Peeb_Cool_ESMF_tamul.pdf* 
Other links 
N/A 
Remarks 
A Resettlement Policy Framework and Scoping Terms of 
Reference and ToRs for a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) 
or Livelihoods Restoration Plan (LRP) as well as an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework consistent with 
the requirements for a Category B programme is contained 
in the “Environmental and Social Management 
Framework”.*  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Thursday, September 15, 2022 
Place 
In the AFD agencies of each of the country where the 
programme is implemented: 
 
AFD Western Balkans Office (for Albania and North 
Macedonia) 
11, Zmaj Jovina 
11000 
BELGRADE - SERBIA 
 
Argentina : 
Avenida Carlos Pellegrini 1141 
Piso 11 
BUENOS AIRES 
 
Costa Rica : 
Del Centro comercial Plaza del Sol 425m al Sur, Curridabat,  
SAN JOSE

=== PAGE 115 ===
Djibouti : 
Rue Ibrahim M. Sultan – Croix de Lorraine 
BP 1937 - DJIBOUTI 
 
Indonesia : 
The Plaza 27th floor, Jl. MH. Thamrin Kav. 28-30 
Indonesia Resident Mission 
Jakarta Pusat - 10350 
JAKARTA 
 
Mexico : 
Torre Omega, Campos Eliseos No 345, 
Piso 16 oficina 1500, Col. Chapultepec-Polanco, 
11560 
MÉXICO, D.F. 
 
Morocco : 
162 Avenue Mohammed VI 
Route des Zaers Souissi 
10170 - RABAT 
 
Nigeria : 
12 Charles de Gaule Street, off, Jimmy Carter St. 
Asokoro 900231 - ABUJA 
 
Sri Lanka : 
19th Floor, East Tower 
World Trade Centre (WTC) 
00100 - COLOMBO 
 
Tunisia : 
Rue du lac Windermere 
1053 Les Berges du lac - TUNIS 
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
At the earliest, December 2022 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 17, 2022 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 16 September 
2022, the following update has been made: The accredited entity has updated the 
“Environmental and Social Management Framework” (ESMF) to comply with the requirements 
of the revised Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 as regards 
SEAH with respect to projects and programmes approved at or after the thirty-second meeting 
of the Board (B.32). After further due diligence on the funding proposal, the Secretariat has 
confirmed that the “Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)” is consistent 
with the requirements for a Category B programme. The updated English version of the ESMF is 
made available in the link provided above. The accredited entity has also provided the link to 
the Tamil version of the ESMF, which was available on its website but inadvertently omitted.   
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 116 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP194
Proposal name: 
Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool 
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia  
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The proposed programme aims to scale up an 
existing programme, Programme for Energy 
Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB), to 11 
countries. Originally envisaged at the 2016 
United Nations Climate Change Conference 
(COP 22), PEEB initially supported five 
partner countries1 to develop and implement 
policies, and build technical and financial 
capacities to implement large-scale building 
projects with high energy and environmental 
performance standards through an 
integrated approach.  
The programme has a tentative multi-country 
project pipeline, which is to be fully 
developed during the implementation phase. 
Proper methodological underpinning with 
assurances, including well-defined eligibility 
criteria and specific technical and financial 
thresholds, alongside detailed 
implementation arrangements, need to be 
put in place to ensure the delivery of the 
targeted impacts of the programme as 
indicated in the funding proposal. It is 
important that the accredited entity (AE) 
strictly complies with the agreed set of 
parameters that will be set forth in the term 
sheet throughout the consideration and 
hopefully approval process. 
PEEB Cool is aiming to transform the 
construction sector at scale by supporting 
resilient and energy-efficient building (so 
called green buildings), design, construction 
and operation. The programme specifically 
targets the buildings segment with significant 
potential for greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction 
and adaptation impacts with strong economic 
and social benefits (e.g. creation of green 
jobs) to reach paradigm shift for public and 
commercial buildings.  
The proposed intervention has two 
components: an investment facility and an 
enabling facility. The components have been 
designed to each address key barriers that 
are preventing the construction industry in 
the targeted countries from shifting from 
current unsustainable practices to a low-
carbon, climate-resilient development 
pathway. It is based on the unique proposal 
that the two facilities go hand in hand as 
investment drives new industry practice, 
which regulation and public policy 
incentivize and regulate. The key risk here is 
that two initiatives have to be well sequenced 
and impeccably synchronized on the ground 
1 Mexico, Morocco, Senegal, Tunisia and Vietnam.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 117 
 
 
in the 11 countries targeted by the proposed 
intervention. 
The programme aims to support the goals of 
the Kigali Amendment and the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). The programme 
also is in alignment with the GCF sector 
guides on cities, buildings and urban systems 
and energy efficiency. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Programme background 
3. 
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), direct and indirect emissions from 
building operations plummeted to about 9 Gt in 2020, after having risen an average 1 per cent 
per year since 2010.2 While there was a 10 per cent drop in the level of CO2 emissions in 2020, 
largely due to lockdowns, slowing of economies, difficulties households and businesses faced in 
maintaining and affording energy access and a fall in construction activity, the building sector 
accounted for 36 per cent of global final energy consumption and 37 per cent of energy-related 
CO2 emissions, as compared to other end use sectors (UNEP, 2021).  
4. 
In its report, IEA indicates that despite the expected rebound in emissions in 2021 being 
moderated by continued power sector decarbonization, buildings remain off track to achieve 
carbon neutrality by 2050. To meet this target, all new buildings and 20 per cent of the existing 
building stock would need to be zero-carbon-ready as soon as 2030.   
5. 
Due to population growth, rapid urbanization and economic development, final energy 
demand from buildings is predicted to increase globally by 50 per cent by 2050 compared with 
2015 under business-as-usual (BAU) scenarios. Energy intensity per square meter of the 
building sector needs to improve 30 per cent by 2030 to stay on track to meet Paris climate 
goals (UNEP, 20173).  
6. 
The Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool, herein after PEEB Cool, 
is an expansion of the Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB), which was initiated 
during COP 22. The aim of PEEB is to transform the building sector by promoting sustainable 
building design and construction. PEEB combines financing for energy efficiency in large-scale 
projects with technical assistance through policy advice.4 
7. 
PEEB Cool takes the experiences and lessons learned from PEEB. Specifically, PEEB Cool 
targets the following critical issues: 
(a) 
Clean cooling as a majority of the countries with developing and emerging economies 
are located in hot climates, both dry and humid; 
 
2 IEA, 2021. Tracking Buildings 2021. https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-buildings-2021  
3 UN Environment Programme. As buildings and construction sector grows, time running out to cut energy use and meet 
Paris climate goals. Press release. 11 December 2017. https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-
release/buildings-and-construction-sector-grows-time-running-out-cut-energy  
4 PEEB website. https://www.peeb.build/ accessed on 8 July 2022.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 118 
 
 
(b) 
Sustainable building construction materials that make the most out of locally sourced 
materials and construction techniques; and 
(c) 
Private sector involvement, which must be spearheaded by the national public 
authorities.  
8. 
Key barriers to be addressed by PEEB Cool are the following: 
(a) 
Technical barriers: 
(i) 
Project stakeholders lack technical knowledge and experience in planning and 
implementing energy efficient and resilient building projects based on 
bioclimatic design principles and efficient cooling technologies;  
(b) 
Financing barriers: 
(i) 
Building owners are reluctant to invest in the higher upfront cost of energy 
efficient, low carbon and resilient buildings, especially with the economic crisis 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; 
(ii) 
Due to lack of experience with such projects, banks are reluctant to expand their 
portfolios towards green building finance. Tailored financial solutions are 
missing and/or too restrictive to be widely used; 
(iii) 
Industry actors are reluctant to adapt their services for the construction and 
operation of energy efficient, low carbon and resilient buildings, specifically in 
times of economic crisis; and 
(c) 
Institutional and regulatory barriers:  
(i) 
National and sectoral strategies and policies for the decarbonization of the 
sector often lack clarity (e.g. lack of clear sectorial targets and specific actions); 
(ii) 
Building codes lack specific requirements for energy efficiency in buildings and 
enforcement is often weak, mandatory for certain types of buildings only, or still 
under discussion; and 
(iii) 
Sector stakeholders lack knowledge and awareness on energy efficient and 
resilient buildings and are highly fragmented. 
9. 
PEEB Cool aims to target 11 countries across 4 continents. The countries are selected 
based on the below criteria: 
(a) 
Level of vulnerability to increased temperatures and climate extremes like heat waves; 
(b) 
A preliminary gap assessment for specific needs in the residential, healthcare and 
commercial sectors; 
(c) 
Similarity of technical barriers; and 
(d) 
The geographic focus and experience of the AE. 
10. 
PEEB Cool countries cut across six different climate zones: equatorial, tropical, desert or 
arid, humid subtropical, Mediterranean, and continental. The diversity of selected countries is 
expected to provide pioneering examples in different contexts. The programme aims to address 
both mitigation and adaptation impacts, with strong benefits of socio-economic resilience of the 
communities through creation of green jobs as well as stable provision of essential public 
services such as education and health. The pipeline of projects and sub-projects (here sub-
projects are used to refer to both sub-projects financed under the direct investment modality 
and end-beneficiary projects that are financed under the intermediary financing modality) will 
cut across seven priority sectors: residential, hospital, education, office, retail, transport and 
hotel, identified based on country-specific vulnerability.

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 119 
 
 
Table 1. Priority sectors identified by country 
  
Residential 
Hospital 
Education 
Office 
Retail 
Transport 
Hotel 
Albania 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Argentina 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Costa Rica 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Djibouti 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Indonesia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Mexico 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Morocco 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Nigeria 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
N. Macedonia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Tunisia 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Sri Lanka 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
11. 
Out of the five countries previously supported by PEEB, three countries are included in 
PEEB Cool. While policy support for these three countries will be provided through PEEB Cool 
to expand support provided by PEEB, the project pipelines of PEEB and PEEB Cool in these 
countries target different sectors. 
(a) 
Mexico: PEEB support was provided on technical guidance and building regulation on 
energy efficiency in hotels to promote private sector investments in the hotel sector. 
PEEB Cool will provide support on energy efficiency in housing for vulnerable 
populations, with a possibility to further provide institutional support on energy 
efficiency in housing;  
(b) 
Morocco: PEEB support was provided to identify and develop energy performance 
improvement measures and national grant mechanisms to support energy efficient 
buildings and appliances. It also supported enforcement of building codes and facilitated 
discussions and capacity-building. PEEB Cool will provide financial support to unlock 
the potential in the residential and education sectors previously identified through 
PEEB; and 
(c) 
Tunisia: PEEB support was provided through technical assistance in health facilities, 
including awareness raising activities, building stock and energy demand analysis as 
well as high environmental quality (HQE) certification. Financing support was provided 
to two regional hospitals. Additionally, training on building code enforcement and 
identification of energy-efficient social housing projects was undertaken. PEEB Cool will 
provide support to scale up the investment in health and individual and social housing. 
12. 
The total programme funding amount is EUR 1,012.5 million and USD 326 million, of 
which GCF funding is requested for EUR 131 million and USD 45 million in senior loans and EUR 
44 million in grants. The AE is providing co-financing of EUR 830 million and USD 281 million in 
senior loans and EUR 5 million in grants. On top of AE co-financing, EUR 2.5 million is co-
financed from the Government of Germany in the form of grant.    
13. 
The programme’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) risk is categorized B. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Investment Facility (total cost: EUR 987.8 million and USD 326 million; GCF cost: 
EUR 153.8 and USD 45 million) 
14. 
Under component 1, the Investment Facility is to be established to provide necessary 
financing to implement sustainable building practices through projects. This is achieved 
through (i) technical assistance at design phase to review plans and make recommendations;

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 120 
 
 
(ii) provision of finance (including concessional loans) to address the financial barrier linked to 
higher investment costs and related debt services induced by green buildings; and (iii) technical 
assistance at construction phase to monitor the proper implementation of bioclimatic design 
and energy efficiency measures and ensure the targeted direct impacts of the programme are 
met.  
15. 
At the design phase of projects, technical assistance will be provided to review and 
identify the potential climate impacts. Support will be provided to prepare technical, legal and 
economic feasibility or pre-feasibility studies. This support will be provided under activity 1.1.1, 
which will be essential to ensure that the following climate impact targets for each project type 
will be achieved: 
(a) 
Mitigation targets for a renovation project: 40 per cent GHG emissions reduction or 40 
per cent energy consumption savings; 
(b) 
Mitigation targets for a new construction project (2 out of 3 of the following targets): 20 
per cent GHG emissions reduction and/or 20 per cent energy consumption savings 
and/or 20 per cent water consumption savings; and 
(c) 
Adaptation targets for a renovation or new construction project: By addressing specific 
climate vulnerability, improvement of indoor thermal conditions by minimum 20 per 
cent (or reduction of 20 per cent of hours of discomfort). 
16. 
The Investment Facility will also provide technical assistance to all projects that will 
receive investment financing from GCF loans during construction and operation phase for 
project management and verification/certification to ensure that performance is improved and 
the targets are met (activity 1.1.2). This will be complemented by additional capacity-building 
support for project stakeholders through trainings on construction methods that are adapted to 
climate context and local materials.  
17. 
Investments to projects will be made through either (a) direct financing to a public or 
private entity provided with potential additional financing sources and self-financing from 
project owners; or (b) intermediated financing to a financial intermediary. The project pipeline 
will be developed during implementation phase in accordance with the eligibility criteria set out 
in the funding proposal and the term sheet. The determination of the GCF level of 
concessionality for each project will be calculated to cover the incremental costs associated with 
adoption of green building technologies.  
18. 
Activities relevant to eligible technologies supported under component 1 may include 
the following (Table 2):  
Table 2. Eligible technologies (indicative) 
Project type 
List of technologies eligible to the programme 
Building 
construction/ 
renovation 
● 
Building envelope (material, insulation, colours) 
● 
Limitation of solar gain (overhangs, windows) 
● 
Heat or cold production system 
● 
Lighting equipment 
● 
Ventilation system 
● 
Drop ceiling 
● 
Electric equipment 
● 
Solar water heaters 
● 
Roof photovoltaic power generation system (or other renewable energy 
system if applicable) 
● 
Green space management 
● 
Water management system

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 121 
 
 
Efficient heating/ 
cooling 
infrastructure 
● 
Heating or cooling network 
● 
Recover waste heat infrastructure 
● 
Solar cooling storage equipment 
● 
Cooling equipment (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning or HVAC, 
storage) 
Green building 
ecosystem actor 
● 
Processes and equipment involved in the production and/or distribution 
of the technologies listed above under building construction/renovation 
and under efficient heating/cooling infrastructures 
● 
Services and equipment required for the installation, operation and/or 
maintenance of the technologies listed above under building 
construction/renovation and under efficient heating/cooling 
infrastructure 
Component 2: Enabling Facility (total cost: EUR 21.5 million; GCF cost: EUR 19 million)   
19. 
The Enabling Facility will support the adoption of policies and regulations to perpetuate 
and scale up these good practices, while ensuring that capacities for implementation and 
enforcement are built. Support will be provided to (i) develop sector investment framework or 
initiatives, including action plans and investment roadmaps; (ii) develop public policy and 
expand policy framework to mainstream energy efficiency in the building sector, including 
establishment/improvement/enforcement of building certification, building code or energy 
efficiency requirements; and (iii) develop capacity of governments and stakeholders to raise 
awareness and technical understanding on bioclimatic building design, building energy 
performance certification and verification procedures, and others. The Enabling Facility will 
share knowledge and experience demonstrated by the Programme utilizing regional and global 
platforms.       
Project management (total cost: EUR 3.2 million; GCF cost: 2.2 million) 
20. 
This component will support the executing entities (EEs) and project implementing 
entities in the management, coordination and implementation of their project activities, in 
compliance with the contractual obligations that are included or referred to in the legal 
agreements entered into with the AE. The GCF portion of the project management cost is less 
than 5 per cent of the grant portion of requested funding from GCF and is compliant with the 
GCF policy on fees.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
  
                               Scale: High 
21. 
PEEB Cool has a mitigation impact potential of 1,562,759 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO2eq) avoided for the project lifetime. The impact is estimated based on the 
emission factors of electricity for each country and a single gas emission factor for all countries; 
and the building lifespan of 15 years is considered. A total of 1,133,261 million people will 
directly benefit from the programme. The programme envisages annual energy savings of 
233,267 MWh per year by the end of the programme, in addition to enhancing the resilience of 
35,069 physical assets in total.  
22. 
Through the Investment Facility financing for 11 projects is envisaged, and through the 
Enabling Facility 10 sectoral investment frameworks/initiatives and 24 policy proposals are to 
be developed and prepared.  
23. 
The programme also estimates 27,000 jobs created in green building construction jobs, 
of which 20 per cent are targeted to be occupied by females.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 122 
 
 
24. 
The underpinnings of the envisaged impact potential of the proposed programme are 
supported by most contemporary urban sector research on improving efficiency of building 
stocks. The McKinsey Center for Business and Environment and C40 Cities (2017) study 
emphasizes building stock efficiency, which they estimate can alone achieve between 21–37 per 
cent of the carbon reductions needed to reach the 2030 objective of a 1.5 °C world. According to 
the study, the largest potential impact is in large, low-income cities while the lowest is in large, 
semi-dense middle-income cities. Among building efficiency actions, ultra-high-efficiency new 
building standards have the greatest potential impact, followed by HVAC and energy efficient 
water heating, as well as lighting and building upgrades.    
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
  
  
 
 
        Scale: High 
25. 
The programme aims to address financial, institutional and technical barriers through 
an integrated approach that has been undertaken through PEEB, which was initiated in 2018 in 
five countries. PEEB Cool is a scale-up programme of PEEB aiming to contribute to unlocking 
climate potential. The programme aims to secure long-term systemic shift in the building sector 
by creating an enabling environment and contribution to regulatory framework and policies. 
26. 
The programme applies innovative sustainable green buildings solutions, incorporating 
bioclimatic design, energy efficient air conditioning and appliances, and on-site renewable 
production. PEEB Cool enables strong technology transfer where the 11 countries demonstrate 
examples in different contexts, and the activities on capacity-building and knowledge 
dissemination will support the sharing of these experiences through regional and global 
platforms.  
27. 
Assuming that 50–65 per cent of new buildings (built in 2017 and later) are constructed 
to ultra-high-efficiency standards, developing world cities (including the 11 countries targeted 
by the programme) could use this sector to achieve 23 per cent of the 1.5 °C emissions target by 
2030 in large, low-income cities, 22 per cent in mega cities and 10 per cent in large, semi-dense, 
middle-income cities.5 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
     
                    Scale: High  
28. 
The programme has a high potential to generate environmental benefits through 
reduced air pollution and improvement of waste and wastewater disposal through bioclimatic 
design and measures applied. It also presents strong social and health benefits, including 
increase in productivity, reduced mortality and heat stress, and improved access to public 
services (e.g. education) through increase in thermal comforts. The programme identifies 
economic opportunities by market creation and 27,000 green jobs as a programme co-benefit. A 
strategy will be developed to address gaps in gender consideration in energy efficiency in 
buildings for each country to promote participation of women in the decision-making process, 
as well as to remove potential barriers for women and women-owned businesses. 
29. 
PEEB Cool will provide benefits over multiple SDGs, including SDG 3 (good health and 
well-being), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy), SDG 8 (decent work 
and economic growth), SDG 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), and SDG 11 
(sustainable cities and communities). 
30. 
The programme’s sustainability is also ensured by building envelope retrofit strategies 
such as solar shading, window glazing, air tightness and insulation as all of these measures can 
 
5 McKinsey Center for Business and Environment and C40 Cities, 2017. Focused acceleration: A strategic approach to 
climate action in cities to 2030. Available at < https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-
insights/a-strategic-approach-to-climate-action-in-cities-focused-acceleration>.

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 123 
 
 
reduce long-term energy consumption by an average of 33 per cent. Improving the building 
envelopes of cities with long winters can help them attain 5–10 per cent of their 2030 emissions 
reduction targets for selected cities.6 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                               Scale: High 
31. 
PEEB Cool will promote and accelerate investments in projects addressing climate 
change impacts for vulnerable populations, including low-income families (residential housing), 
children (schools) as well as patients (hospitals) by reducing climate impacts associated with 
high indoor temperatures. As noted above, the programme has pre-identified the sectors that 
are prioritized by each country based on the vulnerabilities identified. 
32. 
With growing population and increasing urbanization, increase in floor area is going to 
be significant, ranging from 60 to 100 per cent globally by 2050. The 2020 IEA report 
emphasizes the need for effective policies and regulations as well as clear and ambitious policy 
signals to drive a range of measures, including passive building design, material efficiency, low-
carbon materials, efficient building envelope measures, and highly efficient lighting and 
appliances.7 Building energy codes are critical to keep up with the considerable growth in 
demand for new buildings and existing buildings. According to the baseline analysis conducted 
by the AE on the energy efficiency of building codes for thermal regulations (TRs) in the 11 
countries: 
(a) 
9 out of 11 countries have TRs in force; 
(b) 
1 country out of 11 has a TR project; 
(c) 
All countries have TRs or TR projects; and 
(d) 
The Asian countries involved in PEEB Cool all have TRs. 
33. 
The proposed programme is offering a tangible opportunity for building energy codes 
and standards to support lower carbon emissions within the building sector in 11 targeted 
countries. Building energy codes are regulatory instruments that specify minimum energy 
efficiency standards for residential and commercial building sectors. They typically either 
mandate certain energy efficiency characteristics for building technologies or are aligned with 
technology performance and provide target energy use levels for a building as a whole. Building 
energy codes can be mandatory or voluntary and are often complemented by additional energy 
efficiency building initiatives.   
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
            
  
 
        Scale: High  
34. 
PEEB Cool is aligned with the countries’ nationally determined contributions (NDCs), 
the Montreal Protocol and its Kigali Amendments, and countries’ strategies. 
(a) 
Albania: The programme is in line with the NDC and national legal regulations and plans, 
including the Energy Efficiency Reference Law (Law No. 124/2015), Law on Energy 
Efficiency (Law No. 125/2015), Albanian Law on Energy Performance of Buildings (Law 
No. 116/2016) and National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (2017–2020). The 
programme will provide support to implement energy efficiency policies and measures 
to further support implementation and completion of policy efforts and larger 
investments. Albania is committed to the Kigali Cooling Efficiency Programme (K-CEP). 
 
6 El-Darwish and Goma. 2017. 
7 IEA. 2020. Global ABC Regional Roadmap for Buildings and Construction 2020-2050.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 124 
 
 
(b) 
Argentina: The country’s NDC aims to achieve reduction in GHG emissions by 18 per 
cent by 2030 through efforts on diesel replacement by natural gas, nuclear power and 
biofuels, energy efficiency promotion at all levels, disseminated renewable energy 
production and sustainable forest and agricultural land management. The programme is 
in line with the electricity regulatory framework and housing policy and will provide 
support built on existing programmes. The country is committed to the K-CEP and is a 
Cool Coalition partner.   
(c) 
Costa Rica: The country’s NDC includes an unconditional 44 per cent GHG reduction 
target against BAU by 2030 and reaffirms the government’s aspiration of achieving 
partial carbon neutrality by 2021 and becoming a net carbon-neutral economy by 2085. 
HFCs are specifically included in the NDC. The programme will provide support to 
contribute to the country’s ambition for a net zero emissions economy. Costa Rica is 
committed to the Kigali Programme and is also a Cool Coalition partner. 
(d) 
Djibouti: The programme is in alignment with the country’s NDC and legal regulations, 
including Law No. 42/AN/14/7èmeL, Law No. 88/AN (1984), and Law No. 
90/AN/15/7emeL de 2015, and contributes to Djibouti Vision 2035. Djibouti is a Cool 
Coalition partner. 
(e) 
Indonesia: The country’s NDC includes a conditional target of reducing energy sector 
GHG emissions by 398 MtCO2eq by 2030, corresponding to a reduction of 24 per cent 
relative to BAU level. The programme will provide support to achieve the Government’s 
energy sector targets and compliance and enforcement of Minimum Energy 
Performance requirements. 
(f) 
Mexico: The country adopted the General Climate Change Law in 2012, and aims to 
unconditionally reduce GHG emissions by 2030 by 22 per cent below its BAU baseline 
and by 36 per cent with international support for its NDC. The country has been 
implementing the Montreal Protocol since 1991 and has established an energy 
conservation code for buildings. PEEB Cool aims to provide technical cooperations on 
waste management, water management, responsible and sustainable procurement, 
energy management and building design to meet the country’s targets. Mexico is also a 
Cool Coalition partner. 
(g) 
Morocco: The country’s NDC includes actions in relation to energy efficiency in the 
building sector to achieve GHG reduction targets. PEEB Cool aims to support 
contribution to the country’s energy efficiency laws and National Energy Strategy, as 
well as building codes and Minimum Energy Performance Standard implementation. 
Morocco is also a Cool Coalition partner. 
(h) 
Nigeria: The country’s NDC includes a conditional target to reduce GHG emissions by 45 
per cent compared to the baseline scenario; 2 per cent annual improvement in energy 
efficiency (30 per cent by 2030); and 13 GW off-grid solar power plant. The programme 
will contribute to targets set out in the country’s Energy Efficiency Action Plan and 
Building Code. Nigeria is committed to the Kigali Programme and is a Cool Coalition 
partner. 
(i) 
North Macedonia: The country’s NDC includes the building and transport sectors, which 
have the dominant share of reaching the GHG emissions reduction target. The 
programme is in alignment with the Law for Energy Efficiency and National Strategy for 
Energy Development until 2050. Several national energy efficiency and climate plans are 
under development, and the programme aims to contribute to achieving the targets to 
be set. The country ratified the Kigali Amendment in 2020 and is also a Cool Coalition 
partner.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 125 
 
 
(j) 
Sri Lanka: The programme is in alignment with the country’s NDC and national 
strategies, including Vision 2025, the Long Term Electricity Generation Expansion Plan 
2018–2032, the National Solid Waste Management Strategy of 2000, and the Corporate 
Plan 2014–2018, and will contribute to the country’s efforts to improve energy 
performance of buildings. Sri Lanka is committed to the K-CEP and is a Cool Coalition 
partner. 
(k) 
Tunisia: The country’s NDC includes a target to reduce by 41 per cent the carbon 
intensity of the Tunisian economy by 2030, relative to the year 2010. PEEB Cool is in 
alignment with Tunisia's Energy Transition Plan and Energy Conservation Law. The 
country ratified the Kigali Amendment in 2021. 
35. 
PEEB Cool was developed in discussion with stakeholders, including government 
agencies, green building ecosystem actors (e.g. research institutions, councils, and agencies), 
project owners, the donors and other international financing institutions for potential 
collaboration and financing arrangements. During implementation, national designated 
authorities will be heavily engaged and the priority sectors will be identified based on the 
vulnerabilities and needs of the country/local contexts. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness   
 
                               Scale: High 
36. 
GCF funding will deliver mitigation benefits at EUR/USD 49.27 per tCO2eq (total GCF 
project costs/expected lifetime emission reductions) and adaptation benefits at EUR/USD 195 
per beneficiary (total GCF project costs/direct+indirect beneficiary). The programme co-
financing ratio is 1:5.  
37. 
The AE has carried out economic and financial analysis, including sensitivity analysis. 
The EIRR for the programme is assessed at 48.5%. The economic value added of the Programme 
is largely due to its contribution to GHG emission reduction potential and positive impacts for 
health and well-being of the funded activities. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
38. 
Programme background. PEEB Cool aims at enhancing energy efficiency in the 
building sector in the target countries through an investment facility to support public and 
private developers in considering energy efficiency measures in buildings, and includes an 
enabling facility to develop a sectorial investment framework, elaborate policy proposals and 
build capacities for building sector professionals. The environmental co-benefits of the 
programme include the improvement of air quality as a result of the reduced demand for grid 
electricity and decrease in air pollutant emissions. It is also expected to result in improved 
water and soil quality due to better management of construction and operations waste from 
buildings. Improved designs are also expected to result in reduced water requirement, reduced 
light and noise pollution and improved indoor air quality. The social co-benefits include 
improved overall health, quality of life and living conditions of building occupants. 
39. 
Environmental and social risk category and safeguards instrument. The AE has 
classified the environmental and social (E&S) risk category of the programme to potentially 
have “substantial” E&S risks (category B+) as per the AE’s risk categorization, which would be 
equivalent to category B as per GCF E&S risk categorization. The Secretariat confirms this 
categorization and that it is within the AE’s E&S risk accreditation level. All subprojects with 
risk category A as per GCF and AFD categorization (high risk) will be excluded from the

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 126 
 
 
programme’s support; this will be part of the eligibility criteria. The AE has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines the structure for the 
assessment of anticipated E&S risks and impacts of the programme as well as the mitigation 
measures to address those risks and impacts. 
40. 
Compliance with GCF ESS standards: The paragraphs below provide a brief 
description of the programme’s compliance to ESS standards. 
41. 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The investment facility will be implemented by AFD (public projects) and Proparco 
(private projects) within their pipeline of building subprojects in the target countries. The ESMF 
provides a description of the environmental and social risks and impacts of the subprojects 
under the programme and how these will be assessed, managed, mitigated, and monitored at 
the programme and operational activity levels. The reference ESS standards for the programme 
will be the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Performance Standards (PS) and its 
related Guidance Notes as well as the applicable national legislations. Each subproject will be 
evaluated by the implementing entity against various criteria such as extent and size of 
potential negative impacts; sensitivity of the concerned area; temporality of the impacts; 
governance and owner capacity to manage the subproject; and cumulative impacts on different 
geographical areas, among others. The AE will assist each subproject owner in defining the E&S 
performance targets, ensuring their implementation throughout the life cycle of the subproject, 
and formalizing the subproject’s E&S commitments in an Environment and Social Commitment 
Plan. Subproject owners will be responsible for performing the E&S assessment or conducting 
an E&S audit for existing facilities and developing the management plans of its subprojects. 
42. 
ESS 2: Labour and Working Conditions. Potential risks and impacts of the programme 
related to labour and working conditions are expected during the construction and operation 
activities of the subprojects. This is associated with the occupational health and safety risks of 
the workers and labourers who could be exposed to physical, chemical, and natural hazards at 
construction and operation phase of the subprojects in relation to social housing improvements; 
construction and extension of healthcare and education facilities; and energy efficiency 
measures in public buildings and in the industrial and transportation sector. To mitigate this, 
standard operating procedures and guidelines for good labour practices and a working 
conditions checklist to be implemented at the site will be developed. Compliance to labour 
practices and requirements as per the national and the AE’s requirements pursuant to GCF 
policies will also be implemented and monitored. 
43. 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention. The activities under the 
programme will potentially generate wastewater and hazardous materials. In addition, during 
construction, adverse impacts will be aggravated along with the generation of noise, vibration, 
particulate matter, dust, solid and liquid waste, including potential for fuel spillage from 
vehicles, heavy equipment and construction machineries. Soil degradation during soil 
excavations and concreting may also be expected. Potential conflict with the use of local natural 
resources (e.g. water and energy) may also occur. To mitigate these potential risks and impacts, 
the programme intends to ensure that subproject owners will acquire the appropriate 
environmental permits and licenses depending on the specific sector and national 
requirements. Management and mitigation plans and other instruments will likewise be 
developed. Production, storage, and handling procedures will be aligned with globally accepted 
environment, health, and safety guidelines and good international industry practice. 
44. 
ESS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security. The local communities where the 
subprojects will be implemented may experience adverse impacts during the construction and 
operation phase of these activities. These may include potential exposure to nuisance noise and 
dust particularly during construction activities, exposure to physical and chemical hazards, 
increased potential for traffic accidents due to movements of heavy machineries and vehicles, as

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 127 
 
 
well as decreased amenity because of diminished access to housing and/or public utility 
infrastructure. Possible conflicts between construction workers, security personnel and the 
local population may also occur. Nevertheless, these risks and impacts will be assessed in detail 
during subproject identification and specific management plans will be developed. This will 
include the establishment of mitigation measures with regard to the possible impacts generated 
by the presence of construction workers in relation to health, accidents, social conflicts and 
tensions that may occur through preparation of a workers’ code of conduct as well as 
development of an emergency preparedness and response plan. 
45. 
 ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. In the framework of the 
programme, all subprojects shall be designed to avoid involuntary resettlement considering all 
alternatives at the stage of subproject design. Where avoidance is not possible, IFC’s PS 5 
requirements will be followed. To minimize displacements and adverse social and economic 
impacts from land acquisition or restrictions on land use, compensation will be provided for 
loss of assets at replacement cost, and resettlement activities will be implemented with 
appropriate disclosure of information, consultation, and the informed participation of those 
affected. As guided by the assessment, a Resettlement Action Plan or a Livelihood Restoration 
Plan will be required and will be carried out following the ESS5 requirements. An indicative 
terms of reference for a Resettlement Action Plan and a Livelihood Restoration Plan, and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework are attached in the ESMF. 
46. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. The programme will ensure the exclusion of locating subprojects in critical habitats 
and avoid activities that may involve extensive land clearing. The programme will also 
implement a supervision and monitoring programme to check on land use and land cover 
change in the locations where the construction and refurbishment activities will be executed. 
Solid waste and wastewater management plans will also be developed to ensure that no loss of 
habitat and biodiversity may occur due to inappropriate disposal of solid waste and discharge of 
wastewater. 
47. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The project is being 
carried out in a number of countries where indigenous peoples are present and as a result has 
triggered the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy along with various other standards such as PS 7 of 
the IFC. The AE recognizes that indigenous peoples, as social groups with identities that are 
distinct from mainstream groups in national societies, are often among the most marginalized 
and vulnerable segments. At the same time, projects and subprojects can present opportunities 
for indigenous peoples to participate in and benefit from project-related activities. In 
accordance with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the AE and the programme have developed 
an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and an indicative outline of Indigenous Peoples 
Plan that aims to ensure that indigenous peoples: (i) do not suffer harm or adverse effects from 
the design and implementation of programme-related activities, and (ii) benefit from the 
programme activities in a culturally appropriate manner. Specific impacts of projects and 
subprojects on indigenous peoples will be identified during the E&S risk identification process 
and, where significant impacts are expected, an Indigenous Peoples Plan needs to be designed 
following the requirements of IFC PS 7. 
48. 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage. The programme’s activities, particularly during construction, 
may adversely affect tangible physical cultural resources. The programme will however ensure 
that these will be protected in the implementation of the subproject activities and their 
preservation will be supported. Implementing entities will be required to ensure that, where a 
subproject may impact cultural heritage, appropriate protection and equitable sharing of 
benefits from the use of cultural heritage will be ensured throughout subproject design and 
execution. The E&S risk identification process determines whether the project has an impact on 
cultural heritage and the ESMF has provisions for managing chance finds through the

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 128 
 
 
implementation of a chance find procedure in the case of cultural heritage being discovered 
during construction or excavation activities. 
49. 
Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).  The programme 
has identified SEAH as transversal social risks and impacts in the ESMF that fall 
disproportionately on individuals especially for the disadvantaged and vulnerable, as well as 
arise from prejudice or discrimination when accessing the development resources and benefits 
from the programme. The programme also recognizes that SEAH could occur among workers 
and project-affected communities and impact on their health, safety and well-being of during 
the programme operation and subsequently requires SEAH safeguarding be applied to the 
entire programme portfolio, including direct and indirect financed projects and subprojects and 
both project financing and technical assistance components. The Programme will conduct SEAH 
due diligence for projects under the Investment Facility based on the relevant guidance of the 
World Bank for public projects and the IFC for private projects. Considering activities of the 
Enabling Facility are largely focusing on institutional strengthening and capacity building, SEAH 
safeguarding will be approached through the programme’s gender efforts and relying on EE’s 
procedures for assessing and addressing SEAH risks. The ESMF elaborates specific SEAH risk 
management actions along the subproject cycle, including project identification, instruction, 
commitment, supervision, and evaluation. In the case of SEAH incident or complaint, the 
programme will follow World Bank and IFC Good Practice Notes guidelines on grievance 
mechanism and ensure AFD's corporate E&S complaints mechanism be accessible to receiving 
and addressing SEAH complaints. When substantial SEAH risk is identified, a separate SEAH 
grievance mechanism system will be required potentially run by a gender-based violence 
service provider with feedback provided to the parallel grievance mechanisms. Separate 
procedures for SEAH grievance of the Enabling Facility will be followed by GIZ through its 
“Safeguards + Gender Management System” and whistleblowing system. Given the extensive 
geographical coverage of the programme and transversality of the potential SEAH risks and 
impacts, the AE is recommended to provide guidance in the ESMF on survivor-centred and 
gender-responsive GRM procedures to address SEAH complaints and allegations and to ensure 
consistency among the GRMs applied to different components. 
50. 
Implementation arrangements. Each subproject supported by the programme will be 
required to assign a primary safeguards specialist. Additional specialists (as required) may also 
be allocated, including the engagement of support from external consultants. Each of the 
participating implementing entites from each country is expected to manage their supported 
portfolio by applying specific requirements in line with the AE’s prescribed requirements 
during the preparation of subprojects. Capacity-building to improve the E&S capabilities of the 
implementing entities will also be explored by the AE. The implementing entities will be 
responsible for implementation of the ESMF during subproject operations including monitoring 
and compliance with the E&S management plans of third parties and subcontractors. The AE 
will have the overall responsibility in the management, supervision, monitoring and reporting 
of the programme’s ESS implementation. 
51. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The AE conducted stakeholder 
consultations during the preparation of the proposal through virtual and face-to-face meetings 
or calls in each target country. Representatives from beneficiaries, government agencies, 
ministries, and actors of the buildings sector from various organizations and institutions were 
consulted. A stakeholder engagement strategy at the programme and subprojects levels has 
been developed to guide future consultations and participation of stakeholders. The nature of 
engagement, including the frequency and level of effort, will be commensurate with the 
potential risks and impacts of the subproject as well as its stage of development. Subproject 
developers will also be required to disclose subproject E&S reports and information to allow 
stakeholders (particularly the subproject-affected people) to have a clear understanding of the

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 129 
 
 
subproject’s risks and impacts, and the potential opportunities and development benefits that 
the subproject may offer.  
52. 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The programme’s approach to E&S grievance 
and redress relies on the AE’s established institutional grievance procedures. GRMs will also be 
set up at the subprojects level to allow for resolution of complaints from affected people. They 
will also have recourse to the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism in addition to the AFD E&S 
Complaints Mechanism. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
53. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
54. 
 The gender assessment provides an overview of possible gender issues related to the 
project. However, the quality of the analysis varies by country, with some countries still 
requiring a more comprehensive analysis of the enabling environment for the pursuit of gender 
equity (e.g. Djibouti, Tanzania). This includes a review of gender aspects of each countries’ 
participation in international conventions (e.g. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women), constitution, legal system, access to employment and access to 
resources. The AE has committed to undertake specific subproject-based gender assessments 
before the start of the implementation of PEEB Cool component 2. The subproject-based gender 
assessments will be the bases for developing subproject-level, context-specific gender actions 
plans. The programme-level gender assessment was undertaken through desk review without 
gender-specific stakeholder consultations. The subproject-level studies are expected to engage 
various stakeholders, including women and women-focused groups, to formulate relevant 
subproject-specific gender action plans. The analysis and development of the gender action plan 
per subproject is expected to be done through stakeholder engagement of various women’s 
groups and women themselves. 
55. 
The current overall analysis indicates the existence of enabling environment to engage 
in gender equality and women’s empowerment initiatives for most countries. Some countries 
present more advanced states than others, including Mexico, Argentina, and Costa Rica, where 
they take note of the low levels of participation of women and have put measures to promote 
and increase the participation of women in the sector. Gendered data for the construction sector 
is sparse, however from what could be gathered, it indicates that many countries are committed 
to promoting women’s engagement and inclusion in the construction industry, with current 
women's participation levels ranging from less than 3 per cent to up to 14 per cent. Some 
countries have registered progressive increases in the number of women participating in the 
sector. Activities that promote women’s engagement and inclusion include implementing a 
variety of interventions focused on hiring and recruitment and integrating gender into 
organizational policies; prioritizing gender equality when crafting national policies; collecting 
sex-disaggregated data from different sectors; establishing quotas to ensure that women are 
represented in decision-making levels; and strengthening workplace protections for women. 
For example, Mexico is making efforts through the Women Entrepreneurs of the Mexican 
Chamber of Construction Industry to promote the inclusion of women in the sector. This has 
resulted in an increase of women’s participation from 4 to 14 per cent. Argentina is another 
example where gender issues have been integrated into the national policy environment to 
support legislations and practices to promote gender equality. Women are better represented in 
the service and agriculture sectors, while in the construction sector they are represented in 
clerical, engineering, and accountancy related jobs. Some of the barriers identified for women to 
engage in the sector are limited personal development, gender-based discrimination, 
stereotyping the industry, uncomfortable working environment and limited access to 
information related to energy.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 130 
 
 
56. 
 A programme-level gender action plan has been provided with planned actions to 
conduct in-depth subproject-level and context-specific gender assessment and development of 
subproject-level gender action plans. The programme-level gender action plan will be revised 
accordingly during the inception phase, considering the subproject-level gender action plans. 
The current programme-level gender action plan includes broad activities, indicators, targets, 
timelines, gender expertise and budgets as per the requirement of the GCF Gender Policy. The 
activities included in the programme-level gender action plan will address gender gaps 
identified currently such as participation of women in the construction industry and energy 
sectors in technical positions through targeted technical trainings; access to improved and 
green housing and commercial infrastructure; promoting access to jobs and decision-making 
positions within the industry; and access to finance to further develop and engage women-led 
businesses in the construction sector by establishing dedicated funds. These actions will be 
supplemented with activities that will sensitize and influence, in a gender-responsive way, 
existing institutions' current practices and processes to respond to the unmet needs of women 
in the sector. Interventions in this regard are broadly targeted at developing capacities of 
implementing agencies, financial intermediaries, ministries, construction companies and end 
beneficiaries of the programme enabling them to address policy-based gaps in countries in the 
building sector. 
57. 
The AE is recommended to (1) ensure that comprehensive assessments of the enabling 
environment for the pursuit of gender equality are completed for each country and integrated 
into the programme-level gender assessment at the inception phase of the programme and (2) 
ensure that subproject-level gender assessments include an analysis of the existence of 
conducive working environment where employment of women is being encouraged in the 
sector. The assessment should consider existing gender equality policies, conducive working 
conditions, policies on equal pay for equal work, promotion, training, harassment, and such 
issues. These aspects could also be reflected in the planned trainings for diverse groups that will 
be targeted by the program. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk) 
58. 
GCF is requested to provide a loan of EUR131 million and USD 44 million, in addition to 
a grant of EUR44 million for promoting energy efficiency in buildings in 11 countries over 4 
continents. AFD group will co-finance a senior loan of EUR 830 million and USD 281 million, and 
AFD will provide a grant of EUR5 million. The government of Germany is co-financing a EUR2.5 
million by way of grant.  
59. 
The programme consists of two facilities – an investment facility (EUR987.8 million and 
USD 326 million) and an enabling facility (EUR 21.5). For the investment facility, the sub-project 
pipeline in each country will be developed during the implementation period. 
60. 
The programme is designed to provide great flexibility. The programme allows for the 
provision of financing to both public and private sector entities.  The investment may be directly 
made by AFD or intermediated through the local financial partners (LFPs). No more than 90% of 
the total maximum amount of the GCF Sub-participation will be disbursed to public project 
owners/public LFPs. The split amount between direct and indirect financing is unknown at this 
stage.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 131 
 
 
61. 
AFD will be both AE and EE for the project. AFD has a track record of channelling on an 
average EUR2.7 billion per annum into climate finance since 2009. Its country offices can 
support the implementation in participating countries. The AE is rated as AA by Fitch and 
Standard and Poor’s.  
62. 
Proparco and GIZ will be co-EEs. Proparco will be in charge of private financing. GIZ will 
be executing the technical assistance activities. Due to the complex and large scale of the 
programme, effective coordination and implementation is necessary.   
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
63. 
Credit risks: GCF will assume the credit risk of borrowers in direct financing. In 
intermediate financing, GCF will assume the credit risk of LFPs. LFPs will assume the credit risk 
of the end borrowers. There is no minimum credit rating in LFP selection eligibility criteria. For 
public entities, AFD may ask for sovereign guarantee if needed. The GCF and AFD will be 
provided as two separate tranches. Comfort may be drawn by the fact that the credit risk will be 
shared between GCF and AE in pari passu basis. According to the AE, it has mitigation measures 
for limiting the risk of default of the LFPs and counterparts in its appraisal procedure. The AFD 
may not grant loans to countries considering credit risk and political situations to avoid high 
risk of over-indebtedness of the countries. The credit risk is also partially mitigated through 
diversification as the programme covers multiple countries, sectors, counterparts and sub-
projects. To ensure diversification and avoid a concentration risk, there is a cap of 25% per 
single project and single country. Also, no more than 20% of GCF loan will be provided to a 
single LFPs in case of intermediate financing. 
64. 
Co-financing risk: Other projects with intermediate financing or project finance in GCF 
portfolio often require co-financing by LFPs or a minimum equity requirement from sub-
borrowers/sponsors. In this programme, the contribution from sub-loan recipients and LFPs 
will be defined by LFPs and will be considered leveraged financing, not co-financing. There is 
sizable co-financing from AFD Group which will be critical for the success of the programme. 
The AE will have a certain flexibility to determine the ratio between GCF and AFD group tranche 
to sub-loans, but a co-financing ratio of 1:6.31 needs to be met by mid-year at the programme 
level to mitigate the co-financing risk. 
65. 
Complex implementation arrangement: the programme is at large scale covering 
multiple countries and sectors and the complex implementation arrangement may pose a risk of 
delays in the programme. Due to the great flexibility, most of the decisions will be made 
downstream. For the public sector where the majority of the funds will be disbursed (up to 
90%), the decision will be largely up to the public counter parts. The quality of the loan portfolio 
will be a key to achieving the project impact. The success of the programme depends on AE/EEs’ 
ability for direct financing and LFPs’ ability for intermediated financing to ensure and monitor 
that the sub-projects are developed and implemented strictly in accordance with the eligibility 
criteria such as a minimum performance target for mitigation and adaptation. These targets are 
different for construction and renovation. The sequence between the enabling facility and 
investment facility has to be well coordinated. The AFD country offices have experience in 
implementing projects in participating countries.  
66. 
FX risks: GCF and AFD loans will be provided in hard currencies (USD and EUR), the 
volatility of the local currencies could potentially affect returns impact on the borrowers’ ability 
to repay. The provision of two currencies will introduce a currency mismatch at GCF and it is 
recommended that the amount per each currency be pre-determined. If the GCF proceeds 
approved by the board become insufficient to complete the funded activities resulting from the 
exchange rate fluctuations, GCF shall not bear any responsibility of providing additional 
financing.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 132 
 
 
67. 
Project Viability and concessionality: The interest rates of the GCF senior loans are 
differentiated by the public and private borrower in least developed countries and non-leased 
development countries. The ultimate pricing to the private sector borrowers will be determined 
by AE on project-by-project basis. GCF level of concessionality to each project will be calculated 
to cover the incremental costs associated with adoption of green building technologies. It is 
recommended that AE ensure that the pricing of GCF’s concessional financing benefits the end 
borrowers. 
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
68. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk) 
 
69. 
None of the beneficiary countries involved in this project (i.e. Albania, Argentina, Costa 
Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, 
and Vietnam) are currently subject to any United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolutions 
(UNSCRs).  
70. 
AFD, as AE, confirmed that no individual or entity listed on any UNSC sanctions list, 
including the United Nations Consolidated Sanctions list, will be involved in any manner with 
the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer, or beneficiary. 
71. 
AFD confirmed that, during project appraisals and before implementation, AFD would 
require financed entities to screen any entity/individual against UNSC Resolutions. Ex-ante 
annual audits, required as per AFD procedures and contractual documentation with the 
beneficiary, will verify if the entity follows this process. 
72. 
The only counterparty for which AFD must complete due diligence is Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). AFD confirmed that due diligence has 
been undertaken on GIZ because AFD will transfer funds to GIZ and, as such, the process 
requires AFD to undertake due diligence on GIZ. AFD informed GCF that it did not find any 
negative occurrence. The risk in such transfers was assessed as low since GIZ implements direct 
activities (they do not on-grant the funds) and as GIZ is an organization of a Member State of the 
European Union (EU) regulated by the law of the EU and their process and procedures already 
have high standards. 
73. 
As the project is implemented, risk assessments will be undertaken for each recipient 
beneficiary under each sub-project, which will go through an appraisal process as per AFD and 
GIZ policies and procedures. 
74. 
AFD did not undertake a risk assessment on Proparco, which is a subsidiary of AFD, 
Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz, nukleare Sicherheit und Verbraucherschutz (BMU 
or the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety), 
and Fonds Français pour l'Environnement Mondial (FFEM or the French Facility for Global 
Environment). AFD explained that its reason for not conducting a risk assessment on Proparco 
is because AFD policy and procedure do not require due diligence on co-financiers; they only 
require due diligence on recipient beneficiaries. 
75. 
AFD has confirmed that it and Proparco will follow their accredited processes. Anti-
money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) processes for AFD and 
Proparco are the same, and GIZ will follow its own accredited processes. In this regard, AFD 
referred to section IV of the AFD application to GCF to become an AE. 
76. 
AFD is a regulated financial institution subject to banking regulations and supervision in 
all matters pertaining to AML/CFT. The regulations place a legal obligation on AFD to undertake

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 133 
 
 
the necessary due diligence before entering into business relationships with an entity and 
during the course of such business relation to verify that the entity is not involved in money 
laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF). 
77. 
AFD has put in place a comprehensive framework for ensuring compliance with the 
applicable regulations, and its policies and procedures for combating ML/TF are set out in 
circulars that are widely disseminated throughout the institution. 
78. 
AFD provides training on AML/CFT to all its employees, including those in its network 
branches. AFD carries out Know Your Customer (KYC) due diligence checks on all prospective 
and existing clients to assure compliance with AML/CFT policies. AFD does not receive deposits 
from the general public, thus reducing its exposure to ML/TF risks. Based on available 
information, AFD meets the requirements of basic fiduciary standards for AML/CFT. 
79. 
AFD set up an adapted internal AML/CFT procedure using a risk-based approach in 
accordance with French and EU regulations. To supplement its risk monitoring and 
management system, AFD set out various procedures for implementing its revised policy on 
financial security, particularly with regard to AML/CFT. These procedures list first-level 
controls that AFD employees must verify at every stage in the project life cycle in order to 
prevent and detect any AML/CFT risks or breach of national, international or EU financial and 
trade sanctions. The extent of controls depends on the degree of AML/CFT risk posed by the 
counterparty, which is based on the AML/CFT risk classification matrix. 
80. 
AFD confirms that its due diligence efforts aim to identify and verify the identity of 
counterparties and their beneficial owners before beginning business relationships (i.e. KYC). 
Due diligence efforts are recorded in writing and retained in company files. Disbursements are 
systematically subjected to second-level controls performed by the Operational Risk Monitoring 
and Compliance Department. The frequency at which data is updated depends on the level of 
risk that the counterparty represents with regards to ML/TF, as established in the AFD 
AML/CFT internal procedures. Additional points of control are added in the presence of 
aggravating risks, such as:  
(a) 
the presence of a politically exposed person; 
(b) 
the presence of negative elements (including reputation); and/or 
(c) 
the presence of a counterparty incorporated in a country that has been blacklisted by 
the Financial Action Task Force as presenting high risks of ML/TF.  
81. 
AFD also requires counterparties and relevant stakeholders to submit their latest 
audited and certified accounting documents. The beneficial owner of counterparties will 
systematically be identified. In case of ML/TF suspicions or if AFD has not been able to identify 
beneficial ownership, AFD will proceed to submit a suspicious transactions report to the French 
Financial Intelligence Unit. 
82. 
During project appraisal and throughout the project’s life cycle, AFD provides its 
employees with a screening tool that compiles financial and commercial sanctions adopted by 
France, the EU, the United States, the United Kingdom and the United Nations. Such screening is 
also included in the processing chain for payments issued by the AFD financial department. The 
purpose is to ensure that no counterparty or individual involved in such checks, or the supplier 
or winner of a call for tender funded by AFD, is under financial sanction or operates in sectors 
under embargo by France, the EU, the United Nations, the United States or the United Kingdom.  
83. 
AFD confirmed that after a project is completed, procedures for reimbursing and 
winding up equity investments are monitored carefully because they could reveal fraudulent 
practices.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 134 
 
 
84. 
AFD explained that, during disbursements, it regularly publishes and receives from the 
beneficiary implementation reports that enable progress to be tracked, including identification 
of potential issues as well as improvement opportunities: 
(a) 
For every project funded, beneficiaries are required to publish a progress report every 
six months during the implementation phase. The document reports on performance 
indicators defined in the logical framework, including a dashboard with indicators 
material to the project; 
(b) 
The local agency staff (based in the country/region where the project is executed) visit 
the project site and meet the beneficiary regularly. They write evaluation reports every 
semester (called Fiche d’évaluation des risques) regarding project performance and 
potential risks; and 
(c) 
The Project Manager (based in the Paris headquarters of AFD) visits the project site and 
meets the beneficiary once a year, and writes a project implementation report that is 
shared with all project stakeholders (e.g. local authorities and other parties involved). 
85. 
Controls are performed before every disbursement in order to continuously oversee the 
correct implementation of the project and assess expenditure against the project budget. In 
particular, AFD ensures the conditions precedent are fulfilled before proceeding to a 
disbursement. The geographical department is responsible for validating the fulfilment of 
conditions precedent or the granting of waivers.  
86. 
AFD confirmed that there are no intentions to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries, 
either directly or indirectly, cash, vouchers, commodities or other items of value. 
87. 
AFD confirmed that the project will have access to an institutional-level GRM.8 At project 
and subproject level, grievance mechanisms are designed to receive and facilitate potential 
concern or conflict resolution in relation with E&S risks as well as impacts of the project. The 
need or relevance of such mechanisms shall be assessed during project appraisal phase and E&S 
evaluation.  
88. 
Grievance mechanisms will be tailored to the level of project E&S risks and impacts, with 
the purpose of resolving concerns or conflicts through an understandable and transparent 
consultative process consistent with project and/or local context. The mechanism shall be free, 
and shall not impede access to judicial or administrative remedies. Project owners will 
communicate the existence of such mechanisms and inform project stakeholders accordingly. 
Grievance mechanisms at project and subproject level are developed firstly in order to allow 
amicable resolution of a dispute or complaint. If not possible, then the complaint will be 
resolved through a formal legal process. 
89. 
Recommended risk rating: The Office of Risk Management and Compliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance Team has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team has determined a risk rating of medium and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps. 
90. 
ORMC/Compliance would like to remind AFD, as the AE, of its continuing obligations 
and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks for money laundering, 
terrorist financing, or prohibited practices among the intended counterparties, EEs, 
beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities. 
 
8 https://www.afd.fr/sites/afd/files/2019-04-05-24-00/2017-18-activity-report-environmental-social-
complaints.pdf

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 135 
 
 
4.3.6. 
Recommended risk rating: Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall project/programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to implement the 
project/programme 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
91. 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for 
this project. Also, AFD, société de Promotion et Participation à la Coopération économique 
(PROPARCO) and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) will serve as 
Executing Entities (EEs). 
92. 
AFD as the AE will host the Programme Management Unit (PMU) and manage the 
contractual relation with the GCF. The three entities will closely coordinate through the Steering 
Committee and PMU. PMU will coordinate the overall implementation of the Programme and 
will be supported by a Programme Team which will bring technical expertise. 
93. 
 In addition, AFD as the EE will be in charge of the PEEB Cool investment facility 
implementation within the public sector. AFD project teams will be responsible for the 
identification, appraisal, implementation and evaluation of eligible investments. The 
Subprojects’ appraisal process will follow AFD’s procedures. The GCF and AFD will sign a 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and all GCF funds, whether reimbursable or non-
reimbursable funds, will be transferred from the GCF to AFD according to the provisions set in 
the FAA.  The FAA will be a grant and sub-participation. 
94. 
PROPARCO will be in charge of PEEB Cool implementation within the private sector. As 
per AFD projects, PROPARCO project teams will be responsible for the identification, appraisal, 
implementation and evaluation of eligible investments and appraisal process will follow 
PROPARCO’s procedure. AFD will sign a subsidiary agreement with PROPARCO, which will take 
the form of a mandate agreement and will define the fiduciary and implementation 
arrangements between AFD and PROPARCO. 
95. 
GIZ will be responsible for the implementation of activities within the Enabling Facility 
(component 2). GIZ will ensure the implementation of activities using a combination of own 
staff based in headquarters and respective partner countries as well as independent 
consultants. All will report to the PEEB Cool Programme Management Unit. AFD will sign a 
subsidiary agreement with GIZ and will channel GCF funds to GIZ for the purpose of component 
2 implementation. 
96. 
AFD’s procurement rules are in line with international standards provided by the World 
Bank Group. The AFD procurement guidelines as detailed in Annex 19 will apply to public-
owned local partners that will be in charge of implementing the Programme. For private-owned 
Subprojects sponsors, PROPARCO will apply the procedures applicable to the specificities of the

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 136 
 
 
PROPARCO private sector Subprojects clients. GIZ procurement and awarding rules apply for 
procurement within component 2 for which GIZ is the procuring agency. 
97. 
Due diligence for each financing (direct or intermediated) will be carried out by AFD's 
local agencies staff during the appraisal processes of the subprojects. Each subproject and end-
beneficiary project will go through AFD appraisal process cycle, which was reviewed by the GCF 
during AFD accreditation process. Subsidiary agreements will be signed between AFD and 
PROPARCO and AFD and GIZ. 
98. 
Audit arrangements will be carried out in accordance with terms of the FAA and AMA, 
and performed as per AFD’s internal guidelines. 
99. 
Annex II: Financial terms and conditions of grants and concessional loans of the GCF 
decisionB.09/04 requires that a Service fee of 0.25% per annum is applied on high concessional 
loans to the public sector. During negotiations of the financial terms and conditions of the AFD 
PEEB programme, the AE highlighted potential operational limitations on their ability to 
separately charge Service fee on downstream loans. As such, it was proposed that instead of 
having a separate application of Service fee, the Service fee is marked up on to the Interest Rate.  
100. 
Additionally, in order to improve the financial viability of the programme, the 
Secretariat proposes to uniformly apply the High concessional rate of Service fee in all the 
project implementation countries.  
101. 
We would therefore like to bring to the Board’s attention the following deviations from 
the GCF decisionB.09/04, for the Board’s consideration and approval: 
(a) 
Consolidation of the Service fees and interest rates pricing terms for the programme, 
instead of having separate rate for each.  
(b) 
Uniform application of High concessional loans Service fee rate to the public sector of  
0.25% for 10 out of the 11 implementing countries instead of the rate of 0.50%.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
102. 
As a cross-cutting programme, PEEB Cool aims to generate both mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, as per the metrics of the GCF integrated results 
management framework core indicator 1, the intervention is expected to result in overall GHG 
emissions reductions of 1,562,759 tCO2eq over a period of 15 years, based on the impact 
calculations available in annex 22 of the funding proposal. 
103. 
As relates to adaptation, it is expected that the programme will directly benefit a total of 
about 1.133 million individuals by providing them with increased thermal comfort in 
residential, education, health, retail, and office buildings over a 15-year period. The programme 
expects to create 27,000 new green jobs of which 5,400 would be filled by females, as per the 
socioeconomic co-benefit indicator provided in section E.5 of the funding proposal. 
104. 
The theory of change (ToC) adequately explains how change is understood to come 
about across the targeted sectors and result areas. This is properly shown in both the ToC 
diagram as well as in the annexed table to the ToC, which, as per guidance provided by the 
Secretariat, details the specific types of interventions supported by the programme as well as 
how they are foreseen to achieve measurable adaptation and mitigation benefits. 
105. 
Section E.3 of the logical framework has been designed with relevant details, including 
the inclusion of solid means of verification and reporting on the appropriate core and 
supplementary indicators for both mitigation and adaptation and for the targeted result areas 
as per the GCF integrated results management framework.

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 137 
 
 
106. 
The monitoring and evaluation plan in annex 11 of the funding proposal has been found 
to follow the appropriate requirements as it includes the entire list of the programme integrated 
results management framework indicators while ensuring alignment of the data/sources with 
set means of verification. As recommended by the Secretariat, the AE increased the M&E budget 
in the latest package submission to EUR 695,000. However, the budget allocated to M&E 
remains lower than 2 per cent of the total programme budget, as per GCF Evaluation Policy 
recommendations. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
107. 
The accreditation master agreement (AMA) was signed with the AE on 11 November 
2017, and it became effective on 16 January 2018. 
108. 
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme. It is 
recommended that, prior to submission of the funding proposal to the Board: (a) the AE has 
obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a certificate or legal opinion 
from the AE, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, confirming that all final internal 
approvals by the AE have been obtained and that it has the authority and capacity to implement 
the programme. 
109. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, 
Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, and Tunisia.  
110. 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities in these countries. This means that, 
among other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, 
which risks need to be further assessed. 
(a) 
With respect to Albania, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities 
and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Albania on 7 November 
2018. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(b) 
With respect to Argentina, GCF provided a revised draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a note to the Government of the Argentine Republic on 17 September 
2019. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(c) 
With respect to Costa Rica, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica on 
17 February 2022, followed by a revised draft agreement on 5 April 2022. The 
agreement is under negotiation with the Government; 
(d) 
With respect to Djibouti, GCF provided a revised draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities on 26 October 2017. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(e) 
With respect to Indonesia, GCF provided an updated draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Indonesia on 2 
April 2019. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(f) 
With respect to Mexico, GCF provided a revised draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities to the Government of the United Mexican States on 11 November 2017. The 
agreement is under review by the Government; 
(g) 
With respect to Morocco, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities 
and a background note to the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco on 1 October 
2016, followed by an updated background note on 21 November 2018. The agreement is 
under review by the Government;

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 138 
 
 
(h) 
With respect to Nigeria, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities 
and a background note to the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria on 11 
December 2015. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(i) 
With respect to North Macedonia, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of North 
Macedonia on 12 December 2017. The agreement is under review by the Government; 
(j) 
With respect to Sri Lanka, GCF provided a revised draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a note to the Government of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri 
Lanka on 14 November 2018, followed by a further note on 10 July 2019. The agreement 
is under review by the Government; and 
(k) 
With respect to Tunisia, GCF provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities 
and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Tunisia on 25 January 
2016, followed by an updated background note on 21 November 2018. The agreement is 
under review by the Government. 
111. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made 
only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the 
countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
112. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Submission by the AE to GCF of a certificate or legal opinion, in a form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval, confirming 
that the AE has obtained all final internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity 
and authority to implement the proposed programme; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the AE 
provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal 
approvals, whichever is later; and, 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 139 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP194 
Proposal name: 
Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool 
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia 
Project/Programme size: 
Large 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 
Impact potential 
 Scale: Medium to high 
1.
Overview: The Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings Cool (the “Programme” or
“PEEB Cool”) seeks to transform the construction sector at scale by supporting the design,
construction, and operation of energy efficient building, so-called green buildings.1 PEEB Cool
targets 11 countries with hot climates in which the temperature reaches levels at which heat
related risks become significant. The targeted countries include: in Africa, Djibouti, Morocco,
Nigeria, Tunisia; in South-East Asia, Indonesia, Sri Lanka; in South America, Argentina, Costa
Rica, Mexico; and Eastern Europe, Albania, North Macedonia.
2.
PEEB Cool has two components – an Investment Facility and an Enabling Facility. The
Investment Facility (with a total budget of approximately USD 1.3 billion) will offer financing
and technical assistance to public and private project owners incorporating bioclimatic design
principles and ambitious energy efficiency targets. The Enabling Facility (with a total budget of
USD 21.5 million (an average of USD 1.95 million per country) will support investments in
advancing the transformation of the building sector environment through sectoral framework,
policies, and trainings.
3.
In the Investment Facility, PEEB Cool will support local actors in implementing more
resilient and energy efficient building projects through (i) technical assistance at the design
phase; (ii) provision of finance, including concessional loans to address financial barriers linked
to higher upfront investment costs of green buildings; and (iii) technical assistance at the
construction phase to support the proper implementation of bioclimatic design and energy
efficiency measures and ensure the objectives of the Programme are met.
4.
The Enabling Facility is intended to support the adoption of policies and regulations that
support increased ambition around green buildings and to augment local capacity for
implementation and enforcement of such policies. Among other efforts, the Enabling Facility
will focus on activities that catalyse the replication of new performance requirements in public
procurements and public sectoral investments.
1PEEB Cool is an expansion of the Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB), initiated during the 
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP) 22.

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 140 
 
 
5. 
The components are intended to each address key barriers that are preventing the 
construction industry in the targeted countries from shifting away from current practices to a 
low-carbon, climate resilient development path. The two components are meant to be 
complimentary as investment drives new industry practice which regulation and public policy 
can incentivize and regulate. In addition to Agence Française de Développement (AFD) as the 
accredited entity (AE), Proparco will participate as an executing entity (EE) and co-financier for 
the Investment Facility (providing private sector finance) and Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), as executing entity for activities within the Enabling 
Facility. 
6. 
PEEB Cool will focus on construction subsectors that present significant potential for 
climate change adaptation and greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction such as large-scale new housing 
schemes and commercial buildings, working with both the public and private sectors. We expect 
PEEB Cool will primarily finance new constructions that can embed green design features from 
the outset, but the Programme will also support, where feasible, the refurbishment of existing 
building stock.  
7. 
The mitigation target for PEEB Cool is 1.563 million tCO2eq reduced or avoided direct 
emissions over the lifetime impact of buildings constructed by the end of the Programme’s 
duration. The adaptation objective for reduced vulnerabilities is 1.133 million direct 
beneficiaries according to the funding proposal. 
8. 
GCF Funding: As mentioned above, the total PEEB Cool funding amount is USD 1.338 
billion, of which the requested GCF portion is USD 176 million in senior loans and USD 44 
million in grants. AFD will provide co-financing of over USD 1.1 billion in senior loans and USD 5 
million in grant funding. Additional grant co-financing may be available from other sources 
(namely USD 2.5 million from the German government).    
9. 
GCF concessional loan funding (USD 176 million) will be blended into the Investment 
Facility. The GCF contribution will be used to off-set the price differential between business-as-
usual construction and construction that incorporates recommended bioclimatic and energy 
efficient measures. In this way, the green building option will be cost competitive for the project 
owner. Under the Programme mechanism, GCF debt financing will never be higher than the 
share of climate co-benefit of the project financings. GCF funds will be blended with over USD 
1.1 billion of lending from the AFD Group. The Programme is expected to finance between 10 
and 15 projects at an average loan value of USD 74 million.  
10. 
PEEB Cool will also work with local financial intermediaries that are active in 
Programme eligible sectors to catalyse development of financial products for this market. The 
funds under the Programme will be on-lent by partner financial institutions to the final 
beneficiaries for financing subprojects whose technical specifications comply with the PEEB 
Cool eligibility criteria.  
11. 
Impacts: In our view, the Programme has a well-articulated climate mitigation objective. 
We note that the construction and operation of buildings is responsible for 40 per cent of all 
energy related CO2eq emissions and consumes 36 per cent of the global final energy. Due to 
population growth, rapid urbanization and economic development, final energy demand from 
buildings is predicted to increase by 50 per cent by 2050 compared with 2015 under business-
as-usual scenarios. A significant part of GHG emissions from the building sector is due to energy 
use for cooling. According to the International Energy Agency, 2,021 Terawatt-hour (TWh) was 
used for space cooling in 2016, and in the business-as-usual scenario this is expected to increase

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 141 
 
 
to 6,200 TWh in 2050. CO2eq emissions generated by space cooling would then almost double, 
from 1,135 million tonnes (Mt) in 2016 to 2,070 Mt in 2050.2 
12. 
To be on track to meet global climate ambitions set forth in the Paris Agreement, the 
energy intensity per square metre of the global building sector needs to improve by 30 per cent 
on average by 2030 (compared to 2015). This requires mainstreaming of highly energy-efficient 
new buildings and renovation of the existing building stock. PEEB Cool’s approach of providing 
project level technical support along with attractive financing terms coupled with supporting 
regulatory reform could go a long way to overcoming barriers to the decarbonization of the 
building sector (high upfront costs, lack of technical familiarity etc.) in the targeted countries. 
PEEB Cool’s eligibility criteria and feasibility study process provide comfort to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) that the Programme can deliver the proposed mitigation 
outcomes while also demonstrating to the local market that green buildings and energy efficient 
co-benefits and cost savings are a worthwhile investment (eventually not requiring any 
concessionality).  
13. 
PEEB Cool requires a feasibility study for each potential project. The feasibility study is 
intended to generate a series of energy efficiency measures that could be integrated into the 
project’s design to make it compliant with the Programme’s eligibility criteria. Based on this 
feasibility study (and the rate of return of the energy efficiency measures proposed), the project 
owner can decide to integrate the full set of proposed measures, or some subset of the 
measures, in the final design. The incremental costs of the energy efficiency measures are then 
used to calculate the difference between the PEEB Cool approach and business as usual as an 
input to mapping GCF financing needs.  
14. 
The feasibility study will also be used to measure the differences in climate impacts 
between the approaches and their impact on overall project costs over the life of the buildings. 
For example, by incorporating passive (bioclimatic) measures to maintain cooler temperatures 
than conventional buildings, buildings can increase the resiliency to temperature increases of 
inhabitants and users of buildings which are not mechanically cooled. Such building design can 
also reduce cooling demand (on average 20 to 30 per cent reduction in hot climates). Energy 
efficiency requirements can further reduce the consumption of passive buildings by 30 to 40 per 
cent. 
15. 
PEEB Cool has a mitigation impact potential of 1,562,759 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO2eq) avoided for the Programme lifetime. The impact is estimated based on the 
emission factors of electricity for each country and a single gas emission factor for all countries; 
and a building lifespan of 15 years is assumed. The Programme envisages annual energy savings 
233,267 MWh per year by the end of the programme, in addition to enhancing the resilience of 
35,069 physical assets in total.  
16. 
It is our view that buildings are critical to delivering climate change mitigation and 
adaptation outcomes. However, the Programme’s adaptation impacts are presently less clear at 
the project and sub-project level. The funding proposal makes a credible argument that 
standard buildings are not well suited to cope with future temperature increases and with the 
expected increases in the frequency, intensity and duration of extreme heat periods.  
17. 
The Programme intends to address these challenges through financing and encouraging 
the construction of buildings with reduced cooling needs by using bioclimatic measures, 
efficient cooling systems and low-carbon construction materials. Broadly these interventions 
can have adaptation benefits but it is difficult for us to project specific adaptation outcomes 
when one considers (i) the range and climatic diversity of the countries in the Programme 
(including major variation within the countries themselves); (ii) the lack of clarity regarding 
 
2 International Energy Agency (2018), The Future of Cooling: Opportunities for energy-yefficient air conditioning. 
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/0bb45525-277f-4c9c-8d0c-9c0cb5e7d525/The_Future_of_Cooling.pdf

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 142 
 
 
specific projects and subprojects to be funded at this stage; and (iii) difficulty in establishing and 
applying robust adaptation eligibility criteria without hampering the eligibility of strong 
mitigation building projects. 
18. 
We note that the Programme has a tentative multi-country project pipeline which is to 
be fully developed during the implementation phase. Proper methodological underpinning with 
assurances, including well-defined adaptation eligibility criteria and specific technical and 
financial thresholds, alongside detailed implementation arrangements, need to be put in place to 
ensure delivery of the Programme’s targeted adaptation impacts as indicated in the funding 
proposal. 
19. 
Nevertheless, only rapid decarbonisation of existing and new buildings will put the 
building and construction sector globally on a low-emission development path that is 
compatible with the goals of the Paris Agreement. We view this Programme as being a useful 
contribution to this effort and consider the overall impacts sufficient to support GCF 
concessional funding. The current moment is critical to incentivize a shift to low-carbon 
construction considering that 80 per cent of the buildings that will exist in 2050 are yet to be 
built. Moreover, the increased focus on adaptive capacity and climate resiliency in construction 
and rehabilitation of buildings is an enhancement to the overall Programme whether we can 
today credibly anticipate the exact levels of adaptation impact from the Programme.  
20. 
Overall impact potential is assessed as medium to -high. The Programme can contribute 
to bridging the gap that exists in national and international programmes for transformation of 
the construction sector by supporting projects in which local actors will construct green 
buildings while also providing technical assistance for the creation of a sustainable enabling 
environment for a construction sector that increases resilience to climate change and reduces 
GHG emissions.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
21. 
PEEB Cool seeks a paradigm shift by catalysing and financing sustainable green building 
solutions, incorporating bioclimatic design, energy efficient air conditioning and appliances, and 
on-site renewable production. By demonstrating the financial and technical feasibility of these 
investments the Programme will remove barriers related to the lack of experience with and 
awareness of the benefits of green building. The Programme intends to support investments 
which, reinforced by enhancing the enabling environment in the targeted countries, could lead 
to the desired paradigm shift. For instance, if between 50 per cent and 65 per cent of new 
buildings dated from after 2017 and onwards are constructed to ultra-high efficiency standards, 
developing world cities (including in 11 countries targeted by the Programme) could see the 
sector achieve 23 per cent emissions reductions by 2030 in large, low-income cities, 22 per cent 
in mega cities and 10 per cent in large, semi-dense, middle-income cities.3 
22. 
Importantly, many investments in green buildings and efficiency in cooling can be 
popular to end-users and cost effective over the life of the relevant buildings. PEEB Cool has the 
potential to demonstrate the effectiveness of these interventions and their desirability based 
both on utility and total cost, leading to greater market uptake of green building solutions and 
an ebbing of the need for concessionality. For the paradigm shift, it is critical that finance 
institutions, building professionals, and consumers recognize that investment in green buildings 
is beneficial from a financial perspective and in terms of increased comfort and value of real 
estate. 
 
3 McKinsey Center for Business and Environment & C40 Cities, 2017, A strategic approach to climate action in cities—
focused acceleration. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/a-strategic-
approach-to-climate-action-in-cities-focused-acceleration

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 143 
 
 
23. 
The Programme is also designed to facilitate the creation of a replicable and scalable 
financing model for green buildings. Credit lines, especially through local banks, combined with 
technical assistance will generate a pipeline of bankable projects, demonstrating the potential of 
this market segment to local financial institutions.  
24. 
Currently, GCF concessional finance would permit PEEB Cool to shift business-as-usual 
projects into more climate friendly pathways achieving not only project-level impacts but also 
demonstration impacts that are the basis for paradigm shift in financing. 
25. 
PEEB Cool’s implementation across 11 countries allows for further demonstration 
impact by illustrating examples in different environmental and economic contexts. Moreover 
the varied project jurisdictions can lead to increased attention being paid to cooling and heating 
needs when designing and financing building construction globally. By creating demonstrable 
projects in the target countries, the potential of PEEB Cool can be leveraged across other parts 
of the developing world, which may learn from its approach and best practices. 
26. 
Without PEEB Cool, it is likely that existing barriers to green building construction in the 
target countries will remain in place retarding any shift towards the construction of buildings 
with improved thermal comfort. The penetration of high efficiency cooling equipment into the 
market is expected to be slow in the absence of the coordinated market transformation 
activities foreseen within the Programme. Finally, the market for low-carbon materials and 
construction methods will remain small due to the challenge of competing with the large and 
established markets for conventional construction materials and methods. 
27. 
Through the PEEB Cool Enabling Facility’s activities, incomplete regulatory frameworks, 
implementation capacities for operation of buildings and energy management over their 
lifetime, or market distortions, will be addressed and removed at national levels – with long-
lasting impacts on the paradigm in construction beyond the duration of PEEB Cool. By changing 
the incentives for market participants through reduced financing costs for energy efficiency 
projects, the risks and barriers around deployment of low-emission and climate resilient 
solutions in the buildings and construction sector are directly targeted.  
28. 
Overall paradigm shift potential is assessed as high. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
                    Scale: High 
29. 
The Programme has a high potential to generate environmental benefits over multiple 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 3 Good health and well-being, SDG 5 
Gender equality, SDG 7 Affordable and clean energy, SDG 8 Decent work and economic growth, 
SDG 9 Industry, innovation and infrastructure, and SDG 11 Sustainable cities and communities. 
30. 
PEEB Cool presents strong social and health benefits, including increase in productivity, 
reduced mortality and heat stress and access to education and other public services through 
increase in thermal comfort.  
31. 
Sustainability is also ensured by strategies to retrofit existing buildings strategies such 
as solar shading, window glazing and insulation as all these measures can reduce long-term 
energy consumption. Improving the building infrastructure of cities with long winters can help 
them to attain between 5per cent and 10 per cent of their 2030 emissions reduction targets for 
selected cities according to the AE.4 
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits  
 
4 El-Darwish & Goma, 2017.

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 144 
 
 
32. 
Air quality will be improved because of the reduced demand for grid electricity due to 
the supported projects, which will decrease the emission of GHGs and other pollutants. 
Buildings will also be designed to use less water and for a reduction in light pollution through a 
better design of exterior lighting, a reduction of noise pollution, and improvement of indoor air 
quality.  
1.3.2. 
Health co-benefits  
33. 
While quantitative data is scarce, especially in developing countries, the health impacts 
of high indoor temperatures are known to include heat stress and heat strokes, sleep 
disturbance and an increase in respiratory illnesses. As most people spend most of their time 
indoors, improving indoor thermal comfort will reduce the number of deaths associated with 
high temperatures and limit the stress on health-care systems that may struggle for capacity, as 
well as spending on health care.  
1.3.3. 
Economic co-benefits 
34. 
Economic co-benefits include poverty alleviation due to a reduction in energy bills for 
the users of buildings. For example, according to the funding proposal, energy consumption for 
cooling of social housing in Tunis in 2050 will be 50 per cent higher in a business-as-usual 
housing unit than in a well-designed housing unit, with a corresponding saving in energy costs 
for residents. 
35. 
PEEB Cool also projects economic co-benefits in the form of job creation (27,000 
positions). Jobs will be created within the entire construction and building value chain due to 
the use of local materials or the re-use of building materials, through the development of 
building renovation, and more broadly because environmentally sound buildings are more 
labour-intensive than conventional buildings.  
1.3.4. 
Gender co-benefits 
36. 
The Programme targets a sector where women are under-represented. A strategy will 
be developed and implemented to address gaps in gender consideration in energy efficiency in 
buildings for each country. The strategy will also promote participation of women in the 
decision-making process, and will aim to remove potential barriers for women and women-
owned businesses. 
37. 
The independent TAP assesses this Programme as having high sustainable development 
potential with significant social, economic and health co-benefits. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipients   
 
 
                               Scale: High 
38. 
With growing populations and increased urbanization, more people are at risk from the 
impacts of climate change. Inefficient cooling and heating systems and ineffective building 
design mean that future buildings will see higher indoor temperatures and limited thermal 
comfort. This is especially the case in areas of low-income residential housing and working 
environments with limited cooling. PEEB Cool aims to invest in projects addressing climate 
change impacts on low-income families (related to social housing), children (related to schools, 
especially those in rural areas), and the ill (related to health-care centres and hospitals). In 
many countries in the Programme, the population is very young, meaning that many new 
education facilities need to be built. This is particularly the case in sub-Saharan countries.  
39. 
Despite the importance of improving energy efficiency in buildings in the fight against 
climate change, the financing of energy efficiency in buildings remains marginal. Considering

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 145 
 
 
the worsened public finance context resulting from the corona virus disease (COVID-19) 
pandemic, this situation is not expected to improve without intervention.  
40. 
In addition to the finance needs to be addressed by the Investment Facility, the 
Programme’s Enabling Facility has the potential to promote effective policies and regulations as 
well as clear policy signals to drive a range of measures including passive building design, 
material efficiency, low-carbon materials and highly efficient lighting and appliances.  
41. 
For instance, PEEB Cool aims to accelerate the adoption of building energy codes and 
standards to support lower carbon emissions within the 11 targeted countries. Building energy 
codes are critical to keep up with the considerable growth in demand for new buildings and 
existing buildings. In many countries there are no effective energy efficiency building codes that 
would help enforce requirements that prevent climate change vulnerability. The development of 
energy efficiency building codes and other related standards is important to set requirements 
for private investment.  
42. 
The independent TAP assesses this Programme as high in terms of the needs of its 
recipients. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
43. 
No-objection letters have been obtained from all participating Programme countries.  
44. 
From our review, the Programme is responsive to the targeted country ambitions on 
decarbonizing their building sectors. All countries covered by PEEB Cool have a national 
strategy for energy efficiency with varying levels of detail. Many of these countries have 
included commitments to GHG mitigation in the building sector in their nationally determined 
contributions. Some countries (Indonesia, Mexico and Nigeria), participate in the Kigali 
Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, regarding the energy efficiency of cooling systems, which 
includes actions such as upgrading cooling systems and the elimination of hydrofluorocarbon 
(HFC) refrigerants. 
45. 
It also appears from our review that PEEB Cool was developed in discussion with 
stakeholders, including government agencies, green building proponents, project owners and 
finance institutions. 
46. 
We assess the country ownership of the funding proposal as medium to high. The 
Programme fails to achieve a high rating primarily due to the lack of clarity around the 
contributions of participating countries.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
47. 
Supporting increased energy efficient buildings is a highly effective climate strategy. 
Improvements in building envelopes and appliances can achieve energy savings ranging from 
35 per cent to 80 per cent compared to standard buildings. Lessons learned from the initial 
Programme as well as market analysis provided in the funding proposal demonstrate that 
building project owners and end-users tend to be reluctant to accept incremental costs for 
green buildings. To address this barrier, the Programme proposes to blend AFD Group financing 
with a GCF concessional loan to lower the total costs (capex and financial costs) of the green 
building offsetting the incremental up-front costs of passive and energy efficient measures. This 
strikes us as an efficient approach to help catalyse an emerging green building sector that 
should eventually be self-sustaining with commercial finance.  
48. 
The GCF debt contribution will be calculated to strictly offset the additional debt service 
which is due to the incremental costs of bioclimatic and energy efficient measures without the

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 146 
 
 
support of the investment facility. This structure will address the financial barrier at investment 
while providing the minimum concessionality.  
49. 
The level of GCF concessionality will vary depending on the counterpart (private, 
sovereign, non- or quasi-sovereign) and level of development of country (least developed 
countries or not), and takes into consideration some cases where the level of concessionality 
from AFD Group is already high.  
50. 
As a cross-cutting programme, PEEB Cool intends to generate both mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall GHG 
emission reductions of 1,562,759 tCO2eq over a period of 15 years, based on the impact 
calculations of the funding proposal. 
51. 
According to the funding proposal, PEEB Cool will deliver mitigation benefits at EUR 31 
per tCO2eq (total GCF project costs/expected lifetime emission reductions) and adaptation 
benefits at EUR 147 per beneficiary (total GCF project costs/direct+indirect beneficiary).  
52. 
The Programme projects a GCF co-financing ratio is 1:5. The co-financing ratio is 
calculated based on GCF, AFD Group and German Government financing amounts.  
(a) 
GCF financial contribution: EUR 220,000,000; 
(b) 
Total co-financing contributions: EUR 1,118,500,000; 
(c) 
GCF co-financing ratio: 16 per cent; and 
(d) 
The leverage effect on GCF resources equals 5.08. 
53. 
On the adaptation front, the funding proposal provides that PEEB Cool is expected to 
directly benefit a total of about 1.133 million individuals by providing them with increased 
thermal comfort in residential, education, health, retail and office buildings over a 15-year 
period.  
54. 
The funding proposal is assessed with a rating of medium to high in terms of efficiency 
and effectiveness. In our view, the Programme is designed to address the various bottlenecks 
restraining energy efficiency investments in buildings: financing barriers, technical barriers and 
regulatory barriers. The use of concessional loans will encourage the project owners to engage 
in greener buildings in the near term.  
II. 
 Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel 
55. 
Based on the assessment above, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal. 
We would like to make the following additional observations:  
(a) 
We note that USD five trillion are invested in real estate every year. Today’s investment 
decisions will have an impact over the next 30 to 80 years. Better design can reduce 
energy consumption and GHG emissions throughout the long lifespan of a building. The 
potential to reduce the energy consumption of the building sector is significant, but not 
yet realised.  
(b) 
 The proposed intervention has two components - an Investment Facility and an 
Enabling Facility. The components have been designed to each address key barriers that 
are preventing the construction industry in the targeted countries from shifting to low-
carbon, climate resilient development pathways. It will be important to the success of 
this programme that these components are well coordinated considering that different 
executing entities are responsible for the different components.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 147 
 
 
(c) 
The sequencing and implementation of enabling support and investments over the 
course of the Programme should be mutually supportive and coordinated to take into 
consideration the circumstances of each of the 11 countries. The funding proposal does 
not currently provide extensive information on how this coordination will occur and 
how results from one component can be used to make prioritization decisions by the 
other component. For instance, it is important in the view of the independent TAP that 
the Programme will mitigate against moral hazard risks associated with countries de-
prioritizing actual change to their enabling environments to continue to benefit from 
GCF concessionality embedded in PEEB Cool. Similarly, it may make greater climate 
efficiency sense to prioritize investments in countries that are rapidly improving their 
enabling environments. The current “first come, first served” approach of the 
Investment Facility can lead to inefficiencies if the two components are not well 
sequenced and coordinated over the course of the Programme.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 148 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP194) 
Proposal name: 
Programme for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB) Cool 
Accredited entity: 
Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 
Country/(ies): 
Albania, Argentina, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mexico, 
Morocco, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
Impact potential 
In Sections 8 & 9 all funding is indicated in USD whereas the numbers are indicated in EUR in 
the FP and annexes. The funding request is in EUR. 
Paradigm shift potential 
We would like to thank the iTAP for the quality of the exchanges and of the assessment. 
Sustainable development potential 
We would like to thank the iTAP for the quality of the exchanges and of the assessment. 
Needs of the recipient 
We would like to thank the iTAP for the quality of the exchanges and of the assessment. 
Country ownership 
We would like to thank the iTAP for the quality of the exchanges and of the assessment. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
We would like to thank the iTAP for the quality of the exchanges and of the assessment. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.04 
Page 149 
 
 
 
In response to section 18 point (2) and the sequencing and implementation of enabling 
support and investments, PEEB Cool Programme Management Unit will ensure the support 
and coordination between the activities of the two components.  
The activities of each component will feed the other one (the investment component 
providing feasibility studies on technical solutions, market studies, and evaluation on project 
implementation, and the enabling component paving the way for sectoral investments and 
capacity strengthening for project owners). The PMU (component 3) and AFD + GIZ local 
offices will ensure that coordination is made locally between target groups of GIZ activities 
(component 2), and project owners of AFD and Proparco activities (component 1). 
It is also worth mentioning that budget is secured for each of the 11 countries for both 
technical assistance and loan investment. The budget allocated might evolve as per the 
countries’ strategy and prioritization regarding energy efficiency, and the requests for loan 
financing that they will formulate during the five years of approval period for loans.

=== PAGE 150 ===
AFD
July 2022
GENDER ANALYSIS 
Gender Analysis
Gender documentation for FP194

=== PAGE 151 ===
1 
 
Table of content 
List of Acronyms and Definitions ............................................................................................................. 2 
I. 
AFDs Group and GIZ Gender Strategy ............................................................................................. 6 
1. 
AFD Group approach to Gender Equality .................................................................................... 6 
1.1. 
AFD group strategical framework for operations ............................................................... 6 
1.2 AFD Operationalization of the strategical framework on gender ............................................. 8 
2. 
Proparco operationalization of the strategy ............................................................................. 13 
What is a "gender project" for PROPARCO? ................................................................................. 13 
3. 
GIZ Gender Strategy and operationalization ............................................................................. 17 
II. 
Gender approach for the Program ................................................................................................ 24 
1. Program description ...................................................................................................................... 24 
1.1. Rationale ................................................................................................................................. 24 
1.2. Program Objectives ................................................................................................................ 25 
1.3. Program contents ................................................................................................................... 25 
1.5. Sector Eligible to the program ................................................................................................ 26 
1.5. Gender integration within AFD’s intervention to sectors eligible to the program ................ 31 
2. 
Gender Scheme to the Program ................................................................................................ 32 
2.1. Methodology .......................................................................................................................... 33 
2.2 Grievance Redress mechanism ................................................................................................ 38 
Annex 1: Guideline for collecting sex-disaggregated data .................................................................... 40 
Annex 2: Country level gender analysis related to the programme ..................................................... 41 
Albania ............................................................................................................................................... 41 
Argentina ........................................................................................................................................... 43 
Djibouti .............................................................................................................................................. 44 
Indonesia ........................................................................................................................................... 45 
Mexico ............................................................................................................................................... 46 
Morocco ............................................................................................................................................ 47 
Nigeria ............................................................................................................................................... 47 
North Macedonia .............................................................................................................................. 48 
Sri Lanka ............................................................................................................................................ 49 
Tunisia ............................................................................................................................................... 49

=== PAGE 152 ===
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List of Acronyms and Definitions 
‘a 
Subroject’ 
or 
‘Subprojects’ 
 
Refers to the partnership between AFD and a Local Financial 
Partner, meaning a credit facility possibly combined with a 
technical assistance facility and/or guarantee scheme, to be 
financed in the framework of the Program, or a project 
implemented by GIZ within the policy facility component 
 
‘Credit 
lines’ 
end-
beneficiary projects’  
 
Refers to the loans granted by a IE to local companies in the 
framework of the 
Program 
 
‘the Program’ 
Refers to the whole AFD-GCF initiative ‘PEEB Cool’ 
 
AFD 
Agence Française de Développement (French Agency for 
Development) 
 
AFD Group 
AFD Group gathers (i) AFD, French public financial institution, (ii) 
Proparco, Development Financial Institution promoting private 
investments 
GCP 
Gender country profile 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
 
ESDD 
E&S Due Diligence 
 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment

=== PAGE 153 ===
3 
 
Refers to an instrument to identify and assess the potential E&S 
impacts of a proposed subproject, evaluate alternatives, and 
design appropriate mitigation, management, and monitoring 
measures  
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
Refers to an instrument that examines the risks and impacts 
when a subproject consists of a program and/or series of 
subprojects, and the risks and impacts cannot be determined 
until the program or subproject details have been identified. The 
ESMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to 
assess the environmental and social risks and impacts. It 
contains measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and/or offset 
adverse risks and impacts, provisions for estimating and 
budgeting the costs of such measures, and information on the 
agency or agencies responsible for addressing subproject risks 
and impacts, including on its capacity to manage environmental 
and social risks and impacts. It includes adequate information on 
the area in which subprojects are expected to be sited, including 
any potential environmental and social vulnerabilities of the 
area; and on the potential impacts that may occur and 
mitigation measures that might be expected to be used  
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan  
Refers to an instrument that details (a) the measures to be taken 
during the implementation and operation of a subproject to 
eliminate or offset adverse E&S impacts, or to reduce them to 
acceptable levels; and (b) the actions needed to implement 
these measures 
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System  
Refers to the whole procedures, tools, processes and 
organizational arrangements and capacities set up by an 
organization to manage E&S issues and E&S risks in particular. 
ESRM 
Environmental and Social Risk Management 
 
ESSR 
Environmental and Social Screening Report 
FI 
Financial Intermediary/ies 
Refers to financial institutions such as banks, microfinance 
institutions, funds, etc., which are financed by AFD through 
credit facilities in the framework of financially intermediated 
subprojects 
GCF  
 
Green Climate Fund 
GIZ 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit

=== PAGE 154 ===
4 
 
IE 
Implementing entity: an opposite party in a contract or financial 
transaction set up in the framework of the Program. Subproject 
owners of eligible subprojects, financial institutions and partner 
countries 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
 
ILO  
 
International Labor Organization 
NDC 
National Determined Contributions 
 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
 
Proparco 
Proparco is a Development Financial Institution partly owned by 
the French Development Agency (AFD) and private shareholders 
from the developed countries and developing nations. 
PS 
Performance Standard(s) 
 
SGT 
Sectorial Gender Toolkit 
TA(P) 
Technical Assistance (Program) 
 
TORs  
 
Terms of Reference 
UN  
 
United Nations

=== PAGE 155 ===
5

=== PAGE 156 ===
6 
 
I. 
AFDs Group and GIZ Gender Strategy 
1. AFD Group approach to Gender Equality  
1.1. 
AFD group strategical framework for operations 
 
Since the adoption of its first Transversal Intervention Framework on equality between 
women and men (2014-2017), the AFD group1 has been recognized as a committed player on 
issues of gender equality. Its first assessment2, which covers the period 2014-2018, is 
illustrated by the completion of 542 projects (loan and grant) rated DAC3 1 or DAC 2, 
representing almost 9 billion euros of DAC 1 projects and 753 million euros of DAC 2 projects. 
Thereby, almost 50% (in number) of its financial operations (including loan and grant 
operations) integrated main or significative gender-sensitive objectives aiming at reducing 
gender inequalities or actively promoting equality between men and women (promoting 
women’s economic empowerment opportunities, fighting violence against women, 
guarantying access to basic services, ensuring women’s participation in decision-making and 
project governance).  
The emergence of a promising internal culture and organization thanks to the mobilization of 
technical divisions and geographic departments, or even thanks to its proactive role and its 
historic investment in developing the practices of Civil Society Organizations, constitute solid 
achievements for the entire AFD Group. This first positive assessment allows it today to scale 
up, to expand its action and to increase its impact in terms of equality between women and 
men. 
 
 
AFD’s ambition on gender issues is consistent with the international mobilization on women's 
rights, reflected in the Sustainable Development Agenda by 2030, in the commitments of the 
European Union (Gender Action Plan II). This plan is backed by France's International Strategy 
on Equality between Men and Women (2018-2022), presented on March 8, 2018, by the 
Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs on the occasion of the International Day of Women's 
Rights but also by the French Strategy on the challenges of population, sexual and 
reproductive rights and health (2016-2020). 
As a continuation of the French international strategy, AFD Group adopted a new Equality 
between Women and Men Action Plan 2019-2022 aligned with the Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) N° 5, namely: "Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls”. 
 
 
1 AFD’s gender commitments are periodically defined in relation with the Foreign Affairs Ministry, which is in 
charge of the international French Strategy on equality between men and women (the integration of a gender 
approach in the French Official Development Aid started in 2007).  
2 The evaluation of the transversal intervention framework on equality between women and men (2014-2017) 
is under process 
3 https://www.oecd.org/fr/cad/femmes-developpement/dac-gender-equality-marker.htm

=== PAGE 157 ===
7 
 
The AFD group also intends to intervene on these themes in the countries of intervention 
alongside the French diplomatic network. It will apply this action plan to all of its intervention 
geographies. 
 
These last years, AFD’s Group has also developed a Gender sensitive Human Resources Policy, 
which has been set up separately from its strategy for operations and as an employer under 
the French Law on gender equality at workplaces. AFD ordered in 2017 an audit on 
“professional gender equality and diversity at workplace” before to set up an action plan to 
follow up annually and discussed with union representatives. Furthermore, AFD also commit 
on an internal gender equality agreement including indicators of results to be follow up every 
two years.  
a. Financial Commitments and Geographic priorities 
To achieve the objectives of sustainable development and move towards gender equality and 
equality between women and men, the AFD has set itself ambitious financial objectives to be 
achieved by 2022, including: 
 
- 50% of the volume of commitments (grants and loans) marked 1 or 2 according to the Gender 
marker of the OECD DAC; 
- € 700 million per year in DAC 2 marker projects, by 2022. 
 
AFD’s commitments will be achieved through two financial instruments that are : i) direct loan 
and grants support to its regional and country-based partners (States, Local authorities, Bank, 
others … ) leaded by its Direction for Operation; and ii) indirect support to civil society through 
French NGOs leaded by its Department for Civil Society.  
 
AFD Group is committed to target 85% of the State’s financial effort in Africa and in the Middle 
East while prioritizing its grants operations on the African continent. 
 
b. Priority sectors 
 
AFD’s first strategy framework was initially based on a gender mainstreaming approach 
without dedicated or specific sectors or areas to focus on. However, its new gender Action 
Plan for the period 2019-2022 set up specific priority areas, as below, in link with the France 
Strategy’s priorities.  
 
AFD Group aims to invest significantly in the social sectors, in particular health and education, 
to advance rights for women and girls, including sexual and reproductive rights, to promote 
the elimination of all the forms of violence against women and implementing the Women, 
Peace and Security agenda in crisis and post-crisis zones.

=== PAGE 158 ===
8 
 
 
AFD Group is committed to promoting the economic independence of women, in particular 
through entrepreneurship on the African continent. 
 
AFD Group is also committed to increasing its actions in new sectors such as the reduction of 
gender inequalities in the face of the challenges of global warming. It wishes to make Gender 
and Climate projects a strong marker of its action in the fight against gender inequalities. 
 
1.2 AFD Operationalization of the strategical framework on gender 
a. Operational priorities 
In 2013, AFD launched its own strategy process through its 2014–2017 Transversal Integration 
Framework on gender and the reduction of inequalities between men and women. This 
gender policy aims to promote equal opportunities for men and women and to improve the 
efficiency and sustainability of operations financed by AFD, through three main operational 
priorities: 
• Preventing gender inequalities in AFD operations linked with its environmental and 
social risks management’s policy as regard of the principle of non-aggravation of 
existing gender inequalities; 
• Promoting gender equality as one of the objectives of the interventions; 
• Supporting the evolution of gender related social transformation in societies. 
 
To promote AFD gender approach and to encourage better integration of gender in the project 
cycle, AFD gender strategy focuses on: 
1) Developing a gender equality approach specific to AFD’s intervention sectors and 
countries; 
2) Systematically integrating gender issues throughout the project cycle; 
3) Assessing and building knowledge on experiences; 
4) Strengthening AFD’s capacities on gender issues (trainings, methodological tools, 
sectorial tools, etc…); 
5)  Building capacities of AFD’s partners on gender issues; 
6) Participating in debates and discussions on gender and development issues. 
 
The implementation of this strategy is based on a decentralized approach implemented within 
AFD teams, with a network of trained gender focal points in all AFD teams and particularly in 
local offices, supported by the Gender, Environmental & Social, and Sustainable Development 
Units, which bears the technical expertise on gender. Such organization allows the promotion 
of equality in access to and control of resources and income, in participation of men and 
women to all project components, and in capacity building and empowerment of project 
beneficiaries. This approach applies to all projects financed by AFD without discrimination.

=== PAGE 159 ===
9 
 
b. Methodology 
To support, monitor, and report on the integration of gender equality objectives in AFD-
funded operations, specific method and indicators have been set up. 
 
AFD, as a bilateral cooperation agency, uses the OECD DAC4 marker on gender equality to 
screen and report on all projects as follows: 
0: the project has no objective in terms of reduction of gender inequalities. 
1: the project has a specific objective to reduce gender inequalities. 
2: the project’s main objective is to reduce gender inequalities. 
OECD markers on gender equality are assigned during the ex-ante analysis of the project and 
its categorization. This scoring system tracks the progressive efforts allocated to this issue. 
Any project strengthening gender equality and women’s empowerment or reducing gender 
discrimination and gender-based inequalities will be marked 1 or 2. It is important to note that 
these markers are chosen at the beginning of the investigation, and fixed at the time of 
granting. 
 
In addition to that, AFD has elaborated a gender-related indicator within the framework of its 
Sustainable Development Opinion Mechanism5, which is consistent with the OECD DAC 
markers but allowing analysis that is more accurate. In order to avoid the use of two different 
classification methodologies for the same themes, an equivalence table between the ratings 
sustainable development and CAD markers as detailed in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 AFD Sustainable Development Analysis on Gender Equality 
AFD 
Sustainable 
Development 
Indicators 
Contents 
 
Equivalence 
with 
OECD 
DAC 
markers 
-2  
There is important risk of enhancing gender inequality 
through the project. 
0 
-1  
There is an opportunity to reduce gender inequality 
through the project but no dialogue or specific 
measures have been considered to do so. 
0 
0 
There is no specific gender issue to be addressed by 
the project. 
0 
 
4 Development Assistance committe 
5 Out of the DAC Gender marker, AFD uses an internal scoring system in order to evaluate project’s impact 
related to several dimensions of sustainable sevelopment, one of those dimensions is dedicated to gender 
issues. The Sustainable Development Opinion mechanism aims to facilitate the cross-sectoral inclusion of 
sustainable development concerns in AFD’s financing operations 
(https://www.afd.fr/en/ressources/methodology-guide-sustainable-development-opinion-mechanism)

=== PAGE 160 ===
10 
 
+1 
Needs and interests of men and women have been 
analyzed and discussed with the partner but no 
specific objective or measure have been designed. 
0 
+2 
One of the project’s objectives is to ensure effective 
access to women to the opportunities created by the 
project. 
 
1 
+3 
Women empowerment and structural reduction of 
gender inequalities is part of the project’s main 
objectives OR is a cross-cutting objective of the 
project.  
 
2 
 
As per the DAC marker screening, the sustainable development analysis is fully integrated to 
the project cycle from the project’s identification phase to the final financing decision, and is 
validated by the sustainable development opinion, issued by a structure independent from 
AFD’s Operations Department. 
 
In order to ensure the proper implementation of gender analysis and integration of gender 
equality objectives to AFD-funded operations, quantitative and qualitative gender analyses 
are thus defined during the whole project appraisal, including: 
• Pre-identification stage - understanding the gender disparities, the roles and 
responsibilities of men and women and different social groups in the project’s 
background by making an inventory of gender-related available information regarding 
the sector/country, and developing and maintaining a regular dialogue with partners 
in the countries; 
• Identification stage – conducting initial gender analysis and assessment, in order to 
identify project risks and opportunities in terms of gender equality; 
• Feasibility studies/ex-ante evaluation stage - improving the analysis to ensure the 
communities’ motivations are well understood (this analysis articulates with the 
overall feasibility studies of the project), identifying relevant indicators and precisely 
defining costs related to the implementation of a gender strategy for the Project; 
• Approval stage - confirming that the studies conducted have addressed all gender 
issues; 
• Execution stage - integrating gender issues into the contract documents and 
developing indicators to perform on-going monitoring and evaluation of these actions 
and their effectiveness. 
c. Human Resources and responsibilities 
As mentioned above, the implementation of AFD gender strategy is decentralized within the 
agency.

=== PAGE 161 ===
11 
 
The responsibilities are organized as bellow: 
 
• Gender Unit 
Created in 2019, the Gender Unit is in charge of the AFD gender strategy management and 
operationalization. The team consists in five Gender Experts. Two are in charge of the Strategic 
management and external partnerships. One is in charge of interfacing and facilitating 
missions such as the coordination of gender focal points network and internal trainings 
programs.  Finally, two are devoted to operational support and mainly in charge of dedicated 
projects and initiatives. They provide support and guidance to the project teams and gender 
focal points. All the team organize and support internal training sessions on gender, both at 
headquarters and local offices level, and continuous capacity-building of AFD teams. 
 
• E&S Unit 
The E&S Unit provides a specialized sectorial support for the integration of gender equality 
objectives in AFD projects. The E&S Unit supports the development of a gender analysis and 
action plan, for projects ranked as 0 and 1 for the OECD CAD markers. As part of the project 
team they provide recommendation for the mainstreaming of gender throughout the project 
cycle. At the stages of the identification and credit/grant committees6, the E&S experts 
recommend a score for the Gender Indicator of AFD’s Sustainable Development Opinion 
Mechanism and the OECD DAC marker.  
 
• Sustainable Development Analysis and Advice Unit  
The Sustainable Development Analysis and Advice Unit issue the Sustainable Development 
opinion and coordinates collective reflections on sustainable development issues. The 
opinion, composed of 6 dimensions, aims to facilitate the integration of sustainable 
development into projects funded by AFD. It is used to enlighten decision-making bodies on 
the contribution of AFD operations to sustainable development. The dimension 3 concerns 
Gender equality. It aims to promote dialogue with counterparts on the differentiated needs 
and interests of men and women, to better diagnose challenges (risks and opportunities) and 
to explicitly remove the barriers allowing effective access for women to the opportunities 
created within the framework of the project. It also invites to support counterparties in the 
structural changes towards better empowerment and a structural reduction in inequality 
between women and men. 
 
• Sectorial and Geographic Focal Points  
Gender focal points are designated on a rolling basis within each AFD HQ units (especially in 
Technical divisions and Geographic departments) and local agencies. In collaboration with the 
Gender and E&S Units, their tasks is: to maintain and disseminate a comprehensive knowledge 
basis on gender perspectives in their area of work; to promote the internal capacity building 
 
6 As described in the ESMF

=== PAGE 162 ===
12 
 
and dynamic in this area ; and to support their unit to decline and implement AFD’s Gender 
Strategy framework in theirs sectorial and geographical interventions 
 
d. Tools and Supporting Mechanisms 
AFD has developed tools and supporting Mechanisms to enhance the operationalization of 
the Gender strategy in its operation.  
 
• Dedicated fund for Studies and Technical assistance  
Project teams can request budget support from the Gender Unit in order to realize gender 
analysis and design gender action plans in order to integrate a gender approach within the 
projects; and specially to build dedicated projects to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment.  
 
• Tools and toolkit 
AFD has developed a series of tools to support Gender mainstreaming throughout the project 
cycle:  
 
o The gender country profiles (GCP) are developed by the local agencies and provide a 
comprehensive gender analysis of the situation of women and men in a country of 
intervention.  The GCP provides  data  and  analysis  on  differences between women and 
men in their assigned gender roles: in their socio-economic  position,  needs,  participation  
rates,  access  to  resources,  control of assets, decision making powers, individual 
freedoms and human right conditions. They enable to identify key gender issues that need 
to be addressed and to assess a country legal and political context as related to Gender 
equality. GCP are meant to be used in the identification phase of a project in order to 
handle its context and background regarding gender issues. 
 
o Synthetic sheets on Gender issue (“Pause Genre”) provide short presentation of the main 
issues on Gender in Development and examples of good practices by sector. Those 
synthetic sheets to read quickly are particularly useful to train as a gender focal point and 
as part of awareness sessions in theirs units or local agency. 
 
o Sectoral gender toolkits (SGT) promote a cross-cutting approach and provide guidelines 
and resources for technical experts and project leaders to integrate gender approach in 
every phases of project cycle (from the pre-identification to the post evaluation phase). 
The SGT are declined in the different area of intervention of AFD: Urban Development, 
Water & Sanitation, Education-Vocational trainings and Employment, Energy, Health, 
Agriculture & Rural development, Transport. The SGT are also made available for AFD 
partners and are published on AFD’s website7. 
 
7 https://www.afd.fr/fr/page-thematique-axe/egalite-des-sexes (only available in french language)

=== PAGE 163 ===
13 
 
 
o Gender and E&S diligences toolkit provide relevant tools to AFD’s E&S experts based in 
HQ or Regional offices for integrating gender issues through the environmental and social 
diligences conducted to manage risks and negative impacts of projects.  
 
o The Gender prospect toolkit is dedicated to support operational teams involved in the 
project’s instruction cycle and particularly the regional and local agencies, which are key 
players in the pre-identification phases and the dialogue with AFD’s partners. It provides 
operating methods and tools to help regional and local teams to engage a proactive 
dynamic at their region/country levels focusing on how to integrate gender approach in 
the current AFD’s interventions, and also how to build new areas of work with national 
parties to address gender inequalities. 
 
o Internal online community dedicated to gender issues in AFD’s operations encourages 
cross-cutting exchanges of knowledge and practices among operational units (supports 
units, technical divisions and geographical departments including regional and local 
agencies). It provides: large internal and external resources and relevant links, an 
interactive platform to share easily information and documentation, but also to ask 
questions or launch internal discussions.  
 
 
2. Proparco operationalization of the strategy 
What is a "gender project" for PROPARCO?  
Gender, definition: The gender approach concerns social relations between the sexes. This 
approach looks at social functions and roles, statuses, and the stereotypes attributed to 
women and men. The definition, representation and perception of the male or female and the 
values attached to them are social, historical, cultural and symbolic constructions. Being 
neither natural nor innate, these constructions are variable and evolutionary. In contrast to 
the anatomical and biological difference between the sexes, social relations between women 
and men fluctuate and change constantly. The representations of male and female can thus 
differ: 
• between societies;  
• within the same society according to the times and social groups; 
• from one individual to another;  
• depending on the circumstances and contexts. 
A gender project for Proparco is a project that has been designed, implemented and evaluated 
using a "gender-sensitive approach" that will have:

=== PAGE 164 ===
14 
 
 
A gender project takes into account gender based inequalities in all phases of the project from 
its conception and integrates objectives (at least secondary) that aim at acting on these 
women/men inequalities through specific measures responding to the specific/differentiated 
needs of women and men. 
The gender approach in development projects is an approach based on the impacts and 
results of the project which responds to a triple objective: 
1. the identification and consideration of gender inequalities and the specific needs of 
women and men in the design and implementation of projects; 
2. Systematic prevention of the risks of aggravating existing inequalities within the 
project perimeter through the control of environmental and social risks. This implies 
systematically analyzing the risks to worsen inequalities between women and men and 
defining actions to mitigate these risks in the ESAP if necessary.  
3. maximizing impacts: identifying opportunities that promote gender equality, women's 
empowerment and the transformation of gender relations. This maximization can be done at 
two levels depending on the strategies adopted upstream of the project: 
o The "mainstream" approach (G-1)8 when the project integrates one or more 
significant but secondary gender objectives. Gender equality is integrated in the 
 
8 The G-1 and G-2 levels refer to the Gender marker developed by the OECD-DAC. This marker is currently collected in the GPR. 
Upstream
• to pre-identify early in the process the gender issues in sectors and contexts
concerned
•Gender issues mean: inequalities between women and men in terms of
rights, access to goods and services, access to employment, access to equal
working
conditions,
but
also
the
risks
incurred
by
women
(VBG,
discrimination, etc.)....
Due diligences
• identify and analyse the risks and impacts of the project on the worsen or
reduction of existing gender inequalities within the project's perimeter
• to define, where appropriate, measures to mitigate the expected negative
impacts and/or measures to strengthen the impact on the reduction of
inequalities
Instruction
• and also integrate objectives and related activities actively aimed at
reducing gender inequalities found in the project's scope

=== PAGE 165 ===
15 
 
project but is not the main objective. The project would have started even if gender 
equality had not been mentioned among the objectives. 
Example of G-1 project: AMRET - CAMBODIA (2019) With a loan of 10 million dollars, 
PROPARCO is supporting the development of the loan portfolio of AMRET, a Cambodian 
microfinance institution (MFI). AMRET is mainly based in rural areas where many Cambodian 
SMEs do not have access to basic financial products. AMRET participates in the financial 
inclusion of unbanked populations and 70% of its clients are women. To know more  
o The "dedicated" approach (G-2) when gender is the main objective of the project. The 
empowerment of women and/or the structural reduction of inequalities between 
women and men is the purpose of the project.  
Example of G-2 project: Capital Bank - PANAMA (2019) At the end of 2019, PROPARCO granted 
a USD 20 million loan to Capital Bank to support its SME financing activity and encourage 
women's entrepreneurship in Panama. 30% of the credit line will be dedicated to the financing 
of SMEs managed or owned by women in application of the 2X Challenge criteria. To know 
more 
https://www.proparco.fr/fr/actualites/proparco-soutient-lengagement-de-capital-bank-
aupres-des-pme-panameennes-et-de 
In a development financial institution such as PROPARCO, a gender project contributes to 
improving the living conditions of women in developing countries by promoting their 
economic empowerment, their financial inclusion and their participation in the formal and 
productive activities of SMEs but also their access to jobs of quality, resources, essential goods 
and services such as healthcare, education, energy etc.  
 
 
During the G7 Summit in Canada in 2018, the G7 DFIs (FinDev Canada, CDC, OPIC, PROPARCO, 
DEG, JBIC/JICA, CDP) launched the "2X Challenge", a commitment to mobilize USD 3 billion by 
2020 to invest in companies, financial institutions and private funds that contribute to 
reducing inequalities between women and men. Specifically, the "2X Challenge" encourages 
DFIs to support projects that aim at providing women in developing countries with better 
access to quality jobs, positions of responsibility, opportunities to strengthen their leadership, 
and more generally to products and services that improve their well-being and economic 
participation9. 
 
A project qualified as a "2X Challenge" is a project that meets one or more of the 4 indicators 
based on the criteria of the "2X Challenge": 
 
- Entrepreneurship: the supported business is majority owned by women OR was founded by 
a woman or a group of women who still have an active role in the business. 
 
- Leadership: women hold a significant share (% depending on the sector) of management 
positions or on the board of directors or investment board.  
 
 
9 In its new 2020-2022 strategy, PROPARCO has set itself the objective of gradually increasing the share of projects qualified as "2X 
Challenge" - which could represent around 25% of the projects signed by PROPARCO in 2022.

=== PAGE 166 ===
16 
 
- Employment: the supported company employs a significant proportion of women (% 
according to sector) in its workforce AND has an HR policies that promotes gender equality 
beyond local regulations. 
 
- Consumption: the supported company produces goods or services that target and benefit 
women in particular. Goods and services qualify when they : (i) meet the specific needs of 
women; (ii) offer solutions to problems that disproportionately impact women; (iii) are 
purchased by a majority of female customers (women); (iv) the end users are predominantly 
women. 
 
 
A PROPARCO Gender project is a project qualified as a "2X Challenge" project by fulfilling at least 
one of the four 2X criteria listed above.  
By correspondence, AFD refers to the OECD/DAC markers to classify its projects according to 
whether they integrate one or more significant secondary gender objectives (project ranked G-1), 
or where gender is the main objective (project ranked G-2).

=== PAGE 167 ===
17 
 
3. GIZ Gender Strategy and operationalization 
 
Gender equality is one of the key values of GIZ and the work it does. It is a prerequisite for and 
driver of sustainable development and a viable future of society, both at national and 
international level. At GIZ, gender-sensitive and, wherever needed, a gender-differentiated 
approach and consistent action are taken to eliminate existing gender-based discrimination 
and to foster equal rights and opportunities for everyone, regardless of their gender, sexual 
orientation and gender identity.  
 
Gender equality is enshrined in Article 3 of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany, 
to which GIZ is deeply committed. 
 
Article 3 of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany:  
 
(1) All persons shall be equal before the law. 
(2) Men and women have equal rights. The state promotes the actual implementation of 
equal rights for women and men and take steps to eliminate disadvantages that now exist. 
(3) No person shall be favoured or disadvantaged because of sex, parentage, ethnicity, 
language, homeland and origin, faith, or religious or political opinions. No person shall be 
disfavoured because of disability. 
 
 
GIZ gender current gender strategy was conceived in 2016. Its implementation is organized 
around five strategic pillars: political will and accountability, corporate culture, gender 
knowledge, supporting processes and the promotion of equal opportunities within GIZ. 
 
 
 
Strategic pillars of GIZ's gender 
strategy
Political will 
and 
accountability
Corporate 
culture
Gender 
knowledge
Supporting 
processes
Promotion of 
equal 
opportunities 
within GIZ

=== PAGE 168 ===
18 
 
GIZ’s Gender Strategy is a binding framework for all GIZ managers, employees and workforce 
members. They bring the strategy to life and translate it into specific action. An extensive 
internal network including more than 300 gender focal points in Germany and abroad is 
instrumental in implementing the Gender Strategy. 
 
The Gender Strategy includes a clear presentation of the gender architecture in the company 
and GIZ’s position on gender diversity and gender justice. Itis binding for subcontractors, too, 
and it is a source information and guidance for commissioning parties and partners. 
 
Objectives  
 
 
Organisation 
The strategic framework of the gender strategy is binding for all organizational units and 
everyone who works for GIZ. Taking five strategic elements as the starting point, the strategy 
is implemented at decentralised level in a manner suited to the mandates, fields and forms of 
work of the individual organisational units. An internal guidance document provides clear 
guidelines for its operationalisation. 
 
In order to achieve the objectives of the gender strategy, the individual organizational units, 
including the HR Department for equal opportunity within the company, define, adopt and 
document their own specific action documents, measures and, where necessary or 
appropriate, key figures/indicators. They are supported in this by the gender focal points they 
appoint. The action documents, measures and key figures/indicators are used for steering and 
annual reporting. For transparency and accountability within GIZ they are available on the GIZ 
Intranet, in the Document Management System (DMS) and/or on the Integrated Digital 
Applications (IDA). 
•Consistent action to eliminate existing gender-basd discrimination and to achieve equal 
rights and opportunities for everyoneBoth within the company and in connection with 
our commissions
•Both within the company and in connection with our commissions
Effectiveness
•Effective contributions to the gender equality objectives of international, European and 
German agreements.
•Advise for commissioning parties and clients on how to increase the number and quality 
of measures that focus on genderdefined area of action in their objectives.
Business 
development
•Continous expansion of sector-specific and crosssectoral gender competence.
•Harnessing of the potentials and opportunities of gender-diverse teams for creative and 
high-quality performance and service delivery.
Skills and 
alliances
• Compliance with gender requirements of our commissioningparties and clients by 
applying our gender knowledge and competence efficiently
•Standardising of existing approaches and processes to the greatest extent possible.
Economic 
efficiency

=== PAGE 169 ===
19 
 
 
Managers at all levels are responsible for the implementation of this policy. Key bodies and 
office holders are named and briefly described in the gender architecture below.  
 
Actor 
Roles and Responsibilities 
Management 
Board 
- 
Puts the gender strategy into effect and sets the corporate-policy 
orientation for its implementation; the Managing Director 
responsible for the Human Resources Department is responsible 
for equal opportunity policies within the Company 
- 
Appoints a Gender Ambassador among the members of the 
Strategy Committee 
Strategy 
Committee 
- 
Advises the Management Board on fundamental corporate-
policy issues with regard to gender equality 
- 
Annual debate concerning gender 
Management 
Committee 
- 
 Steers and ensures the implementation of the Management 
Board’s corporate policy instructions on gender in operational 
business 
- 
Advises and makes decisions on topic related and procedural 
issues 
 
Gender 
Ambassador 
 
- 
Actively promotes GIZ’s Gender Strategy and gender equality as 
such and acts as an interface between specialist and executive 
management levels 
- 
Acts as line manager for the GIZ Gender Commissioner and 
arranges for the Strategy Committee’s annual debate on gender 
GIZ 
Gender 
Commissioner 
- 
 Coordinator and GIZ spokesperson for gender 
 
 
Human Resources 
Department 
 
- 
Draws up strategies on equal opportunities and gender equality 
within the company 
- 
Plans and implements measures to promote equal opportunities 
and gender equality within the company 
- 
Supports managers in implementing the GIZ Internal Plan for 
Equal Opportunities  
Sectoral Division – 
Gender 
 
- 
Ensures excellence in sectoral expertise on gender as well as the 
ability to deliver sector-specific services 
- 
Takes responsibility for setting up and further developing 
specialised gender know-how and sectoral/methodological 
knowledge management 
- 
Promotes 
the 
integration 
of 
gender 
into 
commission 
management and develops interdisciplinary service packages in 
cooperation with other departments 
Safeguards+Gender 
Desk 
 
- 
The Safeguards+Gender Desk of the Internal Customer Services 
Division (PIC) of the Sectoral Department provides advice on 
gender-related procedural questions in connection with the 
Safeguards+Gender Management System

=== PAGE 170 ===
20 
 
- 
Checks the plausibility of preliminary (Safeguards+Gender 
checklist, possibly gender scan, provisional gender analysis) and 
in-depth gender analysis 
Gender 
coordination group 
 
- 
Consists of the Gender Ambassador, the GIZ Gender 
Commissioner, the gender focal points of the departments and 
corporate units including the GIZ representative offices in 
Brussels and Berlin, the Equal Opportunity Commissioner at 
company level, one representative of the responsible sectoral 
division and the sector programme 
- 
Supports and monitors decentralised implementation of the 
gender strategy within the organisational units 
- 
Compiles the results achieved in the different organisational units 
and identifies joint areas of action on that basis 
- 
Supports the GIZ Gender Commissioner in compiling the report 
on implementing the gender strategy and documents to be 
submitted to the Strategy Committee 
- 
Appoints members for working groups established by the GIZ 
Gender Commissioner 
Gender network 
- 
Consists of all Head Office and field structure gender focal points 
- 
Communicates the gender strategy inside the company 
- 
Encourages the discussion of innovative topics, issues and 
challenges that are important from a corporate policy stance 
- 
Ensures a supra-regional and cross-sectoral exchange on digital 
networking formats and at least one Gender Network Meeting 
each year 
Thematic forum on 
gender 
 
- 
Consists of planning officers and gender focal points from the 
Sectoral Department (FMB) and the Sector and Global 
Programmes Department (GloBe) 
- 
Is coordinated by the two departmental gender focal points of 
FMB and GloBe 
- 
Draws up joint sectoral documents on specific themes 
- 
Contributes to knowledge management on gender in commission 
management processes and in sectors 
- 
Organises joint events with internal and external discussion 
partners 
Equal Opportunity 
Commissioner 
 
- 
Promote and monitor the implementation of the GIZ 
employer/staff council agreement on equal opportunities and 
compliance with the principles of the German General Equal 
Treatment Act (AGG) with regard to protection against gender-
based discrimination and sexual harassment within the company. 
- 
The Equal Opportunity Commissioner at corporate level is the 
employer’s contact for all overarching issues related to equal 
opportunities and gender equality within the company and 
measures that relate to or affect the company as a whole, a 
number of units within the company, or cross-departmental 
workforce groups.

=== PAGE 171 ===
21 
 
 
Resources 
GIZ’s company management provides an annual budget to facilitate company-wide measures 
to implement the gender strategy. This applies to costs, for instance, of the Gender 
Competition, the implementation of the Gender Week and company-wide GIZ gender network 
meetings, the digital gender platform and all costs of the GIZ Gender Commissioner (the 
coordinator and GIZ spokesperson for gender). 
 
To ensure the successful implementation of the Gender Strategy at all levels, managers secure 
the required human resources, time and financial resources in their respective organisational 
units. They also support the gender focal points in performing their duties and promote their 
capacity development so that they can discharge their responsibilities in a professional 
manner. 
 
The Human Resources Department plans, establishes and provides the resources for equal 
opportunity measures within the company and for the gender focal point in the Human 
Resources Department. The Equal Opportunity Commissioners are released from their other 
duties. 
 
Monitoring 
In line with GIZ’s internal Guidelines for Operationalization and the specific action documents, 
measures and key figures/indicators, managers in the departments and corporate units are 
responsible for implementing, monitoring and reporting on the current implementation status 
of the gender strategy in their area of responsibility.  
 
The implementation of GIZ’s Gender Strategy is reflected in the corporate annual objectives.  
The GIZ Gender Commissioner examines the implementation status of the Gender Strategy 
and is responsible for the budget provisions by corporate management. In cooperation with 
the gender focal points of the individual organisational units the Gender Commissioner 
collates a consolidated company-wide implementation report (including recommendations) 
and submits it to GIZ’s Management Committee and Strategy Committee on an annual basis. 
The key results are incorporated into the Integrated Company Report and into other reports 
and declarations (e.g. UN Global Compact, German Sustainability Code). The annual reports 
from the organisational units are complemented by the results of an online survey among the 
gender focal points. 
 
Monitoring and any recommendations for action on equal opportunities within the company 
fall under the responsibility of the Human Resources Department. The GIZ Internal Plan for 
Equal Opportunities is reviewed every two years. The Equal Opportunity commissioners 
continuously monitor compliance with the relevant legal and HR policy requirements, which 
are set out in employer/staff council agreements, for example, and call on the Human

=== PAGE 172 ===
22 
 
Resources Department or the Managing Director responsible for the Human Resources 
Department to ensure they are put into practice. The Management Board reports to the 
Supervisory Board once a year on the status of equal opportunities and gender equality within 
GIZ. The key results are incorporated into the report on the implementation of the GIZ Gender 
Strategy. 
 
Project implementation  
To illustrate the application of the GIZ gender strategy at project level, the figure below shows 
the different steps taken before implementation of a project may happen in a country.  In fact, 
the gender analysis is included in the mandatory Safeguards+Gender process within GIZ. 
 
 
 
The mandatory gender analysis covers the following aspects:  
 
- 
An evaluation of the status quo of gender equality in the country, the sector and the 
partner organizations. The analysis needs to draw conclusions related to and relevant for 
the context of the project; 
- 
A needs assessment on the basis of interviews with project partners and, where 
applicable, other relevant stakeholders and/or representatives of the target group; 
- 
A needs assessment regarding gender equality within the project team; 
- 
An inventory of existing national, regional and international strategies, policies, 
institutions and laws related to the promotion of gender equality in the country/region in 
general as well as of the gender dimensions in the specific sector/field in which the project 
operates; 
- 
An inventory of the activities of other donors and other national, international and 
regional actors (this may include the private sector) working in this particular field and of 
how they take gender aspects into consideration in their work. Recommendations on how 
the project can benefit from these experiences and how it can coordinate with the 
identified actors.  
- 
Recommendations for the project: how should the project be designed in order to be more 
gender sensitive? How can the project respond to the specific needs of women and men? 
What are drivers of change and the gender dynamics in order to achieve the project’s 
adaptation and mitigation goals? How can the project integrate gender issues into its 
project management, project activities, the results-based monitoring system, etc.? 
1
"Gender screening” as part of the Safeguards+Gender Process
2
Based on result of screening, implementation of a gender analysis for the project in 
question (always the case for GCF financed projects).
3
Integration of results of gender analysis into project design

=== PAGE 173 ===
23 
 
- 
Recommendations for the formulation of gender-sensitive indicators in the specific 
context of the country/sector and – if possible – concrete suggestions for gender-sensitive 
indicators at the output, outcomes and impact levels. 
 
The gender analyses are conducted according to the following standards: 
 
Technical 
Methodological 
Formal 
- 
Highlighting complexity 
and interrelationships 
- 
Taking multiple 
discrimination into 
account 
- 
Identifying potentials 
and possible 
unintended negative 
impacts 
- 
Identifying 
opportunities for 
gender-responsive and 
gender-transformative 
approaches 
- 
Insights for the project 
as a benchmark 
- 
Choosing the 
appropriate 
methodology 
- 
Deriving concrete 
measures for project 
implementation 
- 
Using understandable 
and gender-sensitive 
language/presentation 
- 
As short as possible, as 
extensive as necessary

=== PAGE 174 ===
24 
 
II. 
Gender approach for the Program 
1. Program description  
1.1. Rationale  
The construction and operation of buildings is responsible for 40% of all energy-related carbon 
dioxide emissions. A rapid decarbonization of the building sector is therefore needed to reach 
the 2 degree target set out in the Paris Agreement. 
While progress towards more energy efficiency in buildings is being made in most countries, 
improvements are not keeping up with the growing sector and rising demand for energy 
services. The life of buildings range between 30-80 years and thus their energy consumption 
is locked in for decades. 
Due to population growth, rapid urbanization and economic development, final energy 
demand from buildings is predicted to increase 50% by 2050 compared with 2015 levels under 
business as usual scenarios. Global demand for cooling alone is expected to triple by 2050. 
This growth will mostly take place in hot and emerging countries where air conditioning is set 
to soar. 
If comprehensive energy efficiency policies for new and existing buildings as well as appliances 
are put in place, global building space could increase by 60% by 2040 without resulting in any 
additional energy use.  
Therefore action is needed. Buildings that are built now and in future need to follow the 
highest energy efficiency standard. They will exist for decades with energy consumption and 
CO2 emissions locked in. 
To face this challenge and improve the energy efficiency of the building sector Germany and 
France initiated the Program for Energy Efficiency in Buildings (PEEB). 
Catalysed by the Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (GlobalABC), PEEB supports 
the global efforts on embedding the building sector into the climate agenda and strengthen 
the NDC implementation in buildings. 
PEEB supports countries in transforming their building sector. Beginning of 2018 it started 
operations with 5 partner countries: Mexico, Morocco, Tunisia, Senegal and Vietnam and 
other countries already expressed interest to get PEEBs support.  
PEEB provides to the partner countries support for policy implementation, trainings and 
knowledge sharing as well as financial assistance to implement large scale building project in 
high energy efficiency standard. 
PEEB has experienced great demand for support from further countries (Nigeria, Jordan, 
Ecuador, Indonesia etc.) and strives to expand its outreach. Countries see the importance of

=== PAGE 175 ===
25 
 
improving the policy framework for more energy efficiency in buildings while at the same time 
setting up financial incentive Programs for EE buildings. 
Current PEEB budget for policy level activities is earmarked for the first 5 PEEB partner 
countries. However, PEEB has started supporting and financing large scale building 
construction and renovation projects outside its first 5 partner countries. The program has 
already started providing support and financing to 16 large-scale building construction and 
renovation projects and programs in 11 countries amounting to a total investment of around 
900MEUR. 
After the demonstration of its efficiency, the program will be scaled up to match the current 
pipeline of identified large-scale building construction and renovation subprojects amounting 
to EUR 1.6 billion in over 20 countries (EUR 1 billion of which in PEEB Cool countries) and to 
implement the needed policy level and technical activities to bring about a transformation of 
the buildings sector in those target countries. Moreover, AFD wishes to scale up the 
experience on the PEEB program to go beyond and build further on this initiative by 
diversifying towards energy efficient cooling systems, and expanding the geographical scope 
to help shifting the paradigm towards low carbon and resilient building systems.  
1.2. Program Objectives  
The objectives of the Program are to: 
• Significantly transform the buildings sector by promoting sustainable building design 
and construction; 
• Lower the energy demand in buildings in a cost-effective manner as well as reducing 
to a minimum level and avoiding as much as possible greenhouse gas emissions; 
• Leverage untapped social, ecological and economic benefits; 
• Promote clean cooling systems 
1.3. Program contents  
1.3.1. Program contents and implementation scheme  
The Program is composed of two complementary components: 
1. Financing facility to public and private actors with adapted financial incentives to 
foster the best green building investments. This flexibility will be allowed by the variety 
of financing instruments used in this component. Those can be loans, concessional 
loans, or investment grants, The financing facility will carry out the following activities 
a. Identification of feasible financing subprojects  
b. Setting up of financing arrangements for identified subprojects 
c. Monitoring and technical support of financed subprojects 
 
2. Policy facility to help transforming the building sector at national level composed of 
a. The development of (NDC) roadmaps in the buildings sector

=== PAGE 176 ===
26 
 
b. The elaboration of policy proposals for the buildings sector 
c. The implementation of capacity building measures for buildings sector 
professionals 
1.3.2. Eligible entities  
Eligible entities are listed for each component carried out by the Program: 
• Financing facility: all subproject owners (i) within AFD’s or PROPARCO’s pipeline, (ii) in 
one of PEEB Cool’s implementation countries, (iii) whose subproject involves energy 
efficiency potential. Eligible entity can be a private sector company, a ministry, a public 
institution, a public financial institution. 
• Policy facility: any public body (public institution, ministries, regulatory entity, etc.) 
from one of PEEB Cool’s implementation countries that is an actor of the national 
buildings sector. 
1.3.3. Eligible investments  
• Financing facility: all subprojects (i) within AFD’s or PROPARCO’s pipeline, (ii) in one of 
PEEB 
Cool’s 
implementation 
countries, 
(iii) 
involving 
building(s) 
construction/refurbishment or industry energy efficiency improvement, and (iv) that 
are not rated A by AFD Group’s E&S classification.  
1.5. Sector Eligible to the program 
The PEEB Cool Program targets a variety of sectors. AFD has developed Sectoral gender 
toolkits (SGT) which promote a cross-cutting approach and provide a resource for technical 
experts and project leader. These toolkits tackles gender related issues in all the sectors 
targeted by the program and provide sensitive, responsive and transformative measures 
examples to integrate in the subproject activities.  
a. Transportation sector 
Examples of subprojects: Greenfield of brownfield project of energy efficiency in train station, 
bus station. 
Summary of the main Gender issues  
o Transport sector policies are often seen as socially neutral. However, they have 
different effects for men and women because of the technical choices that underlie 
them. 
o Inequalities in access to transport by gender are played out on two levels: women are 
over-represented among poor people do not have access to motorized vehicles, and, 
for an equal standard of living, they do not have priority in access to the fastest modes, 
or even are symbolically kept away. 
o Due to existing gender inequalities, women often participate to a limited extent or are 
excluded from processes decision-making concerning transport at all levels 
(households, local communities, sectoral policies).

=== PAGE 177 ===
27 
 
o The transport needs of women differ in fact from those of men (timetables and travel 
loops differentiated). Due to the difference in participation in decision-making 
processes, this difference is rarely taken into account. The local displacement scale, for 
example, is never considered a priority with regard to regional scales, national or 
international. 
o Women are also more vulnerable than men in terms of security, whether within spaces 
public transport or around major infrastructures, and are more frequently pedestrian 
than conductive. They are more affected than men by negative external effects 
(gender-based harassment, sexual violence, road safety, pollution, cut-off effects, etc.) 
without withdrawing the benefits. 
o Women have more difficult access than men to finance and training to learn a trade in 
the transport sector or developing economic activities there. 
 
Good Practices for Gender Integration 
o Differentiate the needs and practices of men and women in terms of displacement, 
whether in terms of mode, route, time and travel scale. 
o Collect sex-disaggregated data on demand and travel practices. 
o Identify the material and symbolic constraints which weigh differently on men and 
women at all levels (households, local communities, sectoral policies). 
o Ensure the participation of men and women in all stages of subprojects, by adapting 
the methods of participation awareness of the social, material and cultural constraints 
of each group. Consider gender differences intersectionally, that is, taking into account 
the fact that a man or a woman represents its class or ethnicity as much as its gender. 
o Consider from the design of the subproject, especially for urban public transport, 
taking into account the differences. M / F in the travel loops as well as a tariff evolution 
according to schedules. 
o Support the fight against gender-based harassment and sexual violence (data 
collection, security personnel, M / F, differentiated awareness campaigns M / F, spatial 
planning etc.). 
o Sensitize and support sectoral actors on gender issues. 
o Support the development of training, employment and entrepreneurship for women 
in the transport sector. 
o Integrate women in technical training activities in the transport trades. 
o Strengthen security around infrastructure and limit the cut-off effect for non-
motorized modes. 
 
b. Health 
Examples of subprojects: Construction or extension of health center or hospital, Refurbishment 
of health center or extension. 
Summary of the main Gender issues

=== PAGE 178 ===
28 
 
o unbalanced power relations between men and women (weighing on spending 
decisions in health, in particular); 
o  social norms that reduce their access to education, gainful employment and resources 
economic; 
o  limited access to general health and  reproductive health in particular    
o a vision of women centered exclusively on her procreative role; 
o physical, sexual and emotional abuse; 
o eating habits (malnutrition) and use cooking fuels (poisoning). 
It should also be noted that, if poverty represents a major barrier to improving health men 
and women, however, it tends to place an even greater burden on health women and girls 
 
Good Practices for Gender Integration 
o capacity building at national level and sub-national for gender analysis of policies and 
human resources planning / management; 
o a reflection on taking gender into account in national health human resource 
development budgets; 
o promoting the use of gender-specific data in monitoring and evaluating activities for 
all levels; 
o developing accountability frameworks. In addition, other actions can be developed in 
terms of human resources: 
o training of caregivers on gender issues and new gender-sensitive practices; 
o career management: access to training and promotion of women in positions 
of responsibility; 
o incentives to promote geo-mobility graph of women (assignment and 
maintenance of positions in semi-urban and / or rural areas); 
o pay attention to working conditions / measures to take to improve them 
(remuneration, capacity accommodation including with the family, ...); 
o Prevention on harassment. 
c. Education 
Examples of subprojects: Construction of schools, universities, classrooms in rural areas, 
science complex, etc., Refurbishment of training center, Extension of university 
Summary of the main Gender issues 
There are multiple access barriers linked to supply and demand. They hinder entry into a cycle 
of education, the transition in a cycle of education superior as well as maintenance throughout 
a cycle given. Restraints may be different for boys and for girls. Their weight varies according 
to age and situation students. 
 
Good Practices for Gender Integration 
o The establishment of school transport or vouchers transport helps solve the question 
of distance home school.

=== PAGE 179 ===
29 
 
o Distribution of school kits, uniforms and textbooks partially responds to the indirect 
costs of education. 
o School canteens, in direct support of well-being boys and girls facilitate learning and 
school attendance throughout the day 
o Resource transfers to households, the good school, back-to-school loans are 
particularly highly effective for schooling and maintenance when they are conditional 
and targeted (by age, class or cycle) 
o Scholarships allow to target certain groups disadvantaged and to include conditions: 
impacts positive were noted for girls, particularly in secondary school and when 
scholarships are combined with interventions targeting life skills and empowerment 
o The abolition of tuition fees allows expansion of supply and the reduction of demand 
barriers but without necessarily resolving equity issues between boys and girls. 
o Improvement of the school environment (health, hygiene, water) has a positive effect 
on girls in particular in middle and high school. 
o Adapting the building design with dedicated changing rooms and toilets for girls, in a 
sufficient numbers to ensure the equal representation. 
o The establishment of boarding schools and hostels can allow students, especially girls, 
to continue their high school especially in areas rural.  
o Distribution of sanitary napkins reduces girls' absences linked to their menstrual cycle 
o Recruitment of female teachers had a positive impact on girls' access in certain 
countries (e.g. Yemen, Afghanistan, Pakistan). 
o Gender audits of programs and review of curricula / textbooks allow the elimination 
of stereotypes of gender and promoting equality 
o Teacher training for pedagogy gender sensitive can have a positive impact on the 
reduction in girls' dropout rate and academic results. 
o Improvement of school legislation / regulations on the education of pregnant and 
married girls or mothers allow daughters-mothers / daughters-wives to complete their 
studies 
o Additional classes and tutoring, when free, help strengthen students' self-confidence 
and provide support punctual before exams or promotion / transition in a different 
education cycle, especially for the girls. 
o Single-sex classes, if they have demonstrated results positive results on boys' 
educational outcomes like girls in some countries hamper learning diversity and 
reinforce gender divisions in fact this strategy is only used in cases very specific. 
 
d. Social Housing and housing improvement 
Examples of subproject: Greenfield construction of housing facilities, Renovation of existing 
housing (e.g. energy efficiency in housing projects). 
Summary of the main Gender issues 
o Increased vulnerability of women in access to decent housing 
o Limited rights of women to own, control or inherit the land and property

=== PAGE 180 ===
30 
 
o Restriction to access to rental housing 
o Access to housing: economic issues for women 
o Access to housing for women: the issue of access to credits 
o Spatial design and programming of housing: differentiated gender impacts 
o Housing and security 
 
Good Practices for Gender Integration 
o Consult women and men upstream for define their residential needs and strategies. 
o Do not isolate women heads of households from their social fabrics and poles of 
activities and opportunities of employment. 
o Housing is not a simple shelter isolated from rest, it's important to take into account 
the relationships that the inhabitants maintain with private spaces, public and 
intermediary, neighborhood relations, adjustments according to the needs and the 
evolution of the family, residential mobility strategies, as well as the involvement of 
residents in public life and neighborhood management. This notion is important for 
women who remain mostly on the streets close to their habitat (problem of access to 
transports, etc.), or even who need to be able to keep an eye on the house and the 
children. 
o Rethinking eligibility criteria for access to social housing taking into account the 
situation women and especially women Head of household. 
o Ensuring tenure security and decent housing for women and men in vulnerable 
situation; Examples of initiatives: cooperatives of housing, cutting lots, assistance with 
self-construction, etc. 
o Involve women in the construction sector, by integrating women at all stages: 
investment, design, construction, layout public spaces, etc. 
o Take into account gender equality objectives and women for the design of spaces the 
habitat and layout of common areas, semi-private and intermediate spaces. 
o Take into account income-generating activities which are carried out within the 
accommodation. 
o Although their work is invisible, many women contribute to household income in 
addition to perform domestic tasks 
 
e. Industry  
Examples of subprojects: Improvement of energy consumption or water consumption in 
industrial processes (agribusiness, cement plant, etc.). 
Good Practices for Gender Integration 
o analyze the ecosystem with disaggregated data-genders by sex; study the profiles of 
groups of entrepreneurs: repartition of female and male entrepreneurs in the different 
business sectors or their activities, their specific constraints; analyze different 
strategies to free up time (and energy) allocated by women to the expenses of

=== PAGE 181 ===
31 
 
domestic and family work, with criteria of economic growth, entrepreneurship, 
equality of chances, etc. : 
- creation of public or private day-care centers; 
- creation of collective, private or public enterprises decentralized energy 
services allowing women to pound, fetch water, etc. 
o Contribute to change attitudes and perceptions women employed in companies, but 
also within their female and male entourage. This can be done in various 
complementary ways: 
- organize communication campaigns laughing at good experiences, the champions of   
gender mainstreaming and managed businesses by women; 
- use different types of channels, taking into account gender, possible rural / urban 
differences, etc. : information days, group meetings specific, TV and radio, inter-
company visits, etc. ; 
- involve potential allies in the communication campaigns; 
- disseminate specific tools to reduce prejudice and negative attitudes in business 
o disseminate tools to integrate the gender approach within companies and ensure 
follow-up; propose gender training; prevent gender based violence; 
o disseminate tools to facilitate recruitment of women in business (working hours, 
daycare children, gender neutral recruitment, etc.) and gender diversity professional 
 
f. Public building and other building sector 
Examples of subprojects: Energy efficiency measures in public buildings, in administrative 
center, Energy efficiency in market, shopping mall, offices, etc. 
Good Practices for Gender Integration,  
o Involve women in the construction sector, by integrating women at all stages: 
investment, design, construction, layout public spaces, etc. 
o Take into account gender equality objectives and women for the design of spaces the 
habitat and layout of common areas, semi-private and intermediate spaces. 
 
1.5. Gender integration within AFD’s intervention to sectors eligible to the program 
By 2022, 50% of the volume of AFD commitments are to be gender-responsive and rated 1 or 
2 according to the rating criteria of the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) 
PEEB Cool will be representative of this commitment, by assisting projects in sectors which 
have high gender considerations such as:  
- 
Transportation (more than 55% of total commitments marked DAC 1 or 2 since 2017, 
65% in 2021) 
- 
Health (more than 75% of total commitments marked DAC 1 or 2 since 2017, 85% in 
2021) 
- 
Education (more than 90% of total commitments marked DAC 1 or 2 since 2017, 99% 
in 2021)

=== PAGE 182 ===
32 
 
- 
Urban development  (more than 55% of total commitments marked DAC 1 or 2 since 
2017, 50% in 2021) 
- 
Financial systems and credit lines (more than 50% of total commitments marked DAC 
1 or 2 since 2017, 46% in 2021). 
 
 
2. Gender Scheme to the Program 
The approach to gender mainstreaming and gender assessment for the Program will be 
submitted to AFD GROUP, GIZ’s Gender strategies and operational guidelines following GCF 
gender policy10 and its requirements. 
As every context is different and specific, the gender measures taken in one country could be 
non-relevant in one other. Even most of the examples could be implemented everywhere, we 
are trying to focus on specificities of the background/context of every subproject 2.1. Gender 
related activities 
The Gender Approach for the Program is Subproject-specific. Specific indicators and activities 
are therefore defined on a case-by-case basis according to the framework established in the 
Gender Action Plan. 
Considering the objectives and sectors targeted by the Program, gender-related activities can 
be addressed through: 
i. 
Cross-cutting approaches to gender equality: Subprojects can be analyzed and include 
cross-cutting approaches to gender equality, through 
 Gender-based analysis of climate change exposure: since all subprojects to be part 
of this Program intend to fight against climate change, the possible differentiated 
impacts of climate change on men and women can be analyzed on all subprojects. 
Particular attention must be put on the possible increased vulnerability of women 
to climate change, but also on the role women can play in fighting against climate 
change and developing adaptation strategies and activities. Whenever possible, 
specific activities will be integrated to subprojects in order to reduce vulnerability 
of women and increase women’s role in climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 Capacity-building of project partners (IEs and end beneficiaries) on gender 
related topics: technical assistance will be available to support the capacity 
building of IEs and project partners in gender related issues.  
ii. 
Specific thematic approaches: in line with the objectives of the Program, gender 
equality objectives will be also considered looking at the following specific issues11: 
 Women economic participation:  
 
10 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-policy 
 
11 For an extensive analysis on the following issues, please refer to AFD report “BOÎTE À OUTILS GENRE Appui 
au secteur privé, entrepreneuriat et inclusion financière”, https://www.afd.fr/fr/ressources/boite-outils-appui-
au-secteur-prive-entrepreneuriat-et-inclusion-financiere

=== PAGE 183 ===
33 
 
Women generally not only take care of domestic and family tasks, but are usually also 
in charge of them. These responsibilities and burdens have a cost in time, energy and 
availability during the day. These elements limit their allocation of time and energy 
within the economic market, their opportunity for training, experience and ultimately, 
the sector and type of economic activity.  They also explain women's greater 
preference for self-employment, which is more flexible. This division of labour is 
influenced by social norms, but also by traditions and habits.  
o Possible strategies and actions 
For all subprojects, whether they aim to reduce constraints to the growth of 
existing enterprises or to reduce barriers to entry, gender mainstreaming involves 
systematically :  
- 
analyze the ecosystem with sex-disaggregated data; 
- 
study profiles of entrepreneurial groups: distribution of female and male 
entrepreneurs in different sectors or activities, their specific constraints; 
- 
analyze different strategies to free up women's time (and energy) for 
domestic and family workloads, with criteria of economic growth, 
entrepreneurship, equal opportunities, etc.; 
- 
analyze different strategies to free up women's time (and energy) for 
domestic and family workloads, with criteria of economic growth, 
entrepreneurship, equal opportunities, etc (creation of collective, private 
or public daycare center, decentralized energy service enterprises enabling 
women to pound, collect water, etc. ) 
- 
promotion of gender equality at work within IEs and their clients,  
- 
women empowerment and economic participation on credit lines’ end-
beneficiary projects  
 Access, control over resources and securing property rights are often different for 
women and men. This is particularly true in countries where there is an overlap 
between formal and customary law, for example for land. The status of married 
women in both SMEs and farms is often unregulated. Women are neither (co-
)owners nor wage earners, even though they contribute to them (e.g. bookkeeping, 
field work). 
o Possible strategies and actions 
They are currently two main models for reducing gender inequality in access to 
financial products by women entrepreneurs: i) specific credit lines for women's 
businesses and ii) programmes for women entrepreneurs, including training and 
specific products.  
 Equal access to services: access to subproject benefits 
2.1. Methodology

=== PAGE 184 ===
34 
 
Subproject Cycle 
Step  
ESRM actions  
Role and responsibilities  
Identification  
Gender Country Profile  
AFD GROUP  Local Offices  
- 
Gender screening 
- 
Gender ranking : AFD Initial 
Sustainable 
Development 
Indicator 
on 
Gender 
(-2,-
1,0,1,2,3) 
and 
OECD 
DAC 
Markers (0,1,2) 
- 
Gender 
Diligence 
to 
be 
conducted during subproject 
appraisal 
- 
GIZ Safeguards and Gender 
Desk 
- 
AFD GROUP Gender and E&S 
Expert (HQ level) 
Instruction  
(Feasibility 
and 
Appraisal)  
- 
Implementation of a gender 
analysis and integration of its 
results into subproject design 
- 
Gender diligence adapted to 
the - nature and scope of the 
subproject 
- 
GIZ Gender experts and focal 
points, 
Gender 
consultant 
feasibility consultant 
- 
AFD GROUP Gender and E&S 
Expert, 
Gender 
consultant, 
feasibility study consultant  
- 
Drafting 
of 
Gender 
commitments  
GIZ, AFD GROUP Gender and E&S 
Expert 
Commitment  
- 
Finalization 
of 
Gender 
commitments and integration 
to the financing agreement  
GIZ, AFD GROUP gender and E&S 
Expert and Project Manager  
Supervision  
- 
Monitoring 
of 
the 
implementation of the Gender 
Action Plan integrated in the  
Environmental 
and 
Social 
monitoring report  
GIZ, AFD GROUP Gender and E&S 
Expert and Project Manager  
Evaluation  
- 
Gender 
ex-post 
evaluation 
(whenever relevant)  
GIZ, AFD GROUP or external 
consultants  
 
The following diagram sums up gender associated activities, costs and human resources 
allocated to the subprojects during their lifetime:

=== PAGE 185 ===
35 
 
 
 
More detail is provided below: 
• 100% of subprojects will benefit from gender expertise during identification and 
appraisal process in order to assess the opportunities to include gender activities in 
the subproject. All subprojects will be eligible to benefit from gender activities during 
subproject implementation as soon as those gender activities are identified during 
identification and appraisal process. 
• Gender activities are included in PEEB Cool eligibility criteria for financing. For a matter 
of simplicity in this Funding Proposal, expenses for gender activities are split in pari-
passu between GCF financing and AFD group. However the split between GCF and AFD 
financings for covering gender activities costs will be decided subproject by subproject. 
• Budget allocation to gender activities is mentioned in Annex 4 – Budget Plan and Annex 
12 – AE fees 
• Monitoring and follow-up of the implementation of gender activities according to the 
agreed GAP will be made by the project manager or gender expert within AFD, and by 
steering committees (see 2.2.5 below) 
 
The estimated budget secured for gender activities, according to the above assumptions and 
a number of subprojects estimated at 14, would be the following: 
- 
Around EUR 42,000 dedicated to the financing of internal experts within AFD, Proparco or 
GIZ, included in AE fees

=== PAGE 186 ===
36 
 
- 
Around 4,65 M€ dedicated to technical assistance covering gender issues and targets, 
financed by GCF grant (10% of MEUR 46,5) 
- 
Up to 257M€ dedicated to gender activities within the scope of the program (up to 20% of 
MEUR 1,287). 
 
2.2.1. Minimal Requirements 
In line with AFD GROUP, GIZ and GCF’s gender approaches, each subproject is expected to 
develop and to comply at least with the following requirements: 
 
 gender assessment integrating a context’s analysis and sociocultural factors 
underlying climate change exacerbated gender inequality and optimize the potential 
contributions of women and  men of all ages to build both individual and collective 
resilience to climate change. This gender analysis will tackles the roles of men and 
women in the sectors targeted by the subproject are assessed (e.g. through the 
feasibility study) and the findings of gender analysis clearly appear in subproject 
appraisal documentation.  The gender analysis will also take in account gender 
equality in relation/interaction with others inequalities (race, religion, age, location, 
disabilities etc…).subproject- level gender action plan including a gender-related 
baseline, indicators and targets; 
 sex-disaggregated data: quantitative indicators for the Subproject are sex-
disaggregated where relevant; 
 work place policy reviews of institutions where women are expected to be employed 
in. This could include reviewing the existing gender equality policies, presence (or lack) 
of conducive working conditions, absence of policies on equal pay for equal work, 
promotion, trainings, harassment. 
 
Such basic assessment is conducted by AFD GROUP Gender Experts and E&S Experts during 
Subproject Appraisal, with the support of AFD GROUP project Managers and local offices. 
 
Within Component 2 (Enabling Facility) of PEEB Cool, GIZ will conduct an analysis addressing 
the development and integration of a more gender sensitive and inclusive approach in the 
buildings activities, for each country, before starting the implementation of PEEB Cool 
Component 2. Based on the analysis, GIZ will develop a strategy to address gender issues in 
the building sector and to integrate gender issues systematically into policy proposals and 
capacity building measures. 
2.2.2. Definition of gender objectives 
On the basis of the initial gender analysis and in line with AFD GROUP methodology as 
described above, specific or general objectives are designed to promote gender equality 
through the subproject. Such objectives can be formulated at the level of the IE (e.g. gender 
action plans to strengthen gender equality at work, to train personnel on gender-related

=== PAGE 187 ===
37 
 
issues), at the level of IE Subprojects and end-beneficiary projects, in line with the targeted 
sector, or both. These objectives are based on the initial assessment and are discussed and 
agreed with IEs, with AFD GROUP overall coordination. Specific baseline studies are conducted 
in order to identify gender equality stakes in the country, sector, and possibly within the IE, 
and to define gender-specific indicators for the Subproject. 
 
• Examples of Subprojects with gender general objectives: 
o A subproject that supports gender equality at work within the IE and its clients as an 
eligibility criteria to a credit facility; 
o A subproject aiming at supporting women entrepreneurs through training, and target 
beneficiaries; 
o A subproject supporting energy efficiency in social housing with focus on single-headed 
families. 
• Examples of Subprojects with gender specific objectives: 
o A subproject in which the IE conducts a gender assessment and designs and implements a 
gender action plan to enhance gender equality within its internal organization; 
o A subproject that includes a specific study on the role of women in designing and 
participating to climate change adaptation activities in agriculture; 
o A subproject that includes specific awareness and training sessions to promote gender 
equality in the management of community social housing infrastructures. 
 
2.2.3. Implementation of gender activities 
Technical Assistance Programs are crucial in implementing activities that promote gender 
equality within the Program. Since awareness and training are key to the development of 
gender equality, specific expertise in that field is to be considered in the TA recruitment. 
Thanks to the support of gender experts in a punctual or continuous basis – depending on a 
Subproject’s gender objective – TA activities are designed and implemented, as for instance: 
- 
Support to the design and implementation of gender action plans for IEs and end 
beneficiaries; 
- 
Support to gender analysis within E&S due diligence; 
- 
 Design and conduction of awareness campaigns for end beneficiaries; 
- 
Design and conduction of a capacity-building program including tools and training 
sessions for IE staff; 
- 
Conduction of gender specific studies, e.g. on the roles of men and women in the 
sector targeted by the Subproject; 
- 
Organization of knowledge-sharing events between stakeholders involved in gender-
related topics; 
- 
Design of awareness and communication tools to support the promotion of gender 
equality; 
- 
Knowledge management activities with gender focus; 
- 
Support to the inclusion of gender data in monitoring and evaluation systems.

=== PAGE 188 ===
38 
 
Synergies have to be looked at between Subprojects, not only to ensure consistency within 
the Program, but also to encourage learning between peers. Activities such as seminars or 
workshops between IEs with specific focus on gender are encouraged. 
 
2.2.5. Gender Action Plans 
Based on the objectives adopted for each Subproject, a Gender Action Plan must be defined 
with the IE and other relevant Subproject stakeholders during Subproject appraisal. This 
Gender Action Plan will follow the GCF template as per Annex 2 – Gender Action Plan template 
for Subprojects and its definition will fully involve AFD GROUP and GIZ’s Gender and E&S 
experts. The AE will ensure that sufficient resources are dedicated to the implementation of 
subproject level GAP activities. This will be done via the following: 
• The project management specialist/s in project management or implementation units 
will guide overall GAP implementation, while subproject gender focal points at district, 
town, or village level in the subproject area will assist with GAP implementation. The 
subproject steering committee comprising AE staff and gender focal points, will 
provide oversight for GAP implementation. 
 
2.2 Grievance Redress mechanism 
A Grievance Redress mechanism is an out-of-court recourse mechanism that allows any 
person or group of persons affected by the impacts of a subproject to submit a complaint. 
Purpose of such mechanisms, as per GCF Policy is to provide room for grievance and redress, 
and facilitate resolution of grievances about the impacts of the activities.  
The Program approach to grievance and redress relies on AFD GROUP and GCF’s grievance 
procedures, the IE’s approach to grievance and potential grievance mechanisms -when 
existing-, and grievance mechanisms set up in the framework of Subprojects. As a result, the 
recourse to GCF Independent Redress Mechanism and to AFD’s Complaints Mechanism is 
made possible for all levels of the Program. 
At Subproject and end-beneficiary project level, grievance mechanisms must be designed to 
receive and facilitate concern or conflict resolution as the case may be, in relation with 
environmental, social and gender risks and impacts of the project. The need or relevance of 
designing such mechanisms shall be assessed during subproject appraisal phase and gender 
analysis. Grievance mechanisms must be tailored to the level of subproject risks and impacts, 
with the purpose of resolving concerns or conflicts through an understandable and 
transparent consultative process consistent with subproject and/or local context. The 
mechanism shall be free, and shall not impede access to judicial or administrative remedies. 
Project owners must communicate on the existence of such mechanisms and inform project 
stakeholders accordingly. Grievance mechanisms at Subproject and credit line’s end-
beneficiary project level are developed firstly in order to allow amicable resolution of a dispute 
or complaint. If not possible, then the complaint has to be solved through a formal legal

=== PAGE 189 ===
39 
 
process. The mechanism is designed to address affected people’s concerns and complaints 
promptly, using an understandable and transparent process that is gender sensitive, culturally 
appropriate and readily accessible to all affected people. The grievance mechanism includes 
provisions to protect complainants from retaliation and to remain anonymous, if requested. 
At subproject and credit line’s end-beneficiary project level, grievance mechanisms can cover 
a range of aspects of the project, including general aspects such as planning, construction, and 
operation, E&S due diligence process, and their impact, and specific issues such as 
resettlement processes, related compensation and sexual harassment or gender based 
violence. 
As defined by IFC Performance Standards that must apply at least on high-risk subproject and 
credit line’s end-beneficiary project funded under the Program, specific Grievance Redress 
mechanisms must be set up at Subproject level where necessary, as follows: 
- 
For the whole scope of the subproject, with the above described approach, to facilitate 
early indication of, and prompt remediation for those who believe they have been 
harmed by a project or its related activities (PS1); 
- 
For subprojects where PS2 is applicable, grievance mechanism for workers to raise 
workplace concerns, applying to direct workers, contracted workers, and/or supply 
chain workers; 
- 
For subprojects where PS4 is applicable, grievance mechanism for affected 
communities to express concerns about security arrangements and acts of security 
personnel including sexual harassment and gender based violence; 
- 
For subprojects where PS5 is applicable, grievance mechanism must be established as 
early as possible in the subproject development phase, in order to allow the resolution 
of disputes related to the compensation and/or relocation in an impartial manner.

=== PAGE 190 ===
40 
 
Annex 1: Guideline for collecting sex-disaggregated data 
Conducting gender analyses and collecting sex-disaggregated data is increasingly recognized as a 
critical component of program design and evaluation. The  information  below  is  intended  to  serve  
as  guidelines  for  collecting sex-disaggregated data. 
Before collecting sex-disaggregated data, project developers/researchers/consultants must clearly 
identify the research questions. This allows the targeting of data collection to the key issues tackled 
by the subproject and the gender action plan.    It is also necessary to carefully budget for additional 
costs.  These costs will vary widely, depending on the data collection method. For example, adding  
additional  questions  to  a  survey  is  less  expensive  than  collecting  information  from  additional 
respondents or increasing the number of focus groups. Researchers must consider the tradeoffs of 
these different  methods  and  employ those  which  will  most  effectively  address  their  research  
question(s).In some cases, it may be possible to collect sex-disaggregated data with little if any 
additional cost. 
Unit of analysis 
Identifying the appropriate unit of analysis is essential for good research and key to identifying where 
to incorporate sex-disaggregated data.  For agricultural research, these often include: 
Individual: A farmer or a worker along a value chain are examples where an individual is the unit of 
analysis.  Understanding individual choices, preferences, or decisions requires interviewing the 
individual.   
Household: Agricultural households are both producers and consumers.  To consider all of these 
activities, the household may be the appropriate unit of analysis.  Important information about the 
household may include the sex and age composition of its members.  
Intrahousehold: To understand what happens within the household, the focus may be on 
intrahousehold analysis.  This does not treat the household as a single unit, but seeks to understand 
how multiple individuals within the household interact and affect outcomes.   
Community: Communities may be the focus of policies or interventions.  
Regional or national:  For cross-country comparisons, including those of trade or policies, national or 
regional analysis is appropriate.   
Land area:  Spatial analyses of how various policies affect land use may use land areas as the 
appropriate unit of analysis.   Land parcels may be the unit of analysis for analyses of agricultural 
production.    
Resource unit:  A forest, watershed, or lake may be the appropriate unit of analysis for questions 
about natural resource management. 
Formal or informal organizations:  These may be farmer cooperatives, extension service providers, 
credit banks, water user groups, micro-finance groups, self-help groups, etc.  
Who should provide information?

=== PAGE 191 ===
41 
 
For gender analysis, it is indispensable to interview both men and women.  This does not necessarily 
mean interviewing twice as many people or that men and women in the same household must be 
interviewed. For some research questions, it may be preferable to interview one person per 
household and randomly choose whether it is a man or woman. An important consideration in 
collecting data for gender analysis is who should serve as the respondent in individual interviews, 
focus groups, and other data collection methods. The answer depends on both the research 
questions and the unit of analysis. The respondent must be able to provide complete and correct 
information. If questions ask about individuals --their preferences, willingness to pay, empowerment,  
etc. --one  person  may  not  be  able  to  answer  for  another.  Even within a household, husbands 
may not know their wives’ preferences, income, or assets (and vice versa). 
Regardless of the method used to collect information, whether it is a structured interview, a focus 
group, a participatory evaluation, or a transect walk, choosing appropriate respondents (both male 
and female) is necessary for valid gender analysis. All methods must make sure that both women’s 
and men’s perspectives are represented and identified. Participant selection should also ensure the 
representation of other relevant categories and social groupings, such as socioeconomic status, 
ethnicity, migrant status, or age. For all methods of data collection, researcher(s) must be cognizant 
of how gender and other social norms might inform a response. 
Consider the context 
The data collected should be driven not only by the research questions but also by the context. Given 
the heterogeneity  of  gender  relations,  research  on  gender  cannot  follow a  one-size-fits-all  
approach. Questions must be adapted to the context and those collecting and analyzing the data 
need to understand gender  roles  as  well  as  other  dimensions  of  identity  such  as  religion,  race,  
class,  ethnicity,  age,  caste, remoteness,  disability,  or  sexual  orientation.  Acquiring  background  
knowledge  of  this  nature  is  good practice  for  any  data collection effort.  It  will  allow  
researchers to  develop  questions  that  are culturally sensitive, ensure that the questions are 
relevant, and that the researchers, enumerators, facilitators, and respondents all have the same 
understanding of the terms included in each question. The specific context for the interview is 
important.  It may –or may not –be necessary for enumerators or facilitators to be the same sex as 
the respondents.  Depending on the questions and the context, it may –or may not –be appropriate 
to conduct the interview in private.  Understanding  local  gender  relations  and  social  dynamics  
can  also  guide  the  settings  for  interviews  or focus  groups.  If  it  is  not  appropriate  for  women  
to  speak  up  when  men  are  present,  it  is  necessary  to collect  information  from women  
separately.  However,  if  women  can  and  do  assert  themselves  with  men present, it can be 
informative to listen to them discuss the issues among themselves.   
Annex 2: Country level gender analysis related to the programme 
Albania 
In Albania, there is an enabling policy environment to promote gender equality and women’s 
empowerment through a comprehensive set of laws to promote, enforce, and monitor non-
discrimination on the basis of sex and gender identity. The Constitution, as the fundamental law of 
Albania, provides for the principle of equality for all citizens as guaranteed by law (Article 18.)

=== PAGE 192 ===
42 
 
Further, the new National Strategy for Sustainable Development and Integration12, as well as the 
new National Strategy for Gender Equality13 and other sectorial strategies currently under review 
provide a unique opportunity to identify key actions to promote full gender equality. 
No data is available on the effects of climate change on gender in the energy and construction sector 
in Albania. According to UN Women14, it is very likely that energy supply, use and consumption affect 
men and women differently, and intersects with factors such as location, age and financial status. 
Limited information is available on the labour force and disaggregated gender aspects in economic 
activity in Albania in the energy and residential energy efficiency sector.15 It could however be 
concluded based on local expertise and experience in the sector that: 
• 
There is gender differentiation in the building / renovation professions wherein it is a male-
dominated profession. 
• 
A similar male domination of technical fields (engineering, etc.) exists. 
• 
There is also a domination of men in the profession of housing management companies 
(from the local public authorities). 
New infrastructure projects typically see an increase in demand for labour and skills, thereby creating 
new employment opportunities in the construction sector. Several infrastructure projects currently 
being implemented In Albania provide an opportunity to boost participation of women in a largely 
male-dominated sector. According to the World Bank, the construction sector in Albania generates 
7% of total employment and is male dominated; just a small fraction of employees -  5.6% - are 
women.16 Construction is the sector with the smallest share of women employed. While men are 
employed in a wide range of roles across Albania’s construction sector, women are mostly employed 
in the areas of engineering or accountancy. More than half of women in the construction sector are 
aged 25 to 39, and almost 40% are aged 40 and above.Overall, the gender pay gap in the sector is 
14%. 
 
A new Gender Assessment17, funded by the State and Peacebuilding Fund, and carried out with 
support from the Albanian Development Fund, explores women’s participation in road construction, 
rehabilitation, and maintenance in Albania. The assessment shows that females comprise just one-
third of graduates of tertiary-level engineering, manufacturing and construction courses. Very few 
young women enrol in vocational education, which largely determines labour outcomes in the 
construction sector. One of the main reasons for this is the prevailing stereotype around what are 
considered “jobs for women” and “jobs for men”. 
 
12 The third National Strategy for Development and Integration (2021-2026) is under preparation with interim 
nationalized SDG indicators and targets 
13 The Government of Albania (2021). National Strategy for Gender Equality 2021-2030.  
14 UN Women & UNDP (2016). Gender Brief Albania 2016. Prepared by Monika Kocaqi, Ani Plaku and Dolly 
Wittberger. UN Women, Albania.   
 
16 http://www.instat.gov.al/en/themes/labour-market-and-education/employment-and-unemployment-from-
lfs/#tab2 
17 World Bank (2019). Gender Assessment, Recommendations and Action Plan. Enhancing women’s labor force 
participation in road construction, rehabilitation and maintenance in Albania. World Bank Group.

=== PAGE 193 ===
43 
 
Albania has much to gain from addressing gender gaps in its construction industry, not least 
the macroeconomic benefits of higher female labour force participation. And, given the current skills 
shortages in the sector, improving the gender balance in the workforce can help companies better 
meet their staffing needs. 
 
There is a range of initiatives that could potentially boost women’s access to employment in the 
construction sector. These ideas included addressing gender stereotypes (which have a strong 
influence on the education choices women and men make), improving workplace health and safety 
issues, and increasing the capacity of the Albanian Development Fund to systematically reflect 
gender considerations in the development of their infrastructure projects. 
Argentina 
In Argentina, there is enabling policy environment to promote gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. The Argentine Constitution contains a number of specific provisions that recognise 
and seek to advance gender equality. Legislation, policy debates, and reforms often reflect the 
constitutional commitment to gender equality and are likely to obligate the state to act and fulfil 
constitutional guarantees. Further, Argentina has a number of legal frameworks that promote, 
enforce and monitor gender equality.  
According to Argentina's construction workers union, the number of women in the industry 
increased by 131 percent from 2003 to 2010 and they now make up five percent of the workforce.18 
Compared to other Latin American countries like Mexico (0.4 percent), this number is significant. 
There is also an increasing number of women construction groups operating in Argentina. 
In 2020, the government of Argentina introduced new policies addressed to public works with a 
gender perspective, including labour rights equality and the financing of projects that focus on the 
rights of women, girls, boys, and adolescents.19 
The governmental plan is to promote the construction of the first two Territorial Centres for Gender 
and Diversity Policies in the municipality of Quilmes, Buenos Aires, and Santa Rosa city in La Pampa 
province. The investments amount to 90 million pesos ($1.23 million). 
The initiative encourages the participation of women in the construction sector as it is a 
predominantly male industry. The initiative takes place within the framework of the Hace Plan, by 
which the Argentinian government aspires to create 20.000 new jobs in all provinces.  
There is no data on the participation of women in the energy efficiency sector.  
Costa Rica 
Costa Rica has historically placed large emphasis on promoting gender equality, with the constitution 
pledging equal rights. The National Policy for Effective Equality between Women and Men 2018-2030  
is the main national strategy aimed at complying with fifth SDG – gender equality.20 Being one of the 
 
18 https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20210707-female-argentine-builders-breaking-down-barriers 
19 https://www.telesurenglish.net/news/Argentina-Launches-Public-Works-With-a-Gender-Perspective-
20200810-0021.html 
20 La Política Nacional para la Igualdad Efectiva entre Mujeres y Hombres en Costa Rica 2018-2030 – PIEG

=== PAGE 194 ===
44 
 
countries with the highest level of gender equality in Central America, Costa Rica provides enabling 
policy environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
Costa Rica is one of the most urbanized and electrified countries in Latin America. Despite some of 
the advancements that have been made in the energy sector, the country is still struggling to achieve 
balanced labour participation between men and women. To counteract these trends, the 
Government of Costa Rica has taken steps over the past two decades to improve gender equity in the 
workplace. These include prioritizing gender equality when crafting national policies, collecting 
gender-disaggregated data from different sectors, establishing quotas to ensure that women are 
represented in the legislature, and strengthening workplace protections for women.21 
In Costa Rica, the energy ministries, regulatory commission, and national utility have all taken steps 
to create opportunities for women to influence and participate in the energy sector. This includes 
implementing a variety of interventions focused on hiring and recruitment, and integrating gender 
into organizational policies. 
As a key next step, Costa Rica’s energy regulator has started to look at its influence externally on 
outcomes for all populations or users. To do this, the regulator is studying gender-differentiated 
impacts in consumer studies. The authority plans to begin incorporating this information to create 
mechanisms to better serve their consumers. As part of this work, the regulator has held focus 
groups to understand its market segments. In 2017, it conducted an assessment with women’s 
groups to understand more about the energy needs of women and how changes in tariffs impacts 
their economic situation. To increase accessibility and response to the surveys, the type of language 
used in the assessments was tailored for each target group so the surveys could be easily understood 
by each target group. The regulator has also conducted studies on poverty, recognizing that single 
female–headed households are disproportionately impacted by changes in tariff structures relative 
to other households. The goal of these studies is to develop tariff subsidies for minorities, especially 
single women heads of household. 
Official statistics indicate limited involvement of women in formal construction. For example, Costa 
Rica’s ENAHO survey indicates women make up less than 7% of construction employment22, so key 
questions in these formal jobs could include what processes select for men and exclude women, and 
potentially what consequences for men flow from the construction of masculinity in this work. In 
addition, ILO statistics suggest that women’s involvement is much higher in informal construction. 
Women’s employment patterns in the sector suggest that they are heavily concentrated in clerical 
jobs, with a few employers and professionals.23 
In September 2020, Costa Rica launched the ‘Gender Parity Initiative’ to reduce the wage gap and 
increase female participation in the labour market. 
Djibouti 
Djibouti’s constitution states that all people are equal under the law regardless of sex, language, 
origin, race or religion. Further, according to the Labour Code and Penal Code, all people are 
protected from discrimination when seeking employment.  The efforts of the Ministry of Women and 
 
21 USAID (2018). Practical Guide to Women in Energy Regulation. The Cadmus Group.  
22 INEC (2014) 
23 Minor Mora Salas (2015). Precarious work in Construction in Guatemala and Costa Rica. Solidarity Centre.

=== PAGE 195 ===
45 
 
Family and the more recent structural and legal protections seek to address the existing inequalities 
by providing enabling policy environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
This is especially important, considering that in Djibouti, 60.5% of women are illiterate, and gender 
inequality remains substantial. Low literacy rates and educational attainment depress women labour 
force participation - only 19% of women are employed as compared to 81% of men.24 
No official or unofficial data are available on the involvement of women in the energy efficiency and 
construction sectors in Djibouti.  
Indonesia 
The Government of Indonesia ratified the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and committed to 
the Beijing Platform of Action, both of which provide guidance on removing barriers preventing 
women from fully participating in public life. Indonesia also signed the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(ICCPR) in 2006.  
 
The National Gender Mainstreaming Policy enacted in 2000 (through The Presidential Decree in) 
guides the  National Long-term Development Plan (RPJPN) 2005- 2025 which confirms the Indonesian 
government’s commitment to gender equality with specific laws in place and  aligning the National 
Development Agenda with 17 Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) #5 Gender Equality. Through the 
variety of recently introduced laws and regulations, for example, the Law on the Protection of 
Women and Anti Gender- based Violence in 2009, Indonesia is aiming to provide enabling policy 
environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
There is little data available about the representation of women in the energy efficiency industry, at 
various levels of the market. However, in a focus group discussion held by Institute for Essential 
Services Reform with Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection on gender 
mainstreaming in Indonesia’s renewable energy sector, several gender gaps were identified25 that 
can be applied to the wider energy sector in general. Access to information related to energy is 
limited to women, given the male-dominated industry, which in turn limits women’s participation 
and contribution to shaping policy. 
This emphasizes that women are underrepresented at the decision-making level in public and private 
spaces resulting in poor understanding of gender implications of policy. 
Women’s involvement in the Indonesian construction industry is considerably low accounting for less 
than 3% of the total workers, with 6.4% of these women having a formal academic background.26 On 
the other hand, the industry is experiencing a worker shortage causing it to innovatively attract 
construction workers by increasing women’s participation in the industry. Several barriers preventing 
wider involvement of women in the construction sector in Indonesia have been identified  including 
 
24 https://www.usaid.gov/djibouti/our-work/gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment 
25 UNDP (2020). Advancing Indonesia’s Lighting Market to High Efficient Technologies (ADLIGHT). Annex N. 
Gender Analysis and Action Plan. UNDP.  
26 https://www.ijcscm.com/issue/22/paper/44063

=== PAGE 196 ===
46 
 
limited personal development, gender discrimination, stereotyping the industry and uncomfortable 
working environment.27 
Mexico 
Mexico had amended the first article of the Constitution to prohibit all forms of discrimination, 
including on the grounds of gender, and had created the National Women’s Institute (INMUJERES) 
with a mandate to foster, in society and its institutions, a culture of gender equity. Mexico has 
made significant progress in the achievement of women’s rights and gender equality, especially in 
key areas at federal level: strengthening of national laws to ensure women and men equality; 
strong gender institutionalism and increased public resources earmarked for gender equality.  
The first National Development Plan (2013 – 2018)28 for the first time mainstreamed gender equality 
and women’s empowerment in all its areas, and the National Gender Equality Policy (2013 – 2018) 
focused on advancing substantive equality. All above contributes to the creation of enabling policy 
environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
The Ministry of Energy (SENER) and the National Commission for the Efficient Use of Energy 
(CONUEE) with the support from the International Energy Agency (IEA) developed a Roadmap for 
Building Energy Codes and Standards for Mexico. 
Based on the transition scenario set in the Transition Strategy to Promote the use of Cleaner 
Technologies and Fuels, electricity consumption is expected to decrease by 53.4% in the residential 
building sector and by 78.7% in the commercial building sector by 2050. To achieve these targets, an 
ambitious effort is needed from all stakeholders. This is particularly relevant as Mexico housing stock 
is projected to rise by 50% from 2005 to 2030 with an additional 53 million people expected to be 
living in urban areas by 2050.29 
In Mexico, city governments are faced with numerous challenges; from poor air quality to sanitation 
to vulnerability of health and infrastructure to heat waves. Given the local nature of cooling, city 
governments are well-suited to address these challenges, though national initiatives have also been 
instrumental in improving Mexico’s preparedness for future cooling requirements. These include the 
Ministry of Energy’s Roadmap for Building Energy Codes and Standards; Mexico’s Sustainable 
Energy Fund (FSE), a $10 million research initiative on Buildings Energy Efficiency; and EcoCasa, a 
sustainable housing initiative that provides low-interest loans to developers to build affordable 
homes that cut CO2 emissions by at least 20%.30 There is no gender disaggregated data, however, for 
the residential energy efficiency sector.  
Participation of women in the construction sector in Mexico is low, just under 4%.31 However, efforts 
are currently being made in the Women Entrepreneurs of the Mexican Chamber of the Construction 
Industry (CMIC) to promote the opening and inclusion of the female gender in the industry, so in 
recent years the number of members in this body rose from 4% to 14%.32 Currently the participation 
 
27 https://www.ijcscm.com/issue/22 
28 Followed by the second National Development Plan 2019-2024 
29 https://www.iea.org/policies/2474-roadmap-for-building-energy-codes-and-standards-for-mexico 
30 https://www.e3g.org/news/mexico-city-a-case-for-cooling-action/ 
31 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2019). Mexico Gender Assessment. World Bank. 
32 https://www.cmic.org/

=== PAGE 197 ===
47 
 
of women is not only limited to the architecture or engineering areas but also covers other 
specialties within the construction field such as public accounting, business administration, which 
also have to do with the industry. 
Morocco 
In Morocco, the 2011 Constitution guarantees equal protection and enjoyment of its laws for both 
men and women. The country’s progressive Family Law (Moudawana) secured important rights for 
Moroccan women, including the right to self-guardianship, the right to divorce, and the right to child 
custody. Further, Morocco is the first country in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region to 
adopt a new law on public limited companies to promote balanced representation of women and 
men in corporate governance bodies. Overall, the country strives to provide enabling policy 
environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
Despite the above, data from the Morocco National Employment Surveys reveals that the women’s 
participation rate in 2019 was around 22%, compared to 71% for men.33There has been a downward 
trend in employment for both men and women, but the reduction has been strongest for women.  
Women in Morocco are over-represented in agriculture and in the industrial sector but are under-
represented in the service and construction sectors. Women represent around one out of four 
workers in the industrial sector but are under-represented in service sector jobs, and are largely 
unrepresented in the construction sector. 34 
No gender-disaggregated data is available on the involvement of women in the energy efficiency 
sector in the country.  
Nigeria 
The Nigerian Constitution provides for gender equality and nondiscrimination, and the country is a 
signatory to several international treaties that guarantee the protection of women’s rights and 
gender equality. Gender equality is also one of the Sustainable Development Goals which Nigeria has 
pledged to. However, the existing gender inequalities and setbacks associated with the introduction 
of new progressive laws on gender equality mean that, in Nigeria, there is a long road to achieving 
enabling policy environment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
In Nigeria, women make up only 16.3% of the construction profession.35 50% of these women are 
employed as labourers, 37.5% as administrative staff, 10% as management staff and only 2.5% 
represents women with skill. 36 Research on this is scarce but one 2006 study of the informal housing 
delivery sector found that women’s participation was extremely low. This was presumed to be due to 
certain cultural ethics and values in Nigeria. Gender discrimination and dominance of male culture 
 
33 https://www.wider.unu.edu/publication/economic-gains-reducing-employment-gender-gap-
morocco#:~:text=Data%20from%20the%20Morocco%20National,compared%20to%2071%25%20for%20men.&
text=There%20has%20been%20a%20downward,has%20been%20strongest%20for%20women. 
34 IFAD (2016). Morocco. Young women’s employment and empowerment in the rural economy.  
Country Brief. IFAD. 
35 https://theconversation.com/how-women-are-locked-out-of-nigerias-construction-industry-157643 
36 https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Women-professionals%E2%80%99-participation-in-the-nigerian-
Jimoh-Oyewobi/90b855c449a3d6a8e73070f1312035a7959030f4

=== PAGE 198 ===
48 
 
were found to be among the top constraints to the wider involvement of women in the construction 
sector.  
In 2020, IFC introduced EDGE - green building certification system that empowers the Nigerian real 
estate market to build sustainably.37 Taking into account a severe housing deficit, and a fact that 
Nigeria’s population is expected to increase by more than 100 percent by 2050, which will make it 
the third most populous country in the world, encouraging female participation in the labour force in 
green construction is very important.  
North Macedonia 
The Republic of North Macedonia has made significant commitments to advance gender equality. 
The country has ratified the Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) and the Optional Protocol in 1994. The draft law on Gender Equality is currently in review 
and will “regulate the establishment, improvement and promotion of measures to accomplish gender 
equality in all areas of social living…”.38 In 2019, the country published its own gender equality index 
to monitor the progress in gender equality. Overall, there is enabling policy environment to promote 
gender equality and women’s empowerment in North Macedonia.  
Based on the USAID Gender Analysis Report published in 2019, there is a 27% gap in labour-force 
participation between women (51%) and men (78%). Based on Macedonia Gender and Climate 
Change Indicators Report39, the following sectoral level information is relevant: 
 
Manufacturing: women: 45.4% 
 
Construction: women: 6.6% 
 
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply: women: 14.5% 
It is also noteworthy that the data on women and men taking advantage of governmental energy 
programmes and subsidies is disaggregated in the report with the following key aspects: 
 
Subsidies for purchasing pellet stoves 2018-2020: women 26% versus 74% men 
 
Subsidies for purchased and installed PVC or aluminum windows in households in 
2019 – 2020 – 27% women versus 73% men 
 
Subsidies for solar panels in 2019 – 19% women and 81% men 
This is potentially linked to a male-oriented “head of household” in terms of financial decision-
making. 
It is estimated that 6,200 jobs will be created by 2035 by implementing energy efficient measures in 
the building sector.40 
 
37 https://edgebuildings.com/certify/nigeria/?lang=pt-pt 
38 European Commission for Democracy trough Law (2021). North Macedonia Draft Law on Gender Equality. 
https://www.venice.coe.int/webforms/documents/?pdf=CDL-REF(2021)044-e 
39 Apostolova (2020) Macedonian Gender and Climate Change Indicators 
40 United Nations North Macedonia (2020).  Sustainable Development Goals. Voluntary National Review. 
United Nations.

=== PAGE 199 ===
49 
 
Sri Lanka 
The Sri Lankan Government is currently in the process of drafting a new Constitution, aiming to 
include women’s rights in the Fundamental Rights Chapter. Since the adoption of the Beijing 
Platform for Action, Sri Lanka’s steps to achieve gender equality have comprised reforms to domestic 
laws and the integration of gender-related priorities into government action plans. It is currently 
updating a national action plan on women and has a dedicated ministry on women’s matters. The 
introduction of the proposed reforms would provide enabling policy environment to promote gender 
equality and women’s empowerment.  
The construction sector in Sri Lanka is heavily dominated by male workers and faces acute labour 
shortages which are being increasingly addressed by recruiting migrant workers.41 Based on the date 
from the Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs Report (2015)42, women comprise 
approximately 4.5% of the Sri Lankan construction industry workforce.  
There is no gender-disaggregated data on the participation of women in the energy efficiency sector. 
The recent assessment of the gender disparities and labour market challenges in Sri Lanka43 excludes 
both the construction and the energy efficiency sectors, the latter specifically for being male-
dominated.  
Tunisia 
Tunisia is home to one of the most progressive gender parity laws in the world. This law requires 
political parties to alternate the members of their candidate lists between men and women, and to 
have half of their lists headed by a woman. These measures are a natural progression from the 2014 
Tunisian Constitution, which declares that men and women “have equal rights and duties and are 
equal before the law without any discrimination.”44  Being one of the most progressive countries in 
the Arab world in terms of gender equality, the country is well placed to promote gender equality 
and women’s empowerment.  
The labour market in Tunisia exhibits large horizontal and vertical segregation with women largely 
concentrated in services and agriculture.45 Only 28.2% of women participate in the labour force.46 
There is no gender-disaggregated data available on the participation of women in the construction or 
energy efficiency industries.  
 
 
41 UN Women (2022). Gender Disparities and Labour Market Challenges. The Demand for Women Workers in 
Sri Lanka. UN Women.  
42  
 Vijayaragunathan, Srivishagan and Rasanthi, Thalpage (2019). An Insight to Women in Construction for 
Fostering Female Careers in Sri Lankan Construction Industry. Journal of International Women's Studies, 20(3), 
168-173. Available at: https://vc.bridgew.edu/jiws/vol20/iss3/14 
43 UN Women (2022) 
44 Constitution of Tunisia (2014). https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/Tunisia_2014.pdf 
45 Morsey, H., Kamar, B. & Selim, R. (2018). Tunisia Diagnostic paper: Assessing Progress and Challenges in 
Unlocking the Private Sector’s Potential and Developing a Sustainable Market Economy. EBRD 
 
46 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1257823/quarterly-labor-force-participation-rate-in-tunisia-by-gender/

=== PAGE 200 ===
Program Gender Action Plan 
 
A project/program-specific Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) is a tool used to ensure gender 
mainstreaming is clearly visible in project/program design and implementation. This GAP will serve as a key 
guiding tool throughout the delivery of the program, PEEB COOL. 
The Gender Action Plan presented below identifies key program activities and indicative outputs through 
which gender specific strategies, actions and outcomes will be progressed and monitored. The Plan and the 
gender assessment have been developed using desk reviews which included a review of projects 
implemented by PEEB in the 5 countries already with active PEEB engagement. Due to the multi-country 
programmatic nature of the Programme – wherein specific investments have not yet been confirmed - 
consultations with women or women focused groups, ministries or agencies have not yet taken place to 
support the development of the Analysis, but this would be carried out for specific Sub-Projects. 
The Plan will be reviewed and refined during the inception phase, which will also ensure that all project 
stakeholders have the opportunity to identify issues and are aware of responsibilities for delivering and 
monitoring the Gender Action Plan. Implementation arrangements of the program include an ESS and 
Gender Expert who will provide technical advice in the decision-making process of the program’s sub-
activities. 
The PEEB Cool program will seek to develop women’s roles as consumers, employees, and entrepreneurs in 
the green building sector, improving their access to bioclimatic housing and their economic participation.  
 
The following gender-specific  barriers have been identified in the green buildings sector: 
 
Participation 
• 
Due to existing gender inequalities, women often participate to a limited extent or are excluded from 
decision-making processes concerning buildings at all levels (households, local communities, 
businesses and sectoral policies) 
• 
Unbalanced power relations between men and women (including spending decisions on buildings) 
 
Access 
• 
Increased vulnerability of women in accessing decent housing 
• 
Limited rights of women to own, control or inherit the land and property 
 
Jobs and skills 
• 
Women lack the knowledge and awareness about green building options and the benefits they bring 
• 
Women have difficulty accessing training to learn the trade and skills required in the buildings sector 
• 
Social norms that reduce women’s access to education, gainful employment and economic resources 
 
Finance: 
• 
Women have difficulty accessing finance to enhance their livelihoods and economic status. This can 
include difficulty participating (through a lack of digital payments for example) and also affordability.  
• 
Issue accessing credit to own or rent housing

=== PAGE 201 ===
• 
Differentiated gender impacts regarding the spatial design of housing 
• 
Negative attitudes or perceptions of women employed in companies 
 
The table below shows the gender-related indicators that will be tracked as part of the program, including 
highlighting in blue those indicators which will be tracked as part of the results framework for reporting to 
the GCF. Other indicators not highlighted will be tracked for reporting on gender-related activities 
specifically. 
Gender dedicated teams are present at AFD, Proparco and GIZ In order to ensure that 
countries/implementers are supported in the conduct of gender assessment and gender action plan and also 
in the implementation of the gender action plans. 
 
The Support for implementation and monitoring of gender action is designed subproject by subproject. It 
could be technical assistance financed either by the subproject owner resources or AFD-Proparco-GIZ 
resources. 
 
Technical Assistance programs are crucial in implementing activities that promote gender equality within the 
Program. Since awareness and training are key to the development of gender equality, specific expertise in 
that field is to be considered in the TA recruitment. Thanks to the support of gender experts in a punctual or 
continuous basis – depending on a Subproject’s gender objective – TA activities are designed and 
implemented, as for instance: 
- 
Support to the design and implementation of gender action plans for LFPs and end beneficiaries 
- 
Support to gender analysis within E&S due diligence.  
- 
Design and conduction of awareness campaigns for end beneficiaries 
- 
Design and conduction of a capacity-building program including tools and training sessions for LFP 
staff 
- 
Conduction of gender specific studies, e.g. on the roles of men and women in the sector targeted by 
the Subproject. As part of the subproject level assessments the AE will require the analysis and 
consultations provide information and analysis of the nature of challenges for indigenous women, 
women headed households, youth and elderly in each country. 
- 
Organization of knowledge-sharing events between stakeholders involved in gender-related topics 
- 
Design of awareness and communication tools to support the promotion of gender equality 
- 
Knowledge management activities with gender focus 
- 
Support to the inclusion of gender data in monitoring and evaluation systems 
 
Synergies have to be looked at between Subprojects, not only to ensure consistency within the Program, but 
also to encourage learning between peers. Activities such as seminars or workshops between LFPs with 
specific focus on gender are encouraged. This follow-up will be made by the PMU with the assistance of the 
gender dedicated teams at AFD, Proparco and GIZ. 
 
Grievance mechanism: For all subprojects, the implementing partner will provide an easily accessible and 
safe grievance mechanism to address incidents of gender-based violence and/or workplace related 
harassment issues.

=== PAGE 202 ===
Impact Statement: Increased resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative impacts of climate change, and: 
• 
increased participation of women in the design and the construction or supervision of sustainable buildings and associated material or 
industries  
• 
improved access of women to housing and commercial or social infrastructures build with high environmental performances 
• 
improved access of women to jobs of good quality, leadership and business opportunities 
• 
improved access of women to financial services, amongst others. 
Outcome statement : 
Private and public subproject owners have increased awareness and gained capacity on gender equality  
Increased number of women benefiting from gender sensitive housing, commercial or social infrastructure  
Increased number of women gaining access to long-term formal employment 
 
Activities 
Indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
(disaggregated 
by gender)  
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Cross-cutting approaches to gender equality 
1. Subprojects appraisal processes 
integrating gender – to assist 
subprojects to meet AFD Group 
internal gender objectives and seek 
to solve identified gender issues 
1.1. Number and % of E&S due 
diligence documents developed 
that are gender sensitive and 
following international best 
practices 
0 
 
1.1.1. 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
will have a due 
diligence 
document 
AFD GROUP, GIZ 
and IEs 
EUR 
175,000,000 
1.2. Number and % of subprojects 
that are in line with AFD Group 
internal gender-sensitive objectives 
0 
1.2.1. 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
1.3. Number and % of gender-
sensitive consultations conducted1 
0 
1.3.1. 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
will have a 
consultation 
 
1 Consult both women and men upstream to define their needs and integrate these in the infrastructure design as well as identify actions for a greater participation of women in 
the design and construction/supervision of the buildings. For B+ rated projects, this should be included with the ESIA.

=== PAGE 203 ===
1.4. Number and % of assessments 
conducted to determine female 
access to technical assistance 
0 
1.4.1. 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
will have an 
assessment 
1.5. Number and % of subprojects 
with budget dedicated to gender 
activities within the subproject 
implementation 
0 
1.5.1. 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
2. Capacity-building of subproject 
partners (IEs and end beneficiaries) 
on gender related topics – to raise 
awareness of gender issues at 
country and subproject level. 
Events will be organized that 
include direct beneficiaries, key 
country stakeholders and partners 
to share best practices 
2.1 Number of multi-stakeholder 
meetings or policy dialogues which 
contribute to raising awareness of 
gender equality issues 
0 
2.1.1 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
will hold an 
event 
addressing 
gender 
(meeting, 
dialogue, …) 
EUR 5,000,000 
2.2 Number of subprojects with 
budget dedicated to the 
recruitment of gender experts 
during implementation2 
0 
2.2.1 100% of 
financed 
subprojects 
3. Developing a strategy for 
addressing gaps in gender 
consideration in the sector of the 
efficiency for buildings for each 
country, to feed into the policy 
development process 
3.1 High quality strategy completed 
for each country  
0 
3.1.1 10 
strategies 
completed 
AE 
EUR 3,000,000 
Specific thematic approaches 
 
2 Internal or external expert in charge of implementing the Gender Action Plan

=== PAGE 204 ===
4. Provide gender-specific 
technical training to improve long-
term employability of local 
workers of all genders. 
4.1. Frequency of training 
provision: at the discretion of the 
subproject developer. 
 
0 
4.1.1 Gender 
disaggregated 
data to be 
collected, 
training 
attendees to 
be at least 
50% women, 
reflecting the 
hiring targets 
of the 
subprojects, 
allowing equal 
access to 
capacity 
building 
 
 
EUR 1,000,000 
5. Equal access to services – 
improve access for women to new 
bioclimatic and green building 
solutions and services by designing 
interventions that address gender 
issues 
5.1 % of building subprojects that 
facilitate women’s access to new 
solutions 
 
0 
5.1.1 100% of 
the total 
infrastructure 
developed 
within the 
program 
 
EUR 50,000,000 
5.2 Number and % of gender 
sensitive subproject training 
sessions conducted 
0 
5.2.1 65% of 
financed 
subprojects 
will conduct 
training 
sessions

=== PAGE 205 ===
5.3 Number of women-owned 
businesses that are benefited3 .  
Subproject 
dependent 
Indicator 
followed but 
no target 
5.4 Number of female final 
beneficiaries4 
0 
5.4.1 49.7% of 
women in 
finale direct 
beneficiaries 
6. Equal access to finance through 
the establishment of a dedicated 
fund 
6.1 Number of women receiving 
financing from a specific fund 
aligned with the subproject 
objectives (innovation fund, fund 
for small grants, funds for income-
generating activities…)  
0 
Indicator 
followed (on a 
subproject 
basis) but no 
target 
AFD GROUP, GIZ 
and IEs 
EUR 23,000,000 
 
3 As defined by the 2X Challenge criteria #1 Entrepreneurship – either the share of women ownership is equal or superior to 51% or the business is founded by a woman  
4 Methodology to assess the number of beneficiaries developed in Annex 1

=== PAGE 206 ===
Gender Action Plan template for Subprojects 
 
GCF Gender Policy requirements 
The respective Gender Action Plans, when being drafted, should provide the following information: 
baseline information on women headed households in the subproject sites, # of women’s 
organizations, rates of gender-based violence, women’s participation in existing decision-making 
bodies etc. 
Guideline for collecting sex-disaggregated data 
Following the GCF Gender Policy principles, the program aims to contribute to high-quality, more 
comprehensive, systematic and participatory sex-disaggregated data collection. A guideline to 
collect and develop additional sex-disaggregated data within the subprojects is provided in annex 1 
of Gender Analysis.  
GCF manual “Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund projects”5 provides additional guidelines 
on this issue.  
 
Ideas for integrating gender into the subproject budget 
o Integrate a specific “gender expertise” component. 
o Establish a specific fund (innovation fund, fund for small grants, funds for income-
generating activities): this fund can be used to fund small gender activities that will be 
aligned with the subproject objectives of which they will enable operationalization. 
o Condition the disbursement of certain costs (by example overheads) to the participation of 
a certain percentage of women in activities. 
o Condition the loan rate to the inclusion of items promoting gender equality (e.g. allocation 
criteria scholarships providing for gender parity or including an affirmative action dimension 
for girls). 
Ideas for integrating gender in subproject governance 
Composition of the steering committee 
o Ensure that the subproject steering committee includes men and women. Require a quota 
of women (or men) if necessary at the start and plan a capacity building if necessary. 
o Integrate the gender focal point (if any) of the counter part in the steering committee. 
o  Integrate the gender focal point of the concerned ministry or of the national agency of the 
sub-sector, for opinion, even when these are not the counterpart. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
o Assess the relevance of the monitoring and evaluation system in relation to the collection of 
relevant information to follow the participation and the results of the subproject on men 
and women, the opportunity to get the sex-disaggregated data based on indicators relevant 
defined during the investigation, not limited to neither quantitative nor access. 
o Ensure that a gender point is included in the orders of the day of the subproject follow-up 
meetings, in order to analyze the data and take stock of the strategies put in place and 
future opportunities. 
o Plan activities for sharing experiences and good practices to encourage the capitalization of 
existing and pooling of initiatives. 
 
5 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/mainstreaming-gender-green-climate-fund-projects

=== PAGE 207 ===
Gender focal points 
o Appoint a gender focal point for the project, or a male-female pairing, to ensure that follow-
up specific. 
Accountability 
o Ask how the responsibilities for gender will be integrated into the subproject / management 
of the subproject. 
 
Mechanisms and activities that will address the risk of potential increased 
violence against women by subproject investments and activities 
o Empowering women through integrated multisectoral approaches : integrating economic 
and gender empowerment strategy, developing the knowledge and data collection on this 
issue 
o Transforming cultural and social norms relate to gender : differentiated awareness 
campaigns M / F, working with men and boys, behavior change campaign, school based 
intervention 
o Integrating violence against women in service offer : spatial planning, security personnel M 
/ F, developing a subproject GBV grievance redress mechanism 
 
Impact Statement: Write the project/program impact statement here (Note: an impact statement 
briefly summarizes, in lay terms, the difference the project/program will make over time. It also 
states the long – term gender, social, economic, environmental impacts to which the 
project/program will contribute. 
Examples of impact statements in, say, a climate change/energy efficiency project/program: 
increased resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative 
impacts of climate change; improved access to affordable, year – round clean energy services 
for all households, including poor and female – headed households). 
Outcome Statement: Write the project/program outcome statement here (Note: the outcome 
statement should be specific, measurable and let project managers know when project goals are 
achieved. An outcome statement describes specific changes in knowledge, attitude, skills, and 
behaviours that will occur due to actions undertaken by the project/program. 
Example of an outcome statement in, say, a gender – responsive energy efficiency MSME 
project/program: improved business opportunities for an estimated X no./percentage of women – 
led/owned energy efficiency enterprises). 
Outputs Statement: Write the output statement here. In many cases, there will be more than one 
output for a project or program; therefore, for each output statement a separate row should be 
created followed by associated activities, gender – performance indicators, sex – disaggregated 
targets, timeline and responsibilities. (Note: an output statement highlights what the 
project/program intends to achieve in the short term due to project/program activities. Example 
of an output statement in, say, an energy efficiency project/program is: installed sustainable 
cooling system, access to energy efficient infrastructure and improved building sustainability). 
Activities  
Indicator 
Baseline 
Target 
(disaggregated 
by gender) 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
(This is the place 
where the 
project/program 
team inserts a 
brief list of 
activities. 
Outline 
the 
indicators 
and 
targets 
here  
Minimum or 
starting 
point used 
for 
comparisons 
On the other 
hand, a target 
should – in the 
case of the 
GAP – be 
disaggregated 
(Highlight here 
which 
party/organization 
/entity/partner / 
experts will be 
responsible for 
(This is the 
column to 
insert the 
approximate 
budgetary 
allocation

=== PAGE 208 ===
Activities are 
those that tell us 
what the 
project/program 
will do; 
sometimes 
referred to as 
interventions.  
Examples of 
activities 
associated with 
the above 
output are):  
(i) Poor and 
socially excluded 
female headed 
households 
(FHH) provided 
with sustainable 
cooling system  
(ii) Poor and 
vulnerable FHHs 
provided with 
access to energy 
efficient 
infrastructures 
(iii) Increase in 
female-headed, 
start-up, energy-
based 
microenterprises 
(iv) Women self 
– help groups 
(SHGs) trained 
as trainers for 
the 
implementation 
of gender-
sensitive energy 
user awareness 
programs 
(v) Public 
awareness 
program 
implemented, 
targeting 
women’s and 
men 
 
(Note: A 
good 
indicator 
should be 
able to 
measure 
the 
quantity, 
quality 
and 
timeliness 
of 
products 
(goods or 
services) 
that are 
the result 
of an 
activity, 
project or 
program  
 
by sex. 
Targets, 
disaggregated 
by sex, is an 
effective way 
to measure 
quantifiable 
[and 
differential] 
results for 
women, men, 
girls and boys. 
ensuring the 
achievement of 
targets, as 
outlined in the 
indicator and 
targets column. 
 
for 
undertaking 
each 
activity.  
Examples 
are 
provided 
below): 
US$ X 
US$ X

=== PAGE 209 ===
Annex 1: Methodology to assess the number of beneficiaries 
Direct beneficiaries 
Direct beneficiaries are defined as the users of buildings whose construction or renovation is 
financed by the PEEB Cool Programme. According to the Programme targets, in buildings without 
mechanical cooling PEEB Cool support will lead to an increase of at least 20% in thermal comfort of 
users of the building, and often this number will be much higher. 
To assess the number of beneficiaries for PEEB Cool, the subproject portfolio that was analysed was 
broken down by building type after having defined the direct beneficiaries for each building. 
In the residential sector the beneficiaries were calculated based on the number of households to be 
built/retrofitted in each country multiplied by the members of household in each country taking into 
consideration the assumption that a household will reside in a house for 25 years.  
Education direct beneficiaries were assessed based on an average occupancy density of 5m2/person. 
It is assumed that a child will remain in the same school for 5 years so for a period of 50 years the 
turnover ratio equals to 10.  
Direct beneficiaries of the health sector were assessed based on the number of people served by 
health centre/hospital per country. Beneficiaries correspond to the population covered and 
therefore are unique, even though they could use the healthcare services several times in the 50 
year programme period.  
Similarly, to the case of education commercial use beneficiaries have been based on the default 
occupancy density form the EDGE app. It was further assumed that during the 50 years period 2 
businesses will use the same space. 
 
The number of direct beneficiaries can be assessed using the below ratio: 
Building type 
Factor 
Source 
Residential social 
housing 
Household size  
Feasibility study and UN DESA 2019 
Hospitals 
Population 
covered 
WHO Global Health Observatory 
Schools 
Default 
occupancy 
density 
EDGE 
Small office 
buildings 
 
For the calculation of direct beneficiaries over the lifetime of the buildings (50 years), the following 
assumptions are considered: 
- An apartment will be occupied for 25 years by the same occupants, hence why we multiply the 
annual beneficiaries by 2. 
- For schools, it was considered that the same beneficiaries stayed on average 5 years on the 
premises, hence the multiplying factor 10. 
- For small offices, it was assumed that the same staff stayed on average 12.5 years on the premises, 
resulting in a multiplying factor of 4.

=== PAGE 210 ===
- For retail, it was assumed that the same staff stayed on average 25 years on the premises, resulting
in a multiplying factor of 2.
Indirect beneficiaries 
The number of indirect beneficiaries has been computed using the same methodology as GHG 
avoided emissions (factor of three of direct beneficiaries in countries with a building code to account 
up to three replications of the direct impacts in those countries). For those countries where new 
building codes will be introduced, it is assumed that the new building codes would impact 3% of the 
population each year (i.e. due to renovation or new buildings – particularly in the residential sector) 
and over the course of a 15-year period, 45% of the population would be indirect beneficiaries. 
The countries with an existing building energy codes are: Morocco, Tunisia, Nigeria, Mexico, 
Argentina, Indonesia, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Albania and North Macedonia. The countries where codes 
are expected to be introduced are Costa Rica, Djibouti, and Mali. The table below shows the 
estimated number of indirect beneficiaries calculated. 
Gender Disaggregation 
Direct and indirect beneficiaries’ disaggregation has been conducted on a country basis using UN 
DESA 2020 sex ratio data. 
__________
