=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 22 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 22.2.244
creationDate: D:20220928154314+09'00'
modDate: D:20220929094328+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
17 – 20 October 2022 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 13 
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
29 September 2022 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package for FP191 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by
Improving Water Security in Vanuatu";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page b 
3 
89 
90 
92 
109 
119 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
121

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Enhancing 
Adaptation 
and 
Community 
Resilience 
by 
Improving Water Security in Vanuatu 
Country(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Accredited Entity: 
The Pacific Community (SPC) 
Date of first submission: 
2022/04/07 
Date of current submission 
2022/09/09 
Version number 
V.6

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference 
to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will 
be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to 
the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited 
Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
A. 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. 
Project 
or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. 
Public 
or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. 
Request 
for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the Simplified 
Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% 
for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
100% 
100% % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
34 % 
34 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
33 % 
33 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
33 % 
33 % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core 
indicator 
1: 
GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Not applicable. 
A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
The number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries for the project are 
presented below: 
Direct: 
85,650 (including 
42,825 women) 
Indirect:  
216,980  
~27% of the total 
population 
of 
Vanuatu2 
~73%  
of 
the 
total 
population 
of 
Vanuatu 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
28,290,014 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
23,325,033 USD 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding 
proposal. 
2 This figure is based on the latest available population estimate of Vanuatu (307,000), according to the World Population Prospect, see: 
https://population.un.org/wpp/.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. 
Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
 
☒  Grant 
23,325,033 
USD
 
 
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. 
Implementation 
period 
5 years (2023 – 2028) 
A.12. 
Total 
lifespan 
2023 – 2045  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited 
Entity 
obtained/will obtain its own 
approval to implement the 
project/ 
programme, 
if 
available.  
 
Click or tap to enter a date. 
 
A.14. 
ESS 
category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards to assess 
your FP category. 
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted 
as 
a 
CN 
before? 
Yes4 ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. 
Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in 
the 
entity 
work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included 
in 
the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. 
Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
 
If not the Accredited Entity, please indicate the full legal name of the Executing Entity(ies) and 
provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there can be more than one 
Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the National Designated Authority. Refer 
to the definition of Executing Entity in the Accreditation Master Agreement.  
 
As the Accredited Entity, SPC will also be the Executing Entity (EE).  
 
The Government of Vanuatu (GoV) will also be an Executing Entity for the Project, 
acting through the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the Department of Water Resources 
(DoWR). 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
4  Concept Note for the project can be accessed here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/21860-enhancing-
adaptation-and-community-resilience-improving-water-security.pdf

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
1. 
The project, Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu, is a 
climate adaptation investment, aiming to enhance climate resilience and increase water security of rural 
communities. The project will climate-proof water sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure and enhance 
water management planning systems across Vanuatu. The approach will utilize and improve government-
owned processes of water management. This will primarily be: the Drinking Water Safety and Security 
Planning (DWSSP) process, mandated through national policy frameworks such as the National 
Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Water (NIP)5 and the Capital Assistance Programme (CAP)6. 
 
2. 
This project is listed as a priority intervention in Vanuatu’s Green Climate Fund Country Programme7 and is 
being fully co-developed with the Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and other stakeholders for strong 
country-ownership. By addressing climate change-induced risks to water management and working directly 
with vulnerable rural communities (including community-based adaptation activities), the project is fully 
aligned with the Government of Vanuatu’s climate change strategies and policies including the Climate 
Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030, National Adaptation Programme of Action, Nationally 
Determined Contribution, Vanuatu National Sustainable Development Plan 2016–2030 and the Vanuatu 
National Water Policy 2017–2030. 
 
 
3. 
Observed changes in the climate of Vanuatu show there has been a gradual change in climatic conditions 
over the last 70 years. The temperature has increased at approximately 0.1°C per decade since 1970, and 
30-year projections indicate this trend will continue. Despite no general upward trend in overall precipitation 
is observed or projected, extreme rainfall and tropical cyclone events are predicted to become more intense. 
These changes compound common water sanitation services and resource management challenges. 
 
 
4. 
More intense extreme events will increase the incidence of flooding and induce greater damage to water 
utilities, pipes, and community-based water infrastructure in the baseline scenario. Increased climate-related 
damages can result in redundant infrastructure, cutting communities off to water supplies. Flooding events 
increasingly overwhelm drains, and latrine pits, resulting in stagnant, contaminated water that puts the health 
and wellbeing of the ni-Vanuatu population at risk. On the other hand, increased temperatures and increased 
intensity of major El Nino events are predicted to cause increased incidence of meteorological drought. 
Consequently, climate impacts directly threaten water security and sanitation across the country. 
 
 
5. 
Compounding the negative impacts of climate change is restricted technical, institutional and financial 
capacity barriers related to water governance:  
 
limited technical capacity, human resources, and financing at area council and provincial level to develop 
climate-sensitive water management plans;, 
limited technical knowledge, human resources, and financing at provincial and national levels to establish 
and maintain climate-resilient infrastructure; and 
insufficient awareness, knowledge, and skills on climate change issues and climate-resilient water 
management at provincial and national levels.  
 
6. 
In 2020, the DoWR, in association with UNICEF, conducted an inventory of water systems, as part of a Water 
and Sanitation Sector Strengthening Programme. Only 79% of systems were identified as functional and only 
37% of these systems were reported as providing water 24h/day daily, every day of the year.8  
 
7. 
The project will address these barriers by implementing three distinct but mutually reinforcing Outcomes. 
They will target three climate change-related water impacts as described under GCF guidelines on water 
security projects: (i) water-related disasters; (ii) areas suffering from water stress; and (iii) poor water quality-
induced fatalities.9 
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water resources 
Activities will boost technical capacities across national extension structures to support climate-resilient water 
management planning at the community level. Enhancing capacities of rural water committees (RWC) to 
develop resilient and sustainable water management plans. Maintaining safe and secure water access in the 
long-term.  
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure 
The project will enhance DoWR screening and approval processes for resilient infrastructure investments 
and increase financial flows to enhanced DWSSPs that require financial assistance to construct necessary 
resilient water infrastructure systems.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks associated 
with water security. 
Activities will focus on capacity building across national and provincial levels to boost DoWR and WASH 
sector partners’ technical capacity concerning climate-resilient water management. Further, the Outcome will 
enhance monitoring and evaluation practices across extension structures and facilitate improved knowledge 
management processes. This will enhance evidence-based knowledge transfer and raise awareness of 
climate-resilient water management practices. 
  
8. 
Ultimately, the combined impact of these Outcomes will induce a paradigm shift in Vanuatu’s water 
management systems. It will catalyse a shift towards safe, climate-resilient, and sustainable water utilization 
and improved water security at community levels.  
 
5 Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning (DWSSP) is a process of community engagement in identifying and discussing threats to safe 
and secure drinking water, and making plans to manage these threats. The resulting community DWSSP guides day-to-day water supply 
operation and maintenance, as well as improvements. These feed into the National Implementation Plan (NIP) for safe and secure community 
drinking water. The DWSSP and the NIP are the key processes to deliver safe and secure water to rural communities, directly addressing 
water security and improving community resilience. DWSSP are also required for school and healthcare facility water supply systems. The 
processes have been generally well received, supported through resources and training, and existing methodology to improve rural 
communities’ 
water 
supply 
systems. 
See:https://www.nab.vu/sites/default/files/documents/Vanuatu%20National%20Implementation%20Plan%20for%20Safe%20and%20Secur
e%20Community%20Drinking%20Water.pdf  
6 The CAP will help communities to improve the safety and security of their drinking water supply schemes by providing financial assistance 
if they can demonstrate their need. An approved DWSSP is the essential prerequisite to making a CAP funding request.  
See: https://mol.gov.vu/images/News-Photo/water/Vanuatu-CAP-Guide-annual-CAP-241018.pdf  
7 Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme is available here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/country-programme-
vanuatu.pdf  
8 UNICEF (2020). Rural water supplies in Vanuatu in need of significant improvements. (WASH Technical Paper/13/2020). 
9 GCF Water Project Design Guidelines (v 0.98 – 28 September 2021 – developed by Deltaeres).

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
10 Information on demographics available at: https://vnso.gov.vu/index.php/en/ 
11 Vanuatu’s economy is primarily based on subsistence or small-scale agriculture, providing a living for more than 70% of the population. 
Since the early 2000s, tourism, land sales and high commodity prices for copra and coffee, and donor funding have driven the economy. 
Economic impediments include: undiversified economic base, constrained transport infrastructure and a small domestic market. Migration 
and remittances have been a critical driver of increased living standards in Vanuatu and other Pacific Island Countries. However, while out-
migration has increased household incomes, such processes are affected by external shocks (such as climate change). Due to COVID-19, 
seasonal worker schemes have been affected, causing broad-based and significant reductions in employment and earnings. 
12 World Bank Group. (2017) Systematic Country Diagnostic for the Eight Small Pacific Island Countries: Priorities for Ending Poverty and 
Boosting Shared Prosperity, available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23952  
13 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic: PIC8. Ibid.  
14 The Pacific Community (SPC) – see more details on https://sdd.spc.int/vu.  
B. 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
9. 
The climate context is presented below. It is presented in the following sub-sections: adaptation context; 
vulnerability; climate data analysis (observed historical change and projected climate change); risks and 
impacts; and complementarity and coherence. 
 
10. 
Adaptation context: Vanuatu is Small Island Developing State comprising 83 islands, 65 of which are 
inhabited, extending over 1,000 km in the Western Pacific between the equator and the tropic of 
Capricorn. The archipelago, which is of volcanic origin, is 1,750 km east of northern Australia, 540 km 
northeast of New Caledonia, and to the west of Fiji. Port Vila, on the island of Efate, is the capital of the 
country. Vanuatu is divided administratively into six Provinces and each province is administered by a 
provincial council (responsible for promoting regional autonomy). There are three municipal councils for 
the cities of Port Vila (Shefa), Luganville (Sanma), and Lenakel (Tafea). Each province is further divided 
into Area Council administrative units, with Area Administrators, who have devolved mandates from the 
DoWR. 
 
11. 
The Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) estimated the 2021 population to be at 316,000.10 The 
country is highly homogeneous – 99% of its population are the indigenous, Melanesian ni-Vanuatu 
peoples. Around three-quarters of the people live in rural areas, although Port Vila – and the surrounding 
capital region – account for about 21% of the total population. There are over 100 languages and dialects, 
of which approximately 80 are actively spoken, making it one of the one of the most linguistically diverse 
countries in the world. There are three official languages: Bislama, English and French. 
 
12. 
Vanuatu’s economy11 is characteristic of small Pacific Island nations: small in scale, remote from major 
markets and internally dispersed. These factors combine to push up the costs of private production and 
public administration, lower the return on market activities and narrow the feasible set of economic 
opportunities.12 The country’s geographical location, undiversified economic structure, and high import 
dependence makes it vulnerable to external shocks, especially climate change-induced disasters and 
natural hazards.13 Climate risks and shocks greatly impact hard-earned development gains and threaten 
food, energy and water security – the latter of which this project sets out to address directly. 
 
13. 
Water resources in Vanuatu: The islands in the archipelago are highly heterogenous in geographic, 
topographic and climatic conditions. For example, some of the larger, more mountainous islands have 
good groundwater and surface water resources, whilst others have either ground or surface water or rely 
entirely on rainwater catchment. However, steep catchments and narrow coastal plains are ubiquitous in 
these islands and are vulnerable to flooding and sea-level rise. Water resources in the country, therefore, 
vary and are influenced by these climatic and geographic factors.  
 
14. 
At the same time, the island nation is prone to multivariable water-related climate risks coupled 
with underlying social and economic vulnerabilities. Since Vanuatu’s population is also concentrated 
along the coasts, the balance of freshwater and saltwater ecosystems also plays a vital role in the 
subsistence and commercial life of the population. The islands have uniquely fragile water resources due 
to its small scale, lack of storage and limited freshwater reserves – which are increasingly exposed to 
climate impacts. Climate impacts particularly destabilize natural resource-dependent livelihoods of rural 
communities (75% of the population)14, who continue to rely on subsistence farming (with variable water 
access) in the different islands.

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
15 UNICEF (2020). Rural water supplies in Vanuatu in need of significant improvements. (WASH Technical Paper/13/2020). 
16
 Vanuatu 
National 
Statistical 
Office; 
World 
Bank. 
2014. Vanuatu: 
Socio-Economic 
Atlas, 
available 
at: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/18669  
15. 
Vulnerability analysis: Vanuatu’s climate profile is closely linked with, and is one of the important 
determinants of the performance of socioeconomic and political indicators in the country.  
 
16. 
More than 10% of Vanuatu’s population lives in extreme poverty, compared to the regional average of 
3% for the Pacific. Vanuatu, the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati and the Marshall Islands 
collectively host over 90% of people in poverty in the southern Pacific. Annex 2 – the Feasibility Study 
and Annex 8 – the Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan explore poverty, hardship and other 
indicators in greater detail.  
 
17. 
Despite producing insignificant greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change, SIDS populations 
(including in Vanuatu) are on the frontline of climate change impacts, including having a high burden of 
climate-sensitive diseases. Child mortality, for example, has fallen in Vanuatu, but remains high 
compared to other Pacific countries. Poor water security and WASH infrastructure is one of the leading 
contributors to enteric and other infectious disease burdens, which remains high in Vanuatu. 
 
18. 
Vulnerabilities, in terms of limited climate resilience and water insecurity also encompass gendered 
aspects – explored in detail in Annex 8, and summarized below:  
• Different gender groups, particularly women and girls, have gendered needs, which remain 
underserved by existing WASH infrastructure and are particularly impacted during humanitarian 
emergencies; 
• Women continue to be underrepresented in water security and climate adaptation-related decision-
making bodies, despite registering better performance when represented; 
• Insufficient, non-resilient WASH infrastructure continue to be compromised by climate risks, 
increasing time poverty among certain gender groups (women and children primarily collect water for 
domestic usage); and, 
• Since water is central to well-being, water insecurity indirectly and directly combines to exacerbate 
gender inequality in other sectors (such as limited land rights) and limit adoption of adaptation and 
resilience strategies. 
 
19. 
This socioeconomic context informs the primary challenge for water safety and security in Vanuatu, 
which is: while access to a proximate source of drinking water is high (94% access to an improved 
drinking water source and 86% access on the premises) 15, the safety and reliability of the water 
consumed by most people in Vanuatu is not well known. This has short- and long-term health impacts 
on the indigenous ni-Vanuatu: unsafe drinking water can lead to diarrhoea and other water-borne 
sicknesses, while (in the longer-term) inhibiting the ability of the body to absorb nutrients and contributing 
to chronic undernutrition. Climate change is a threat multiplier in this context.  
 
20. 
In terms of sanitation, the household living conditions analysis of the 2020 Census reveals that outside 
urban centres and provincial hubs (where flush toilets are available), people rely on shared or private pit 
latrines or have no toilets at all. This is particularly true in Penama where between 83–100% of Ni-
Vanuatu living in Pentecost, Maewo and Ambae rely on these types of sanitation infrastructure.16 Water 
rationing, both for household use and sanitation, and water shortages are common during the dry season 
within families. The DoWR Water Resources Inventory (WRI) indicates that many of the water sources 
are not available or have inadequate yields during the dry season. Meanwhile, rainfall patterns have been 
affected by climate change, and can often manifest as intense periods of extreme rainfall, leading to 
floods that will further exacerbate the WASH baseline context. 
 
The following sub-sections detail the observed and projected climate change in Vanuatu, and 
how these drive risks and impacts on the WASH sector.  
 
21. 
Observed historical trends and climate change: Vanuatu's climate varies from wet tropical in the north 
to subtropical in the south. From May through September, south easterly winds support fine sunny days 
and cooler nights. November to April is the wet season with higher temperatures, heavy rain and 
occasional cyclones. The wettest months are from January through March.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Sample maps for the historical (1981-2010 average) and RCP4.5 2050 annual precipitation and mean 
temperature for Vanuatu. The baseline annual precipitation and temperature were based on the adjusted WorldCLIM2 
data, and RCP4.5 changes were based on the CMIP5 GCM/RCM ensemble median data. (Data and map source: authors) 
 
Temperature – Average temperatures range in Port Vila from 27°C in February to 22°C in July. 
Temperatures have been rising in the at approximately 0.1°C per decade since the 1970s. Up to the 
1990s, there was limited warming in the region, but from 1995 – warming noticeably accelerated, and 
temperatures between 2014–2018, were averaging around 0.5–0.6°C above the long-term average.

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Historical temperature trends by study site (Celsius) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Precipitation – Rainfall is also affected by latitude and altitude in the islands. The northern higher islands 
in the Banks and Torres groups receive an annual average of 4,000 mm rainfall, while the southern and 
lower islands may receive only half of such figures, showing regional disparity in the water sources 
available. The World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal states that a study has pointed to 
significant natural multi-decadal rainfall variability in the South Pacific Convergence Zone (which Vanuatu 
is situated within). Observing records over 400 years, it shows abrupt changes of ~1,800 mm can occur 
between wet seasons. However, no changes in rainfall patterns significantly outside the range of normal 
inter-annual variation have been documented and linked to human-induced climate changes.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
Table 2: Historical annual precipitation changes (mm) 
 
Extreme winds and Tropical Cyclones – November to April is also the tropical cyclone season, which 
impacts the water sector extensively. The geographical location of the archipelago in the southwest 
Pacific means that tropical cyclones (TCs) occasionally traverse the country with wind speeds of at least 
62 km/hr or more. According to the Vanuatu Meteorological and Geo-Hazard Department statistics, the 
area of Vanuatu (land and sea) receives about 2-3 cyclones per season. The most significant frequency 
of these events is in January and February. On average, Vanuatu, and its marine economic zone 
experience 20–30 cyclones per decade, between categories three and five causing severe damage. TCs 
can affect any island of Vanuatu, with several impacts: extreme winds heavy rainfall, flash flooding, 
flooding of low-lying areas, coastal flooding, riverine flooding, storm surge, landslides, and very rough 
seas. These events regularly cause damage to life, infrastructure and public goods, as well as property 
in the islands – and also have direct and indirect impacts on water security and WASH infrastructure in 
the country. Since 2015 two category 5 (>250km/hr) Cyclones have directly passed over Vanuatu causing 
extensive damages: 
- 
Cyclone Harold, 2020 160 000 people, more than half of the total population, required assistance. 
On certain islands this percentage raised as high as 90% of the population being impacted, e.g. 
Sanma province. Economic costs are still ongoing for the disaster with COVID19 pandemic 
contributing to slower response times and impacting response funding availability.   
- 
Cyclone Pam 2015, displacing about 65 000 people and resulting in USD 600 million in economic 
losses, the equivalent of about 65 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product  
 
Drought – In Vanuatu, drought is frequently associated with El Niño Phases of the ENSO cycle, that 
causes a warm pool shift towards the eastern Pacific. The result is increased high pressure systems over 
the south Pacific, reducing rainfall levels and inducing meteorological drought. Whilst there is uncertainty 
on the predicted trends of El Nino occurrence, events have been stronger and more aggressive in the 
last 50 years. Four out of five extreme events since 1901 having occurred since 1970. This was most 
recently exemplified in the 2015/16 El Nino event that caused severe drought in Vanuatu which

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
17 https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/10/191021153346.htm  
18 Savage A, Bambrick H, Gallegos D (2021) Climate extremes constrain agency and long-term health: a qualitative case study in a Pacific 
Small Island developing state. Weather Climate Extrem 31:100293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2020.100293 
19 See: https://www.pacificclimatechangescience.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/15_PCCSP_Vanuatu_8pp.pdf  
20 World Risk Report 2021, see: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/2021-world-risk-report.pdf  
compounded negative impacts of the aftermath of Cyclone Pam that devastated infrastructure across the 
country17. The drought caused severe water security impacts resulting in increased soil aridity and crop 
loss, reducing food security. It was reported that the majority of stable crops (yams and taro) failed, 
forcing 90,000 people (about 30% of the total population) to rely on food aid18. 
 
Sea-level rise – According to the Pacific Climate Change Science Program19, as ocean water warms, it 
expands, causing the sea level to rise. The melting of glaciers and ice sheets also contributes to sea-
level rise. Instruments mounted on satellites and tide gauges are used to measure sea level. Satellite 
data indicate the sea level has risen near Vanuatu by about 6 mm per year since 1993. This is larger 
than the global average of 2.8–3.6 mm per year. This higher rate of rise may be partly related to natural 
fluctuations that take place year to year or decade to decade caused by phenomena such as the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation.   
 
22. 
Projected climate change: Vanuatu was ranked as being at the highest risk level in the 2019 World 
Risk Index for disaster exposure and has consistently featured among the top 10 most climate-impacted 
countries in the world.20 For project preparation, therefore, it was crucial to conduct a climate modelling 
study that would identify these trends, and ensure that these are mainstreamed into the design and 
delivery of the project paradigm.  
 
For this climate study (which is included in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study), historical data were analyzed 
based on six weather stations with reasonable data quality and quantity in Vanuatu. Climate change 
analysis was carried out for baselines and the year 2050, under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios, applying 
CMIP5 22 CORDEX AUS Domain RCM and 40 GCMs ensemble approaches and other historical climate 
data sources, with outputs for the median, 5th and 95th percentiles. Due to the timing of the project’s 
preparation phase, CMIP5 was the most current iteration of global modelling. All results are known to be 
consistent with CMIP6 scenarios and the findings of IPCC AR6. Ten populated locations in Vanuatu were 
selected for climate change scenario analysis: Port Vila, Luganville, Norsup, Port-Olry, Isangel, Sola, 
Lakatoro, Melsisi, Lamap, and Aneghowhat, indicated below:  
 
 
Figure 2: Selected sites for climate change scenario analysis in Vanuatu

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
23. 
Temperature – The climate modelling study revealed that climate change has manifested in the historical 
observational data, especially in the temperature data with an increasing trend. Projections for mean 
temperature showed increasing trends in all the selected stations. The projections indicate an 
approximate increase in temperature by 1°C across the locations under RCP 4.5 against the baseline.  
 
Table 3: Baseline and future scenarios of monthly mean temperature by populated area (Celsius)

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
21 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32878-8_6  
22 IPCC, 2021: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, 
L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, http://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896  
 
24. 
Precipitation – data shows no significant predicted change in the trend of annual rainfall. Percentage 
change in total annual rainfall is estimated at 0% with a variability of -12% to 14% under 2050 RCP4.5 
projections, relative to a 1986-2005 baseline. Despite this, variability of individual rainfall events 
continues to be considerable across single seasons and years. Consequently, extreme precipitation 
events are expected to increase. Daily extreme precipitation was calculated based on the six 
meteorological observation stations data and average recurrence intervals (ARI) and projected for 2, 5, 
10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 500 years. The extreme daily precipitation for all stations is predicted to increase at 
a steady rate and is deemed to be significant against the baseline. On average, across the country, daily 
extreme rainfall events are expected to produce an average of 6.5% more precipitation by 2050 under 
RCP4.5 projections. However, 95th percentile estimates indicate precipitation on any given event could 
be as high as 77.5% higher than baseline observations, indicating individual events over a season or 
year could cause dramatically higher precipitation events, causing major impacts as listed below. This is 
also correlated to predicted increase in Tropical Cyclone (TC) intensity and rainfall (see paragraph 26). 
For more detailed breakdown of the data please see Table 7 of Annex 2. 
 
25. 
Extreme wind – wind speed in all the Vanuatu locations is very high, and under climate change 
scenarios, the median change indicates increase in intensity. Based on the GAR15 data, the 100-year 
return wind speed can range across the country of 165.5–175.8 km/h, and 1,000-year return is around 
240–260 km/h, which are in the range of category five (252 km/h) of the Saffir-Simpson scale. Under 
climate change scenarios, the extreme wind speed is projected to increase between 1 and 5% in the 
ensemble median but reach more than 10% in the 95th percentile. This is also associated with a greater 
predicted intensity of TCs. Tables 16–18 in Annex 2 elaborates on the outputs regarding wind speeds 
from the climate data analysis.  
 
26. 
Tropical Cyclones – the occurrence of and predictability of TCs is very hard to predict under current 
models due to their formation complexity and their influence by climatic cycles such as El Nino Southern 
Oscillation phases. TC tracking is also unpredictable, and it is not possible to accurately predict (at 
present) trends in paths of TC that will cross a given country. However, due to their size and speed of 
travel regional analysis is applicable to predicting overall trends in TCs. Analysis at the regional level 
indicates that there is: 
 
• 
High confidence in the increase in average TC intensity (category 4-5). This correlates with 
the information presented in paragraph 25 that indicates that extreme wind speeds are predicted 
to increase (AR6 SPM B.2.4).  
• 
Medium to high confidence in an increase in TC rainfall rates. This correlates with the information 
presented in paragraph 24 that indicates that extreme precipitation events are predicted to 
increase. 
• 
High confidence that TC frequency will decrease over the coming century but that there is low 
confidence that Category 4 and 5 events will change. This correlates with Figure 3 that indicates 
that TC crossing rates for Vanuatu are decreasing.  
• 
High confidence that sea level rise will increase TC-related storm surge events. 
• 
In summary, although TC events are predicted to decline, it has been observed that the global 
proportion of major (Category 3-5) TC occurrence has increased over the last four decades (AR6 
SPM A.3.4). TCs will likely generate greater windspeeds and precipitation causing greater risk 
of loss and damages and associated impacts as listed below21 22.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
23 Earth Grid System Federation data portal. https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/search/cmip5/  
 
Figure 3:  IBTrACS TC best track data for TC crossing Vanuatu 
27. 
Drought – Drought severity and duration probability based on the Standardized Precipitation 
Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) are projected to have a similar increasing trend for all the locations 
across the country under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 2050. The increase of drought is caused by a slight 
decrease in precipitation and an increase of temperature. The results indicated that the probability of 
extreme drought increase in all the locations. Especially, when coinciding with El Nino phases of ENSO 
cycles. For detailed figures please see page 49 of Annex 2.  
 
28. 
Mean sea-level rise – An increase in sea level rise over the next 30 years is projected. By 2050, an 
increase of 40–60 cm in mean sea level is projected under CMIP5 RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios with 
only slight variation from location to location 23. In the coastal areas, where Vanuatu’s population is 
concentrated, high-water levels in the historical period for 50-, 100-, 200-, 300-year return period are 
presented. The 100-year ARI extreme water level for the ten locations is around 0.7–1.0 m. By 2050, the 
extreme still high-water level could reach 1.4–1.8 m. Tables 29–30 in Annex 2 elaborates on the outputs 
about sea-level rise and coastal extreme water level analysis from climate data analysis.  
 
Table 4: Projections of mean sea-level rise increase in Vanuatu by 2050 (cm) 
Name 
RCP4.5 
5th 
percentile 
RCP4.5 
50th 
percentile 
RCP4.5 
95th 
percentile 
RCP8.5 
05th 
percentile 
RCP8.5 
50th 
percentile 
RCP8.5 
95th 
percentile 
Port Vila 
45.7 
54.2 
62.9 
49.0 
57.9 
67.2 
Luganville 
40.6 
49.2 
57.9 
43.9 
52.8 
62.2 
Norsup 
42.3 
50.8 
59.5 
45.6 
54.5 
63.9 
Port-Olry 
39.3 
47.8 
56.5 
42.6 
51.5 
60.8 
Isangel 
38.9 
47.4 
56.0 
42.2 
51.0 
60.3 
Sola 
37.7 
46.2 
54.8 
41.0 
49.8 
59.1 
Lakatoro 
42.4 
51.0 
59.7 
45.7 
54.6 
64.0 
Melsisi 
42.5 
51.1 
59.8 
45.8 
54.7 
64.1 
Lamap 
43.7 
52.1 
60.7 
46.9 
55.8 
65.1 
Aneghowhat 
34.7 
43.2 
51.8 
38.0 
46.8 
56.1 
 
29. 
Risks and impacts: Water remains the main channel through which climate change will be felt in 
Vanuatu and remains the key sector for developing successful adaptation strategies. This is because 
climate change affects all aspects of the water cycle and is currently driving an ongoing intensification of 
the water cycle in the equatorial Pacific, which is already exposed to elevated occurrences of natural 
hazards. Climate change impacts on freshwater sources, for example, are evident in Vanuatu, and data 
analysis shows that climate variables, which can impact water access, supply and security, will continue 
to increase uncertainty over time.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
30. 
Table 5 summarizes the findings of the climate modelling study and demonstrates the risks and impacts 
for the water sector (water sources, infrastructure and WASH) in Vanuatu.  
 
Table 5: Climate and non-climate drivers impacting drinking water and WASH infrastructure in Vanuatu. Numbering in 
column three relates the individual impacts to the phenomena type and is cross referenced elsewhere in the document. 
Phenomena 
Type of driver 
Risks and impacts for drinking water and WASH infrastructure 
Increased air 
and 
water 
temperatures 
Climate 
change 
driver 
T.1. 
Reductions 
in 
catchment 
water 
sources 
due 
to 
increased 
evapotranspiration – which will impact water points and sources that 
are accessible to communities; 
T.2. 
Increase in water treatment costs as quality of inflows decrease, due to 
lake stratification and fewer destratification (mixing) events; post-
bushfire runoff of dissolved materials into receiving waters; changes in 
turbidity and chemistry of water – these will impact water quality as well 
as availability, particularly in remote areas; 
T.3. 
Increased occurrence of eutrophication and toxic algal blooms in rivers, 
reservoirs and lakes, due to increased water temperature – these 
occurrences reduce water quality and increase health burden among 
communities that cannot access alternative water sources or expensive 
options such as packaged drinking water;  
T.4. 
Reductions in groundwater levels due to accelerated conditions that 
increase biomass and higher levels evapotranspiration – which, in turn 
will affect water security and safety, as well as reduce options for water 
access; and 
T.5. 
Increase in operations, maintenance and repair costs for distribution 
networks as saline intrusion increases – which will particularly affect 
vulnerable communities that do not have access to disposable 
household income and/or cannot access government/donor funds to 
improve existing water systems and WASH infrastructure. 
Increased 
intensity 
of 
extreme 
precipitation 
events 
Climate 
change 
driver 
P1. 
Damage caused by extreme winds or extreme flooding events, to 
WASH infrastructure, can lead to overflows in pit latrines or makeshift 
structures – which will immediately reduce access, as well as increase 
the health burden of exposed communities (and further affect 
marginalized groups within such communities);  
P2. 
Reduction in holding capacity of water sources due to increased 
overland flows, soil erosion and sedimentation as well as contamination 
of freshwater sources – this will impact water availability as well as 
quality, particularly in remote islands;  
P3. 
Inflows and recharge of groundwater as well as freshwater sources will 
have increasing levels of suspended solids and other contaminants – 
which will drive up the cost of purification to reach potability, as well as 
increase the costs for operations and maintenance of treatment plants 
(as well as create demand for establishing such systems);  
P4. 
Increase to damage costs to low-lying water infrastructure exposed to 
inundation hazards – which will drive up the costs for repair, operations 
and maintenance in the long-term, while having immediate effects such 
as reduced access and availability of potable water; 
P5. 
Increase in costs to maintain and repair distribution networks due to 
increasing erosion hazards caused by overland flows – which will drive 
up the costs for repair, operations and maintenance in the long-term, 
while having immediate effects such as reduced access and availability 
of potable water; and, 
P6. 
Decrease in groundwater recharge, as heavy precipitation can exceed 
soil infiltration capacity and, instead, increases surface runoff – which 
will necessitate the establishment of purification technologies that will 
be energy-intensive and difficult to scale up in rural contexts. 
Extreme wind 
speed, 
tropical 
cyclones 
Natural 
climatic 
driver (as Vanuatu 
is in the cyclone 
belt) 
 
E1. 
Intense cyclones can bring torrential rains and have embedded severe 
thunderstorms that are accompanied by tornadoes – causing wind 
damage to limited WASH infrastructure and housing options; 
E2. 
TCs often damage precarious water points and infrastructure, 
particularly if these are not secured or underground – due to TC Harold

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
24 Government of Vanuatu – WASH Cluster (July 2020). See lessons learnt report here: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/vanuatu/tropical-cyclone-harold-covid-19-wash-cluster-lessons-learnt-july-2020  
25 The Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC) demonstrates the need to incorporate disaster scenarios in planning of 
infrastructure 
and 
institutional 
elements 
of 
water 
supply 
and 
sanitation:  
https://www.preventionweb.net/files/8655_RefNoteWASHDisastersFebruary09.pdf  
Climate 
change 
driver 
(increasing 
the frequency and 
intensity of TCs) 
in April 2020, WASH situation in Santo, Pentecost and Ambrym was 
degraded24;  
E3. 
Wind-borne debris often initiates or enhances damage to structures, 
which are then worsened by extreme precipitation – this can particularly 
affect 
rainwater 
harvesting 
infrastructure, 
particularly 
system 
components (gutters, downspouts, screens) that are usually exposed; 
E4. 
Heavy rainfall and subsequent inland flooding can also induce 
extensive damage and, in coastal areas, cause coastal floods and 
beach erosion – which can impact water sources nearer to the sea, 
cause increased salination and impact upon both water access and 
health burdens of dependent communities; and,  
E5. 
Even with climate-proofing, it is essential to note that some extreme 
events may overwhelm the best intentions in engineering for climate 
resilience – therefore, disaster preparedness must coincide with 
adaptation planning and infrastructure design 25, particularly in the 
context of a fragile WASH baseline in Vanuatu. This holds true for 
planning WASH infrastructure in emergency shelters as well – which 
often have to be relied on due to Vanuatu’s increased exposure to TCs 
and other natural and climate-induced hazards.  
Drought 
and 
decreased 
precipitation 
volumes, 
seasonal 
patterns 
changes 
ENSO Oscillation – 
natural 
climatic 
driver 
 
Climate 
change 
driver  
D1. 
Reduced streamflow, reduction in groundwater aquifers and increased 
pollution concentrations – which, in turn, impugns availability and 
quality of water supply for natural resource-dependent communities 
(primarily the rural population) of Vanuatu; 
D2. 
Increase in penetration of saline waters into estuaries and aquifers 
during drought season, causing imbalance between freshwater and 
saltwater – which may reduce water supply and quality available to 
communities as well as expose them to health hazards caused by 
overconsumption of sodium; 
D3. 
Increase in operations, maintenance, and repair costs for water 
infrastructure due to lower quality water – this will particularly affect 
systems that are vulnerable or require upgrade in rural and remote 
areas of the country, driving up the costs of water production for potable 
use. Water service providers may need to build greater numbers of 
capital-intensive rain-independent desalination and recycled water 
plants to provide adequate water security for coastal populations. 
Sea-level rise 
Climate 
change 
driver 
S1. 
Saltwater intrusion and increased salinity of groundwater aquifers and 
distribution networks – this will lead to reduction in availability and 
quality of water supply (access to freshwater source points will reduce, 
and existing options may not remain potable for consumption), which 
will have direct impacts on water security as well as health burdens of 
communities;  
S2. 
Saltwater intrusion and increased salinity of groundwater will have 
direct impacts on drinking water and WASH infrastructure – this is by 
increasing costs and demand of desalination systems and distribution 
networks, which may be energy-inefficient and cumbersome in rural 
and remote communities (thus lowering overall water security); further, 
sea-level rise can be expected to physically damage both drinking and 
WASH infrastructure, and introduce yet another climate variable that 
would require mainstreaming in design processes.  
S3. 
Inundation of land due to raised seawater levels will also –  increase 
the  maintenance, operation, and repair costs of WASH infrastructure 
as exposure will increase. When this increased need cannot be met, 
communities will be exposed, and water insecurity as well as health 
burden from degraded WASH infrastructure will increase. 
Deforestation  
Anthropogenic 
driver 
DF1. 
Deforestation can reduce communities’ access to clean drinking water, 
by decreasing water yield.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
26 Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme is available here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/country-programme-
vanuatu.pdf  
27 https://www.nab.vu/project/standardization-wash-emergency-iec-material  
28 https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp035 
29 https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf-b32-02-add01.pdf  
DF2. 
Runoff and sediment deposition can increase the costs of water 
treatment, as well as pollute freshwater and groundwater sources, 
reducing water points and access. 
Water 
pollution 
(direct) 
and 
other 
environmental 
pollution 
Anthropogenic 
driver 
WP1. 
Water pollution occurs when harmful substances—often chemicals or 
microorganisms—contaminate a stream, river, lake, ocean, aquifer, or 
other body of water, degrading water quality and rendering it toxic to 
humans or the environment. 
WP2. 
Water pollution can happen through point source pollution – 
wastewater (also called effluent) discharged legally or illegally by a 
manufacturer, oil refinery, or wastewater treatment facility, as well as 
contamination from leaking septic systems, chemical and oil spills, and 
illegal dumping. 
WP3. 
Other sources of environmental pollution can also find its way into water 
outlets, streams and water bodies. Particularly plastic and other 
anthropogenic waste, due to the lack of waste disposal and sustainable 
practices. Waste can often find its way into water sources, thereby 
reducing water safety and security in the long-term.  
WP4. 
This is because water is uniquely vulnerable to pollution. Known as a 
“universal solvent,” water is able to dissolve more substances than any 
other liquid on earth. 
31. 
The project will strongly contribute to addressing climate-related risks and impacts on drinking water and 
WASH infrastructure, while supporting the implementation of Vanuatu’s national priorities. Indeed, 
climate-resilient WASH infrastructure has been identified as a priority intervention in Vanuatu’s GCF 
Country Programme26. The Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030, the National 
Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) and the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) also 
identified water resource management as a priority need for Vanuatu. 
 
32. 
Complementarity and coherence: The table below summarises the main past, on-going and projects 
under development in Vanuatu which focus on water security and climate resilience. Synergies and 
complementarities are highlighted and more information on projects is provided in Section 11 of Annex 
2 – Feasibility Study.  
 
Table 6: Synergies and complementarities with other water-related projects and interventions 
Project /Programme 
Additionality / Complementarity with the proposal  
Standardization of WASH in Emergency Information, 
Education and Communication (IEC) Material (UNICEF) 
2015 - 201627 
Emergency IEC materials were developed and delivered 
through training to Vanuatu stakeholders, to address critical 
life-saving safe water, sanitation and hygiene behaviors in an 
emergency context.   
The GCF proposal will build on this previous 
experience to scale up the impact: IEC materials will 
be used in trainings where relevant to enhance 
adaptative capacity on WASH in case of emergency.  
GCF 
– 
Climate 
Information 
Services 
for 
resilient 
development planning (SPREP) 2018 - 202228 
The project addresses climate information gaps to develop and 
deliver climate information tools and resources, supporting 
coordination and dissemination of tailored information across 
five priority sectors. 
The current GCF proposal will build on the climate 
information services to support decision-making 
processes on climate resilient WASH infrastructure 
throughout the project.  
GCF – Community-based climate resilience project (Save 
the Children) 2022 - 202829 
The project provides vulnerable remote and rural communities 
with access to climate information and early warning. It also 
integrates climate risks into community planning processes and 
build adaptive governance systems at the local level.  
This proposal will expand on the initial results of the 
project, in particular on local adaptation plans which 
will identify key local issues that drive climate 
vulnerability in Vanuatu. It will also benefit from the 
implementation of nature-based solutions which will 
enhance the resilience of natural resources and 
improve water security.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
30 Full project proposal under development, concept approved in 2020: https://www.thegef.org/projects-operations/projects/10712 
31  Concept note submitted in 2019: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/22710-malekula-water-supply-project-
increase-resilience-vulnerable-and-marginalized-communities.pdf 
GEF – Enhancing water-food security and climate 
resilience in volcanic island countries of the Pacific (FAO) 
[under development]30 
The objective of the proposal is to: 
- 
Expand and assess the role of groundwater resources 
- 
Introduce 
sound 
groundwater 
governance 
frameworks 
- 
Tackle hot-spots with on-the-ground-interventions 
- 
Reinforce institutional capacity in groundwater 
assessment, management and monitoring 
Lessons learned on groundwater resources use and 
governance will be shared with FAO. Opportunities 
will be explored to amplify the benefits of the GCF 
proposal as a parallel investment for this GEF 
proposal under development. 
GCF - Malekula Water Supply Project: Increase Resilience 
of Vulnerable and Marginalized Communities through 
Integrated Water Resource Management and Ecosystem-
based Interventions (UNEP) [under development]31 
The proposal intends to develop climate-resilient water 
management plans for Malekula, provide climate-resilient 
water supply systems and catchment management in 
Malekula. 
The UNEP project is specifically targeting Malekula 
island 
through 
ecosystem-based 
adaptation 
interventions to enhance ecological provisioning and 
regulatory services. These activities compliment the 
proposed project. Investments for water infrastructure 
made available by this project will enable communities 
to access greater water provision provided by UNEP’s 
proposal. As such, GCF resources will not be invested 
in duplicated activities or impacts on the ground. This 
programming 
is 
seen 
as 
synergistic 
and 
complimentary to providing robust climate resilient 
water access on Malekula and in line with Vanuatu’s 
wider water strategies.  Lessons learned from this 
GCF proposal will be shared to ensure further 
complementarity with the UNEP proposal and aim to 
ensure maximum impact and effectiveness to induce 
a paradigm shift.   
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus 
diagram) 
33. 
This section presents the barrier analysis and the project’s proposed theory of change to address 
these barriers.  
 
Barrier analysis 
34. 
Barriers for this project have been identified through a review of primary and secondary sources, as well 
as through a DoWR-led stakeholder engagement process. Primary sources include Vanuatu’s draft GCF 
Country Programme, the Vanuatu Water Policy 2017–2030, and in-country consultations with water 
management experts at the national and provincial level. Consultations were conducted during the 
concept note stage, as well as during the full project preparation stage. 
 
35. 
The secondary review included an extensive desktop study, which collated documents from different 
climate sector and development sector actors, focusing on climate change issues in the Pacific SIDS, 
water security and Climate-Resilient WASH (CR-WASH), and Vanuatu’s socioeconomic and gender 
baseline. Additionally, post-disaster assessments on Cyclone Pam (2015) and Cyclone Harold (2020) 
were reviewed to assess climate impacts on Vanuatu’s water infrastructure, with particular focus on 
available localised studies on Sanma, Torba and Tanna. The main barriers to climate change adaptation 
in the water sector in Vanuatu include:  
 
36. 
Barrier 1 – Community awareness and capacity – this is limited at community levels due to a lack 
of backstopping and outreach from extension agents to adequately design climate resilient 
DWSSPs and designs: Resilience at the community level is key to ensuring beneficiaries receive 
sustainable water and sanitation services that can adapt to external shocks and processes of change, 
particularly climate change. The national/sub-national-level processes support coordination and service 
provision to the WASH sector, but it is the infrastructure and the capacity of communities to manage their 
system that can either deliver the needed health impacts and increased water security in Vanuatu or 
prove to be a hurdle in achieving the project goals.  
 
Capacity barriers for climate-resilient WASH in Vanuatu, at local and community levels, have two 
features:

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
32 UNICEF (2020). Rural water supplies in Vanuatu in need of significant improvements. (WASH Technical Paper/13/2020). 
33 Ibid. 
34 Ibid.  
35 Ibid.  
36 During the project preparation stage, a technical review of the rural water infrastructure landscape as well as an analysis of the technical 
capacities of the DoWR was conducted. This exists as a standalone study and is also extensively incorporated into Annex 2 – the Feasibility 
Study. 
• inadequate access to evidence-based planning among communities for climate-resilient water 
management; and, 
• limited awareness, knowledge, and skills on climate change issues and climate-resilient water 
resource management at the community level.  
Stakeholder consultations highlighted these observations: Red Cross Vanuatu (RCV) identified limited 
capacity to provide backstopping at provincial offices and community levels prior, during, and after the 
implementation of project activities, as a key gap. World Vision (WV), similarly, identifies that at the 
community and operator level, training and project intervention need to support design capacities, as well 
as be deployed quickly and efficiently. 
Outcome 1 will address this barrier 1 – section B.3 below provides relevant details.  
37. 
Barrier 2 – Limited market signals and insufficient CR-WASH Infrastructure – Water is generally 
perceived as a public good in rural and remote settings in rural Vanuatu, and existing WASH 
infrastructure is lacking climate resilience in designs at local and community level:  
In rural settings, water is a public good – although climatic and environmental conditions as well as 
resilience of infrastructure largely determine access to this essential utility. The DoWR recognizes that, 
particularly in these rural (often remote) areas, the absence of market signals (such as prices and 
permits), as well as inadequate planning and incentive structure can impact upon water security, leading 
to overextraction through the limited water source points currently available. This informed the 
establishment of the government-owned and community-facing water governance architecture in the 
form of the DWSSP, which the project will utilise to address climate-related challenges in the sector.  
Existing water challenges in the sector, particularly limited CR-WASH infrastructure, is being exacerbated 
by climate change, resulting in increasing temperatures globally and in Vanuatu, changes in precipitation 
patterns and extreme weather events, leading to excessive flooding and droughts and threatening water 
and food security, health and the environment. 
 
One of the primary barriers in Vanuatu is limited WASH infrastructure and water supply sources. The 
DoWR conducted an inventory of water systems, as part of an MFAT-funded Water and Sanitation Sector 
Strengthening Programme – which found only 79% of systems functional.32 Shefa Province, which hosts 
the capital city – Port Vila – had the best functionality at 98%.33  Meanwhile, Torba, the most remote 
province in the north, had only 72% of systems functioning.34 It is also important to note, that even 
operational systems, did not necessarily have water supply all day, every day. Further analysis revealed 
that only 37% of systems were reported as providing water 24h/day, every day of the year.35 
 
Data collected from rapid assessments of 230 rural water supply systems, as well as inspection of 57 
rainwater harvesting systems, following Tropical Cyclone Harold, revealed that –in the immediate 
aftermath, the only source of clean water for communities were coconuts. With extensive damage to 
water infrastructure, the WASH Cluster was quickly activated to send in contingency supplies, such as 
liquid chlorine and chlorine tablets, to stem chances of water-borne diseases. Given this baseline, 
infrastructure barriers have the following features in Vanuatu:  
• insufficient or lack of WASH infrastructure, with sub-national variations; 
• vulnerable WASH infrastructure (poorly maintained and not climate-resilient); and, 
• no alternative water supplies in case of emergency (shelters are also ill-equipped).  
Outcome 2 will address this barrier – section B.3 provides relevant details.  
38. 
Barrier 3 – Design standards – current designs do not account for full range of climate resilient 
approaches: A sample of Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning (DWSSP) documents and their 
water supply designs were reviewed from an engineering perspective as part of the feasibility study,36 
whilst considering climate change and other vulnerabilities to secure water infrastructure.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
37 https://www.gov.vu/index.php/resources/vanuatu-2030 
 
Design standards, procedures, and choices of water systems and their components will provide the 
greatest amount of resilience against climate change and other vulnerabilities. Due to limitations of 
available data, finances and/or resources, and skills and experience, some climate-resilient technologies 
are not suitable for a given community/location. This is already recognised by system designers who 
focus on implementing simple yet effective solutions such as gravity-fed systems and community 
rainwater harvesting systems. The reviewed designs imply the need for greater consideration of water 
resource security hierarchy and threats such as saltwater intrusion.  
 
Although the designs are to standard and typically optimised sufficiently, they do not extend beyond the 
minimum requirements of water supply for individuals. Nor do they provide backup or fail-safe 
mechanisms which could maintain water reliability during flood, drought or natural disasters. It was 
noticed that some designs are downscaled to minimum standards due to cost concerns; this should be 
avoided. The additional costs of a larger tank or pipe could greatly increase water security now and into 
the future.  
Outcome 2 will address this barrier – section B.3 provides relevant details.  
 
39. 
Barrier 4 – Technical capacity - human resource capacity and knowledge of technical areas 
associated with climate-resilient WASH infrastructure is limited at the provincial and national 
levels: The National Sustainable Development Plan (2016–2030)37, provisions for capacity and technical 
assessments to ensure a dynamic public sector in Vanuatu. The DoWR is the governing body for water 
resources, overseeing the provision of safe, secure and sustainable management of community water 
supplies, protection of water resources, catchment management, and WASH disaster programs. Their 
staff have been organised in three units:  Monitoring and Evaluation, Technical Services, and Projects 
and Operations supported by an administrative department.  
 
40. 
In 2016, the DOWR lacked human resource capacity, with a need to expand staff numbers, and only 
having two of three Section Heads in an acting capacity and with little management experience. Further, 
women held only administrative positions. This study identified that some staff worked without pay at the 
start of their employment. In 2018, only 5 of 16 planned recruitments were successfully completed. The 
DoWR have, demonstrably, experienced reduced staffing, including a period without in-house engineers, 
or dedicated Project Management Units. This, combined with competing urban water resource tasks, has 
burdened staff and hampered progress of rural water supply improvements. Civil engineers in NGOs 
were generally only available for collaborative projects. Indeed, the DoWR does currently have some civil 
engineers, however, personnel capacity to meet demand is severely lacking. 
 
41. 
Stakeholder engagement, conducted during the preparation of this Feasibility Study, demonstrated that 
DoWR staff often undertake duties at a technical level below their terms of reference requirements. 
Training courses are frequently classroom-based, without direct in-field application to reinforce the 
absorption of skills, leading to ineffective outcomes. The training survey (self-assessments) conducted 
in February 2021, indicated the lack of (or under) confidence for a range of skills: basic water engineering 
skills, technical and project management, data processing and computer skills. The survey returned few 
responses on climate change, which could indicate a gap in understanding of climate risks interlinkages 
with water security and WASH infrastructure, generated likely from the well-established status quo of 
siloed action on these sectors. Water governance in Vanuatu is restricted by technical capacity barriers, 
amounting to the following features:  
• limited technical capacity, human resources on climate-resilient water management at area council, 
provincial and national level; and, 
• insufficient awareness, knowledge and skills on climate change issues and climate-resilient water 
management at the provincial and national levels. 
Outcome 3 will address this barrier – section B.3 provides relevant details.  
42. 
Barrier 5 – Institutional constraints - the Department of Water Resources and associated water 
governance architecture lacks human resource and corporate/operations service capacity for 
effective 
implementation 
across 
devolved 
levels 
The DoWR underwent an institutional assessment primarily carried out through the Office of the Public

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
Service Commission’s Framework for Institutional Capacity Assessment and Development (available as 
Annex C of the Feasibility Study), which was designed to clarify the capacity needs, and assessment and 
development approach. The assessment has nine rubrics, with several indicators within each (I: Legal 
Framework, Purpose and Mandate; II: Strategic Plans and Budgets; III: Organisational Function and 
Design; IV: Operational Systems and Procedures; V: Human Resource Management; VI: Management 
Processes; VII: Performance; VIII: Workplace Culture and Leadership; IX: Infrastructure). Several 
indicators were pegged at basic or below moderate levels of capacity, such as: planning within the 
institution; operational procedures; and service delivery standards. Some indicators were highlighted as 
requiring immediate capacity development or attention, including staff retention; strengthened 
management and improved project implementation efficiencies and data accessibility. 
 
The gap in institution building and capacity development, hence, is an important barrier that the project 
will contribute towards. Particularly: 
• inadequate institutional capacities on climate-resilient water management corporate and operations 
services at the provincial and national level; and 
• paucity of robust and accessible data for integrated and climate-resilient water management. 
Outcome 3 will address barrier – section B.3 provides relevant details.  
43. 
Barrier 6 – Financial constraints – lack of financing restricts the ability for communities and local 
public institutions to meet the demand for CR-WASH infrastructure installations at provincial and 
community levels. 
The World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic for Vanuatu (which was conducted in 2016 with 7 other 
Pacific Islands) emphasizes that while public expenditures tend to be high in relation to the size of the 
economies of these island nations, the absolute size of the public sector is still very small and often lacks 
the financial and human resources needed to provide adequate public services at national scales. This 
is supported by the high demand on CAP requests for investment in to DWSSPs for water infrastructure. 
Linked to Barrier 3 this has induced downscaling of infrastructure works or lack of funding for most 
appropriate climate resilience. This has led to increased vulnerability as exemplified by the aftermath of 
Tropical Cyclone Harold. Financial constraints for investment in water infrastructure therefore directly 
presents a barrier to climate-resilient water security and sanitation.  
Outcome 2 will address this barrier – section B.3 provides relevant details.  
 
Theory of Change 
 
44. 
Based on this barrier analysis, a Theory of Change has been developed with outputs geared towards 
delivering improved water security and water governance with an overall focus on improving the climate-
resilience of WASH infrastructure in Vanuatu.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Theory of Change diagram 
45. 
Figure 4 presents the high-level, relevant GCF Integrated Results Framework indicators and how the 
project will contribute towards a paradigm shift for climate-transformational investments in the WASH 
sector of Vanuatu.  
 
46. 
The project goal statement explains the causal linkages between the project outputs, outcomes and the 
goal that the project will contribute towards (in this case, increased water security and climate resilience 
of communities in Vanuatu). The statement states that IF local planning, decision-making and water 
management processes at national and devolved levels are improved and resources are provided for the 
improvement of water resources, THEN climate resilience and water security of vulnerable communities 
will be enhanced in the rural areas of Vanuatu, resulting BECAUSE OF enhanced community awareness 
and capabilities, upgraded infrastructure to address climate risks and impacts, and strengthened national 
water governance capacities.  
 
47. 
The project will be delivered through three Outcomes to address the barriers above:  
 
48. 
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate resilient water resources  
This outcome will deliver on two aspects of community resilience towards climate change: firstly, through 
increasing the number of DWSSPs, while also introducing climate adaptation measures in these plans. 
It will also aid in retrofitting existing DWSSPs with a climate change perspective. Additionally, this 
Outcome will focus on building the institutional capacity for CR-WASH at national, provincial, area council 
and community levels.  
 
This Outcome has been designed to create a paradigm-shift towards implementing CR-WASH in a 
scalable and sustainable way at the community level, building on UNICEF research that this can only be 
achieved by providing tailored and required assistance to communities. The DoWR Technical Assistance 
Programme (TAP) component, for example, which is implemented through the DWSSP process, 
provides a risk-based training method to communities in order to aid them in managing their systems and 
understanding required infrastructure to meet defined WASH targets. This will be support by the project 
to include greater focus on climate-resilience. Using these plans to both manage community systems 
and apply for capital assistance provides both the management capacity and infrastructure – and 
importantly, ownership – to rural communities. This Outcome will address Barrier 1, as described above.  
 
49. 
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced rural water infrastructure   
This outcome represents the core investment envisioned for a paradigmatic shift towards CR-WASH 
infrastructure in rural contexts of Vanuatu. The objective of this Outcome is to strengthen water systems 
in prioritized rural communities (through the DWSSP process) and to address climate variability and

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
change risks and impacts (through the existing CAP). Investments in rural water supply infrastructure 
(whether new or improved), such as improved gravity fed systems, will be at once a private good 
(providing water supply to households), but when used correctly and consistently, also a wider, public 
good key to achieving SDG 6 targets. 
 
At least 270 prioritized communities, schools or healthcare facilities are expected to be targeted as part 
of Outcome 2. GCF funding and co-financing will be mobilized to support climate-resilient infrastructures 
that will be developed, based on needs identified in the DWSSPs and through DoWR’s expanded and 
improved capacity (delivered through Outcome 1). That every drop of water that has to be pumped, 
moved, or treated to meet health and food needs requires energy. The Oucome, therefore, will aim to 
deliver technology options that ensures effective co-management of water and energy, to ensure systems 
are reliable and climate resilient. This Outcome will address barriers 2, 3 and 6, as described above.  
 
50. 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks 
associated with water security 
A key barrier identified in the process of adapting to climate-related water risks in Vanuatu stem from 
constraints at the institutional level – both provincial and national. Water security is simultaneously 
impacted by and contributes to climate change – and institutional strengthening is a key aspect in 
addressing these multifaceted risks effectively. Outcome 3, therefore, focuses on improving provincial 
and national institutions in Vanuatu by increasing capacity of governance staff and WASH sector 
partners, while also provisioning for knowledge management, data sharing mechanisms and M&E 
framework.  
 
The Government of Vanuatu recognizes that essential to the effective delivery of the National 
Implementation Plan are standardised support tools and processes, the foundation being community-
level DWSSPs. Additionally, it also recognizes that essential to efficient delivery of the National 
Implementation Plan is reaching as many communities as possible by devolving responsibility and 
support to provincial government, coupled with national oversight and coordination of the many 
government agencies, implementing partners, and technical support agencies. Keeping this mandate as 
context, Outcome 3 will work towards gearing institutional capacity at provincial and national level to 
ensure the effective and efficient delivery of the National Implementation Plan and other related water 
management processes to manage the adverse effects of climate change.  This Outcome will address 
barriers 4 and 5, as described above. 
 
51. 
Six hundred communities will be direct beneficiaries as part of Outcome 1 (improved planning and 
community-based activities on climate-resilient water management), of which 220 will also benefit from 
improved climate-resilient water infrastructure as part of Outcome 2. 50 communities with existing 
DWSSPs will be targeted under Outcome 2 during the first year of the project. Further to this, 100 
DWSSPs from the current 301 established to date will be updated to follow the new climate resilient 
methodology in Outcome 1. This makes a total of 750 communities directly benefiting from Outcomes 1 
and 2. This will directly benefit 85,650 (including 42,825 women) beneficiaries, that is around 27% of the 
total population in Vanuatu. Indirect beneficiaries include the entire rural population in Vanuatu (216,980 
individuals which is 73% of the total population), mostly through enhanced institutional capacities and 
processes leading to climate-resilient water security for rural communities (Outcome 3). 
 
52. 
Table 7 below summarizes the identified climate risks and impacts, and how the Programme’s Theory of 
Change addresses these climate change impacts through adaptation interventions in the three thematic 
areas. 
 
Table 7: Climate impact mapping again adaptation needs and interventions to achieve desired adaptation benefits. The 
Impact numbering can be cross-referenced in Table 5. 
Climate 
risk 
Impact 
(table 
5) 
GCF 
results 
area  
 Adaptation need 
 Adaptation intervention 
Adaptation 
benefit 
Increasing 
temperature 
and drought 
occurrence 
T2 and 
T3   
ARA2 
 
 
 Improved 
awareness 
of 
communities on water quality 
under drought scenarios.  
 Improved infrastructure and 
water 
treatment 
processes 
built into DWSSPs. 
 Community 
knowledge 
sharing and capacity building 
events.  
 Training of trainers to support 
DWSSP designs.  
(Activity 1.1.1) 
Climate-resilient 
DWSSP 
designs 
and 
greater access 
to 
finance 
through 
CAP

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
T5, D3 
ARA3 
 Assess 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure 
designs 
and 
update them to adapt to 
climate issues. 
 Increased data management 
and 
knowledge 
generation 
support continual improvement 
of designs. 
 Construction/upgrade 
of 
climate-resilient infrastructure.  
 Assessment 
of 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure.  
 Data management systems 
enhanced, 
and 
data 
and 
knowledge disseminated. 
 CAP request support to RWC. 
(Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 2.1.1, 
2.1.2, 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) 
applications 
results 
in 
drought 
sensitive 
CR-
WASH 
infrastructure 
construction 
and 
T1, T3 
and D1 
ARA 1 
 Improved 
understanding 
of 
drought 
on 
surface 
water 
quality and ground water tables 
 Assessment 
of 
drought 
sensitive 
CR-WASH 
intervention.  
 Training of extension agents 
(DWSSP 
facilitators) 
on 
drought risk.  
 Enhanced DWSSP designs  
(Activity 1.1.1, 1.2.1 and 1.3.1) 
Precipitation 
extremes 
P2-6 
ARA2 
 
 Increased 
awareness 
at 
community level of the dangers 
of overflows and contamination 
of water sources and buildup of 
sedimentation. 
 Training of trainers to support 
DWSSP 
design 
including 
watershed management to 
address soil degradation and 
sedimentation 
build 
up 
caused by extensive rainfall 
and increased contamination 
risk of water sources. 
 Community 
knowledge 
sharing, and capacity building 
events  
(Activity 1.1.1 and 3.1.1) 
Communities 
made aware of 
contamination 
risks 
and 
DWSSPs 
account 
for 
contamination 
risk with safe 
and 
sanitary 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure in 
place 
P1-5 
ARA3 
 Assess and update CR-WASH 
infrastructure designs. 
 Increased data management 
and knowledge generation. 
 Construction/upgrade 
of 
climate-resilient infrastructure.  
 CR-WASH 
intervention 
account 
for 
flood 
related 
issues. 
 DWSSP design processes 
strengthened  
 CAP request support to RWC. 
(Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 2.1.1 
and 2.1.2) 
Extreme 
events 
E4 and 
E5 
ARA1 
 Extension 
agents 
identify 
communities most vulnerable 
to the risks of extreme events 
and 
include 
appropriate 
response 
measures 
into 
DWSSP designs. 
 Training of extension agents 
(DWSSP 
facilitators) 
to 
carryout 
technical 
assessments of community 
contexts 
to 
identify 
vulnerability 
to 
extreme 
events and tailor DWSSP 
designs to the context specific 
needs of communities.  
(Activities 1.1.1 and 1.2.1) 
DWSSPs 
account 
for 
extreme 
event 
risk 
and 
CR-
WASH 
infrastructure is 
built 
to 
withstand 
events and be 
maintained 
in 
the long-term. 
E1, E2, 
E3 and 
E5 
ARA3 
 Assess and update CR-WASH 
infrastructure designs.  
 Increased data management 
and knowledge generation.  
 Construction/upgrade 
of 
climate-resilient infrastructure.  
 Increased capacity to maintain 
and 
operate 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure in long-term. 
 Update 
CAP 
risk 
ranking 
process 
with 
CR-WASH 
aspects 
 Assessment of robust CR-
WASH interventions 
 Data management systems 
and dissemination enhanced.  
 Support RWCs to access 
CAP requests  
(Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 2.1.1, 
2.1.2, 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) 
Sea 
level 
Rise 
S1-2 
ARA2 
 
 Extension 
agents 
identify 
saltwater risks  
 Support 
RWCs 
develop 
DWSSPs to manage impact.  
 Training of trainers identify 
saltwater risk and support 
DWSSP designs.  
 Community level knowledge 
sharing, and capacity building  
(Activity 1.1.1 and 3.1.1) 
DWSSPs 
account 
for 
saltwater 
intrusion 
and 
other 
water 
sources

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 Improved 
community 
awareness on saltwater impact 
of se level rise 
(desalination 
infrastructure as 
a last resort). 
Infrastructure is 
in 
place 
in 
appropriate 
contexts 
to 
overcome 
saltwater 
contamination. 
S2 and 
S3 
ARA3 
 Assess and update CR-WASH 
infrastructure designs. 
 Construction/upgrade 
of 
climate-resilient infrastructure 
 CR-WASH designs account 
for saltwater intrusion 
 DWSSP design processes 
strengthened  
 CAP request support to RWC. 
(Activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 2.1.1 
and 2.1.2) 
 
53. 
Finally, the limited female representation within water governance and devolved utility authorities has 
been analysed in the Gender Assessment and Action plan (Annex 8). As a project co-benefit, increased 
gender representation is expected through 40% women participation in all registered RWCs by the end 
of the project. This will be primarily delivered through Outcome 1 (which will establish new DWSSPs and 
provide policy and climate training). The project will also ensure gender-balanced beneficiary distribution 
through the integration of gender-specific needs and priorities in the delivery of infrastructure and 
plumbers, community development and water committee management trainings (Outcome 2) and a 
gender balance in trainings on climate risks associated with water security (Outcome 3). 
 
54. 
Improved health and sanitation have also been identified as a co-benefit for this project, particularly 
through Outcome 2. By strengthening rural water systems, the project will have a positive impact on 
sanitation and health of rural communities, reducing the risk of vector-, water-borne diseases and 
malnutrition.     
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people 
and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, 
food
and 
water
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure
and 
built
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 ☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
55. 
The adaptation pathway proposed by this project will address the above three impacts through the 
following, interrelated outcomes:  
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water resources; 
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure; and, 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks 
associated with water security. 
 
56. 
This project will contribute to the second paradigm-shifting pathway in GCF’s Water Security Sectoral 
Guide: strengthening integrated water resources management and water management and will deliver 
on all two sub-areas: (i) preservation of existing water resources; and (ii) development of new water 
supply sources.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
38 GCF Water Project Design Guidelines (v 0.98 – 28 September 2021 – developed by Deltaeres). 
39 This was completed before the initiation of the project preparation stage in early 2021.  
 
57. 
This objective of the project, therefore, is to contribute to the management of water-related impacts from 
the above observed and projected climate change effects in Vanuatu. This project will address three 
water-related impacts from climate change in Vanuatu, which are increases in: (i) water-related disasters; 
(ii) areas suffering from water stress; and (iii) poor water quality-induced fatalities.
38  
 
58. 
The project will increase the adaptive capacity of rural communities to better cope with the additional 
burden of climate change on water security and safety by improving the current design criteria for 
DWSSPs (Outcome 1) and delivery of WASH infrastructure (through Outcome 2). This will be supported 
by Outcome 3 that will focus on capacity building of government institutions to enhance delivery of CR-
WASH infrastructure. Presented below is a summary description of project Outcomes, outputs and 
activities. For detailed breakdown of each Outcome and their sub-levels, please refer to Annex 2 
Feasibility Study. 
 
59. 
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate resilient water resources  
Rationale: see Section B2 Outcome 1 for more detail on the Outcome’s rationale. 
US$: 6.26 million (GCF US$ 5.64 million, co-finance US$ 617,400) 
Beneficiaries: 700 communities = 79,940 direct beneficiaries (including 39,970women), which is 25.2% 
of the total population of Vanuatu. These communities are selected at the provincial level based on 
prioritisation of most vulnerable communities to climate impacts. There are evaluated based on exposure 
to climate related impacts and current coping capacity of community systems to negative impacts.  
Complementarity with other Outcomes:  The Outcome will establish strengthened technical capacities 
across DoWR extension structures and within RWCs. This will strengthen integration of climate-resilience 
directly into DWSSP designs with a focus on adaption for resilience and long-term sustainability. The 
Outcome mutually reinforces Outcome 2, facilitating increased technical enhancement and knowledge 
transfer. Increased capacity in these areas enables greater consideration of climate considerations in 
water infrastructure investments.   
Outcome indicators: contributes directly to GCF Core Indicators 5 and 6 – see section E for further 
detail.   
 
This Outcome has two outputs, one focused on improving the DWSSPs methodology, while the other 
focuses on improving the design, implementation and management capacities of communities and local 
governance mechanisms.  
 
60. 
Output 1.1: New and existing DWSSPs incorporate incremental improvements to mainstream 
adaptation solutions 
There is an identified shortfall of design and engineering standards experienced by the DoWR – which 
combines with the above water-related hazards of climate variability. This proposed output will address 
this gap by analysing conventional design protocols in the Department and increase climate impact 
resilience by implementing simple changes to the design criteria, providing staff exposure and experience 
to enhance climate-resilient designs. See Annex 2 ‘Feasibility Study’ for detailed breakdown of 
technology design enhancements suggested through project formulation. These will be refined over 
project implementation.  
 
The DWSSP methodology has been updated recently.39 Through this project the methodology will be 
further updated with a specific focus on strengthening the mainstreaming of climate resilience. Annual 
incremental improvements will be applied to the methodology over implementation to account for 
experience-based learning in the enhancement process.  
 
In the new DWSSPs developed with communities, the updated methodology will be used to ensure 
climate risks are mainstreamed as per Output 1.3. For the existing DWSSPs technical assistance will be 
provided to ensure these plans are retrofitted to better reflect climate risks and adaptation solutions. The 
importance of this Output stems from the reality that although Vanuatu has seen overseas development 
assistance (ODA) or ODA-driven investments in the WASH sector, these are often ad-hoc in nature and 
have not been made in a climate-resilient way or central process updated to have rigorous climate 
resilient factors incorporated. The updated, existing DWSSPs and the new DWSSPs, will therefore 
provide a sector leading framework that will encourage and leverage additional investments in the sector.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
ACTIVITY  
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
1.1.1 - Implement DWSSPs 
processes that incorporate 
incremental improvements 
to mainstream adaptation 
solutions 
and 
update 
existing DWSSPs. Please 
refer to section 6.3 of Annex 
2 
Feasibility 
Study 
for 
details on DWSSP status 
across Vanuatu. 
1.1.1.1: Review uptake and delivery of updated methodologies, making 
incremental improvements annually. Incremental improvements will be made 
by reviewing and updating the DWSSP template and process on a yearly 
basis to incorporate climate resilient design standards and design criteria in 
the risk assessment and improvement plan sections of the DWSSP. There 
will be small improvements made each year taking into consideration 
additional data and lessons learnt from implementation of DWSSPs and CR 
WASH infrastructure during the year. International and local consultants will 
be recruited to work with a National Project Engineer (NPE) to, carrying out a 
gap analysis on the current methodology and analysing lessons learned from 
ongoing DWSSPs. Following the above assessments, the consultants and the 
NPE will update the methodology to mainstream climate resilience factors into 
the documentation and ensure all DWSSPs moving forward account for 
climate risks and impacts. Updated methodology will be presented to the 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) for approval at regular intervals to enable 
incorporation of lessons learned over the projects 5 years of implementation. 
This will ensure that by completion of the project the DoWR and DWSSP 
methodologies are strengthened based on international best practice and 
tailored through evidence-based feedback to account for local contexts. 
 
1.1.1.2: Integrate updated methodology into DWSSP processes. The NPE will 
provide training to DWSSP Facilitators at the national level. This will be 
conducted twice to accommodate facilitators covering all provinces. 1.1.1.3: 
Update existing DWSSPs, when appropriate. DoWR staff and provincial 
DWSSP facilitators will identify the 100 DWSSPs (of the 301 developed to 
date, please see Annex 2) most vulnerable to climate change through climate 
analysis and identification from the original documentation for updates to 
enhance the DWSSPs with new climate resilient factors. For cost efficiency 
this will be done through provincial level engagement with Provincial Area 
Councils at 3 intervals over the project. The remaining 201 DWSSPs will be 
updated by the DoWR through national processes post project. Upgrades will 
include enhancing the hazard risk assessments and improvement and 
preparedness plans as well as upgrading the climate change risk and 
improvement plan sections in alignment with the new DWSSP climate resilient 
methodologies.  
 
61. 
Output 1.2: Awareness, capacities and skills of communities and area administrators on climate-
resilient water management improved 
Resilience at the community level is key to ensuring beneficiaries receive sustainable water and 
sanitation services that can adapt to shocks and processes of change. The national/sub-national-level 
processes support coordination and service provision to the WASH sector, but it is the capacity of 
communities to manage their system that delivers the needed sanitation and security impacts in Pacific 
communities. Awareness and empowerment, as well as capacity and skill-building will improve the 
climate-resilience and sustainability of community WASH services and infrastructure in rural Vanuatu. 
The Output’s activities will be synergistic with, and build on, Output 1.1 activities by carrying out 
community level awareness and knowledge sharing campaigns to specifically enhance understanding of 
the importance of climate resilience and its incorporation into the DWSSP methodology. Further, climate 
vulnerability technical capacity training for area administrators within the government extension structure 
on climate resilient practices in the DWSSP processes will be held. This will enhance Area Council level 
technical understanding for development of new DWSSPs following the updated methodology in Output 
1.3. Through this process the three outputs are seen as fully complimentary, providing in Output 1.1) 
relevant updates to methodologies, in 1.2) relevant awareness raising and technical capacity building on 
climate resilient, and in Output 1.3) actively engaging and providing support in the development of 
DWSSPs. 
 
ACTIVITY  
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
1.2.1: 
Train 
area 
administrators and develop 
1.2.1.1: Conduct training targeting area administrators on climate vulnerability 
and risks and updated DWSSP methodology. This will carried out at the

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
40 https://mol.gov.vu/images/News-Photo/water/DoWR_File/Management_Plans/Vanuatu-NIP-Guide-annual-CAP-210818.pdf 
material for communities on 
climate vulnerability, risks 
and 
updated 
DWSSP 
methodology 
provincial level by facilitators, who will provide tailored training on climate 
vulnerability and its relevance to building climate resilience through the 
updated climate resilience updates in the DWSSP methodologies.  
1.2.1.2: Conduct training targeting communities on DWSSP processes, with 
interactive content and WASH advocacy materials. Technical knowledge on 
the impacts of climate change and solutions for climate resilience will be 
synthesised into appropriate learning material to be shared with communities 
by Area Councils, including easily comprehensible written documents 
(pamphlets and flyers for RWC to distribute) as well as through social media, 
and popular media (TV and radio) campaigns. 
 
1.2.2: Organize knowledge 
sharing events 
1.2.2.1: Organize community level knowledge sharing events to ensure 
widespread dissemination among communities. The Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Officer (MEL) and Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) 
officers will establish a community of practice for knowledge sharing and 
dissemination. This will include provincial forums held at intervals over the 
project to enhance the profile of climate resilience and showcase success 
stories and lessons learned.  
 
62. 
Output 1.3: Vulnerable communities are supported to develop and implement their DWSSPs (600 
DWSSPs by the end of the project cycle) 
The majority of WASH systems in the Pacific are isolated from government service provision and are 
managed by community committees. This is also the case for Vanuatu, establishing strong governance 
structures at grassroots levels that are accountable, with participatory decision-making mandates and 
are key to managing water resources safely in the country. The DWSSPs will provide a framework 
through which community-owned WASH infrastructure (new and/or improved) can be sustainably 
managed, localizing both priorities and interests. Through this output, the project will deliver the 600 
targeted DWSSPs, identified through the country-owned (DoWR-mediated) NIP process40. For a full 
description of the process please refer to Annex 23. In summary, a community request (triggering) is 
received at the Area Council or Provincial Government. Support to communities to develop DWSSPs is 
provided with a priority to the most vulnerable communities climate threats impacting their water security. 
This takes into consideration drought maps and local knowledge from Area Councils, National Disaster 
Management Office, Ministry of Health and other Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) partners. Once 
a community is selected the support is provided to conduct a DWSSP with the Rural Water Committee 
and other community members. Following this a vulnerability analysis to quantify climate risks in relation 
to water quantity and safety is carried out by the Provincial Water Resources Advisory Committee 
(PWRAC) to prioritise the sites. After communities have completed low cost improvement plan developed 
during the DWSSP workshop they will be eligible for CAP funding. RWC’s will be registered under the 
national and provincial RWC register (provincial RWC register to be established in this Output to filter 
into the National RWC register).   
 
As presented in Annex 2 section 6.3, approximately 2000 DWSSPs must be developed by 2030. To 
reach this target a minimum of 200 DWSSPs are required to be developed per year up to 2030. This 
exceeds the DoWR current capacity. This project will therefore provide resources to enhance the capacity 
of the DoWR over the project cycle to target an additional 600 DWSSPs. This Output will be conducted 
in years 1-3 of the project. This will enable the 600 developed DWSSPs to access the resources as 
described in Outcome 2 to carry out the required infrastructure works over the remaining implementation 
period for communities most in need under the context of climate vulnerability.  
 
The technical capacities provided by the project in terms of technical knowledge and human resources 
will be continued by the DoWR post project creating an enhanced enabling environment to carry out 
required operations at the scale needed. This in conjunction with institutional improvements also provided 
by the project (Outcome 3) will enhance efficiency in the process. This combined impact will enable the 
DoWR to have a long-term strategy and capacity to meet the 2030 target.  
 
ACTIVITY  
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
1.3.1 
Identify 
vulnerable 
communities through the 
1.3.1.1: Recruitment of provincial engineers – these positions will be 
embedded in the DoWR and will provide centralised technical support at the

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
NIP process to prioritize 
delivery of DWSSPs 
provincial level to assist with monitoring contractors facilitating the community 
DWSSP workshops, assist with provincial level climate resilient trainings, 
assist with detailed assessments to create designs and bills of quantities for 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure 
improvements 
and 
complete 
construction 
monitoring 
of 
contractors 
implementing 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure 
improvements (refer to CAP, Outcome 2)  
1.3.1.2: Refresher for community DWSSP facilitators halfway through the 
project to serve as a refresher training and to incorporate the various 
incremental improvements over the intervening implementation period 
incorporated under Output 1.1.  
1.3.1.3: Development of 600 DWSSPs informed by best-available climate 
science, local information and traditional knowledge. This includes a five day 
workshop/training at the community level, conducted by DWSSP facilitators, 
to engage with RWCs and community members to develop DWSSPs in an 
inclusive and representative manner. This is in alignment with the 
requirements under the Water Resources Management Act and shows 
alignment with national legislation and policies. The ESS Officer and 
Provincial Engineers will monitor the community DWSSP facilitator 
contractors to ensure DWSSPs are to standard including the climate risk 
assessments, ESS assessments and improvement plans and that 
communities are well trained to improve community climate resilience.  
1.3.1.4: Establish and register local water committees. Currently, there is no 
register at the provincial level. The project will establish an online register with 
the provincial governments to deliver this process.  
1.3.1.5: Support provided by Provincial Engineers and Provincial DoWR 
officers  to implement no and low-cost measures in communities. 
 
63. 
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced rural water infrastructure 
Rationale: see Section B2 Outcome 2 for more detail on the Outcome’s rationale. 
US$: 20.0 million (GCF US$16.09 million, co-finance US$ 3.97 million) 
Beneficiaries: 270 communities (including 220 already targeted by Outcome 1, and 50 additional ones) 
= 30,834 direct beneficiaries (including 25,124 from Outcome 1 and 5,710 additional ones); which is 8% 
of the total population in Vanuatu. Applications to the CAP have set prioritisation criteria for approvals 
with a focus on the most vulnerable and at need communities. These will be applied to all submitted 
proposals, meaning all selected beneficiaries for funding under this Outcome will be driven by 
vulnerability assessment.  
Complimentary with other Outcomes: As above, this Outcome is mutually reinforcing with Outcome 
1. The technical capacities put in place in Outcome 1 will ensure that CAP requests incorporate greater 
emphasis on climate-resilience in infrastructure designs. Ultimately, the two Outcomes combine to 
ensure improved planning and increased technical abilities to ensure that climate-resilience is directly 
incorporated into the GoV NIP process, resulting in greater operationalisation of CR-WASH systems 
across the country.  
Outcome indicators: contributes directly to GCF Core Indicators 6 – see section E for further detail.   
 
This Outcome forms the core investment required for a paradigmatic shift towards CR-WASH 
infrastructure in rural contexts of Vanuatu. There is one Output that will be delivered through two 
activities.  
 
64. 
Output 2.1: 270 vulnerable communities supported to construct, operate, and maintain climate-
resilient water infrastructure 
This Output will focus on delivering climate-resilient water infrastructure to 270 communities in Vanuatu. 
Provision of this WASH infrastructure will include: rehabilitation, upgrading, and/or expansion of rural 
drinking water supply systems to serve at least 270 communities. Collaboration with provincial 
governments, drinking water providers, and target communities will ensure reliable and sustainable 
potable water services. To ensure improvements are sustained, the project will aim to achieve two 
mutually reinforcing intermediate results, through this Output:  
i. 
Increase access to safely managed drinking water in rural Vanuatu through the rehabilitation or 
construction of small-scale infrastructure projects, identified through the country owned DWSSP and 
NIP processes

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
ii. Increase engagement of communities in management, oversight and accountability of drinking water 
service points and infrastructure (through, particularly, the RWCs). 
 
In 2014-2016, the national Water Resources Inventory (WRI) under DoWR, and UNICEF conducted a 
water point mapping that identified 4,097 water systems across 44 islands of which:  
• 
15% were Indirect Gravity Fed systems (IDGF), 
• 
20% Direct Gravity Fed systems and  
• 
65% Community Rainwater Harvesting systems. 
 
Only 79% of systems were identified as functional and only 37% of these systems were reported as 
providing water 24h/day daily, every day of the year.  
 
The CAP facility under the NIP does not have capacity to upgrade or build new CR-WASH infrastructure 
for all of the required infrastructure needs at present. This project aims to enhance CAP and institutional 
capacities in the DoWR and to contribute an additional 270 CAP investments over the project life cycle. 
Please see Table 8 below and Annex 4’s detailed budget notes for a detailed breakdown of planned 
infrastructure investments based on CAP and DoWR experiences to date. This is deemed the maximum 
level of support feasible considering the human resource and technical capacities conducting CAP 
operations at present plus the additional capacity provided by positions planned through this projects 
PMU. Noting the 270 is additional to the current CAP capacity which completed 100 investments in 2021 
expected to increase each year with efficiencies. With the enhanced institutional processes in place from 
Outcome 3 it is envisioned that this project will also increase capacity of the DoWR to roll out greater 
than 100 CAP requests a year post project. Targeting the most vulnerable communities to climate change 
through the improved assessment process.  
 
Table 8: average cost of investments through the CAP to date. 
System Type 
Average Cost (USD) - materials, shipping and labour 
Rainwater Harvesting System 
20,148 
Direct Gravity Fed System 
96,360 
Desalination 
91,980 
Indirect Gravity Fed System 
53,436 
 
 
The 270 communities targeted for this Output will be selected from those DWSSPs developed under 
Outcome 1 and will be financed by GCF resources through the DoWR managed CAP. DWSSPs will be 
selected for CR WASH infrastructure projects through the method described in the ‘Guide to the Capital 
Assistance Programme’. Please see Annex 22 sections 2.1 and 3.1 for pre-requisite conditions and list 
of eligibility criteria (these will be included in the Term Sheet and Annex 6 and will not be changed by 
through implementation) .  
Once a DWSSP is deemed to meet the prerequisites and eligibility criteria a request for CAP funding will 
be developed by the RWC with assistance from the Provincial Engineers, DoWR Provincial Officers, Area 
Councils and PWRAC members. The project is then submitted through the review and approval process, 
please see Annex 22 for full details. In summary the process: 
• 
Will check that each application contains all of the required documentation (application form and an 
approved DWSSP). 
• 
Will calculate the overall risk scores (safety and security) for each application (see Section 4.1 Annex 
22). 
• 
Will use the overall risk scores to categorise each new application (see Section 4.2 Annex 22). 
• 
Make adjustment to the category for community commitment (see Section 4.3 Annex 22). 
• 
On a quarterly basis, PWARC will prepare a summary report of applications awaiting financial 
assistance and submit to DoWR all applications for Category 6 and 5 [and possibly Category 4] 
communities for detailed works design and costing. 
• 
On an annual basis, complete the application form to the National Water Resources Advisory 
Committee (NWRAC), recommending the priorities for allocation of CAP funds 
• 
NWRAC will, on an annual basis, review and make decisions on which community improvements will 
proceed, within the annual budget it has allocated to each province. NWRAC will notify provincial 
government of these decisions.

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
• 
DoWR will then administer the funds, contracting relevant suppliers as necessary to implement the 
constructions and requisite trainings as detailed in Activity 2.1.2 below.   
 
To further support this process the project will assess the CAP criteria and upgrade the risk screening 
process to be more robust and provide a greater focus on climate vulnerability as described in sub activity 
2.1.1.1 below. Further, the ESS Officer will provide technical capacity support to the Provincial Engineers 
and DoWR Provincial officers to provide technical support to communities in the development of ESS 
screening and impact assessments (for those projects deemed category B, estimated at <5% of 
applications based on CAP applications to date) for CAP proposals, as per Activity 2.1.1.2 described 
below.   
 
Communities / water asset owners not covered by this project will be covered through updated CAP 
processes with alternative funding to meet the target National Sustainable Development Plan 2030 target 
of ‘Ensur[ing] all people have reliable access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure by 2030’ 
(100% coverage of the population).  
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
2.1.1: Improve CAP request 
prioritization, with gender 
and ESIA screening for 
chosen sites  
2.1.1.1: Assess and update multi-criteria analysis for risk ranking process to 
prioritize CAP requests to prioritise sites for infrastructure planning. Additional 
criteria will be included to those risk criteria presented in Annex 22 to enhance 
focus on climate vulnerability. The new criteria to be incorporated includes, 
flood risk, sea level rise, degraded forest areas, groundwater resources and 
saline intrusion assessments. On approval of the changes by the NPSC, 2 
trainings will be provided to provincial facilitators to highlight and explain 
these changes.  
2.1.1.2: Conduct relevant surveys, gender, environment and social 
safeguards screening and impact assessments in chosen sites. The ESS 
Officer, Provincial Engineers, National Engineer and DoWR provincial officers 
will assist communities/RWCs to conduct these activities.  
2.1.2: Upgrade CR WASH 
infrastructure, 
with 
adequate O&M training 
2.1.2.1: Construct and upgrade infrastructure for climate resilient water 
sources, distribution, and storage. Please refer to Annex 2 Feasibility Study 
Annex C for indicative list (and pictures) of climate resilient Infrastructure 
works to be financed through the CAP. This includes technologies such as 
concrete protection on spring sources, well head aprons, cyclone screws and 
tie downs, appropriate foundations for tanks, robust river crossing 
infrastructure, housing around tap and pipe stands, well covers, deep ground 
water wells (not shallow), relocation of wells from brackish water sources. 
These are a few examples and each CAP proposal will be assessed on an 
individual basis against proved CR-WASH designs.   
2.1.2.2: Train RWCs on operation and maintenance for the CR-WASH 
infrastructure.  The Water Resources Management Act states that the 
Minister must not establish a Rural Water Committee unless he or she is 
satisfied that the members of the committee have undertaken a: 
1. Community development training - technical training at community 
level, specifically focused on plumbers training and community 
mobilisation to understand, operate and maintain infrastructure.  
2. Water management and financial training – provided to the RWC to 
ensure effective and sustainable management of the infrastructure in 
the long term.  
These trainings are detailed in the budget and reflect the national regulation 
under the Water Resources Management Act and subsequent lump costs the 
DoWR have defined as minimum requirement for adequate training.  
 
65. 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks 
associated with water security  
Rationale: see Section B2 Outcome 3 for more detail on the Outcome’s rationale. 
US$: 0.893 (GCF US$ 0.718 million, 0.175 Co-financing). 
Beneficiaries: 2000 communities = Indirect beneficiaries: the entire rural population in Vanuatu (around 
216,980 individuals, which is 73% of the total population). The Outcome will strengthen institutional

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
capacities across Vanuatu’s WASH sector with a focus on rural communities. This is complimented by 
enhanced M&E and knowledge management, that will increase lessons learned and aid refinement of 
processes, methodologies, and engineering designs in the future. Consequently, the total rural population 
of Vanuatu will benefit from the Outcome.  
Complementarity with other Outcomes: Institutional capacity building under Output 3.1 will directly 
facilitate outputs under Outcome 1 by enabling improved knowledge transfer across extension structures 
in the WASH sector. Output 3.2 and 3.3 will facilitate greater communication across WASH sector 
partners and generate key lessons learned from the project. Under Output 3.3, there will be continual 
monitoring and evaluation on an annual basis which will allow adaptation of processes, engineering 
designs or implementation modalities. All of these factors will generate essential knowledge that will build 
into Outcomes 1 and 2 to enhance their success and contribute to sustainability in the long-term. 
Outcome indicator:  Contributes directly to GCF Core Indicators 5 – see section E for further detail. 
 
Outcome 3 will enhance institutional capacity at provincial and national level to ensure the effective and 
efficient delivery of the DWSSP and other related water management processes to manage the adverse 
effects of climate change. The expected outputs, along with activities, are listed below:  
 
66. 
Output 3.1: National and provincial-level staff and WASH sector partners trained on climate-
resilient water management 
This output will focus on providing training to different levels of staff within the water governance structure, 
as well as to WASH sector partners, to ensure climate change and management of climate risks are 
mainstreamed within existing processes of water safety and security. In doing so, it will deploy different 
types of training – from the provincial and key line ministry level, to WASH sector partners – ensuring 
stakeholders across the board (and in the WASH industry) are better able to deliver on Vanuatu’s 
emerging 
and 
ongoing 
needs 
related 
to 
climate-resilient 
water 
management. 
 
ACTIVITIES 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
3.1.1: 
Deliver 
enhanced 
administrative and technical 
capacity training for water 
management 
3.1.1.1: Train PWRAC and DoWR staff on updated DWSSP, climate risks and 
water management 
3.1.1.2: One engineer recruited in in each of the six target provinces hosted 
by the DoWR and providing humanitarian engineering assistance by 
enhancing technical capacity of engineering related to water infrastructure at 
community level.  
 
67. 
Output 3.2: Knowledge management through data sharing mechanism established for climate-
resilient water management 
This output will focus on knowledge management and will establish data sharing mechanisms available 
to the different stakeholders of the water and climate change sectors. Support, particularly, will be 
provided to WASH sector partners to be able to employ data for decision-making. One of GCF’s paradigm 
shifting pathway for water security is creating and sharing knowledge to harmonise valuation 
methodologies with climate risks built into financial decisions for sustainable development – this Output 
will contribute towards this pathway and indeed pioneer a robust, climate-water- specific KM for Vanuatu.  
 
ACTIVITIES 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
3.2.1: Improve knowledge 
management processes 
 
3.2.1.1: Review existing knowledge management and identify gaps to be 
strengthened 
3.2.1.2: Establish knowledge management protocol through consultative 
process 
3.2.2: Operationalize data 
sharing platform  
 
3.2.2.1: Integrate data collected through DWSSPs into government 
knowledge management platforms, such as DoWR Information Management 
System. 
3.2.2.1: Set and disburse relevant data management procedures to ensure 
data is compatible and aggregable within the system. 
3.2.1.2: Engage relevant stakeholders to support effective utilization of data 
for decision-making by WASH sector partners 
 
68. 
Output 3.3: Monitoring, learning and evaluation framework established for improved learning for 
climate-resilient water management

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
This output will establish a MEL system and contribute to the same paradigm shifting pathway for water 
security as the previous output (creating and sharing knowledge to harmonise valuation methodologies 
with climate risks built into financial decisions for sustainable development).  
Having a MEL system, particularly for the sanitation and hygiene sub-sector will measure and ensure 
that inputs and activities lead to their intended results and outcomes; to adjust course where necessary 
(during the project lifetime); and to establish whether progress is being made; and lastly, to document 
lessons learnt and best practices. This will tie in with the DoWR’s structure – which includes an M&E unit 
that keeps track of DWSSP progress and maintenance of system improvements.  
 
ACTIVITIES 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
3.3.1: Collate existing MEL 
practices 
within 
water 
governance structures in 
Vanuatu, and establish a 
robust MEL protocol 
3.3.1.1: Stocktake existing MEL processes, and collate lessons learnt, case 
studies, and best practices available  
3.3.1.2: Create an inventory of existing reports  
3.3.1.3: Introduce robust MEL protocol, identified through a consultative 
process  
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
 
69. 
The implementation arrangements are shown diagrammatically in Figure 5, which is followed by a 
narrative that provides the landscape of project oversight and supervision, elucidates the roles under 
each entity, and tracks how funds will flow if the proposed adaptation project is approved:  
 
Figure 5 - Visual representation of the project implementation arrangements including financial flows, technical 
assistance roles and reporting lines. 
 
70. 
Accredited Entity: SPC will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project. SPC was made a regional 
Direct Access Entity to the GCF in February 2019. SPC’s comparative advantage, as the AE for this 
project, lies in its:  
 
extensive ties with Pacific Islands governments, administrations, agencies, and partners in all Pacific 
Island Countries.

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
presence of SPC’s Melanesian Regional Office, which is hosted in Vanuatu, creating close linkages 
at country level that will enable greater communication between SPC and the PMU.  
 
broad mandate on urgent development issues in the Pacific, including water, disaster-risk reduction, 
climate change and environmental sustainability, gender and human rights.  
 
large funding base with multi-lateral and bilateral donors, allowing for co-financing options, cost 
sharing and combined programmatic funding.  
 
extensive international partnerships which range from UN agencies to other IGOs, NGOs and civil 
society groups at grassroots level, including in Vanuatu.  
Within SPC, the AE functions will be undertaken by the Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability 
programme, which hosts the Climate Finance Unit (CFU), SPC’s focal point with the GCF. The CFU’s 
role in the project will focus on oversight and quality assurance of project management and delivery in 
alignment with obligations agreed upon with the GCF through relevant financing and legal agreements. 
The primary roles of the AE include:  
• 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the GoV in its capacity as EE for execution;  
• 
reviewing financial expenditures and progress reports submitted by the EE to ensure that GCF 
financial obligations are met in prior instalments to allow for subsequent disbursements;  
• 
providing technical guidance as needed to ensure appropriate technical quality is applied to all 
Project activities as well as reporting outputs;  
• 
submitting all relevant documentation to meet reporting obligations to the GCF (financial reporting, 
Annual Progress Reporting, Audits, Mid-term Report, Terminal Evaluation Report);  
• 
ensuring the project complies with the terms agreed in the project’s respective FAA as well as the 
AMA signed between SPC and the GCF;  
• 
ensuring that the project is implemented in line with its environmental and social safeguards 
classification; and 
• 
undertaking regular annual supervision missions according to the SPC’s guidelines. 
 
71. 
Executing Entity: SPC will also be an EE for project acting through the Geoscience, Energy and 
Maritime (GEM) Division for the project. Within GEM, the Disaster and Community Resilience 
Programme (DCRP) is a key technical pillar of the division and develops, implements and supports 
coordination of innovative applied science and technical action to respond to challenges faced by 
communities, as well as repeated disaster risks, in the Pacific region.  
 
The DCRP will be essential in enabling community resilience through CR-WASH in Vanuatu given the 
breadth of its targeted work in disaster risk reduction initiatives alongside climate change adaptation, 
water security and sanitation, hazard and risk understanding, Ridge-to-Reef solutions and natural 
resource management. Further, the DCRP leads the SPC’s efforts in operationalising the Framework for 
Resilient Development in the Pacific (FRDP) through the provision of coordinated technical support to 
our members. As such SPC through the DCRP is well placed to execute the project. 
 
As EE, SPC will coordinate actions to ensure the project is adequately staffed and supported to efficiently 
implement the project. More specifically, the EE will oversee tasks within the overall project management 
structure consisting of:  
• 
contracting PMU staff (Project Manager, National Project Engineer, Administrative Assistant and 
Environment and Social Safeguards Officer); 
• 
providing guidance to support the PMU in alignment with the direction of the National Project Steering 
Committee (NPSC); 
• 
supporting the PMU to ensure that all project-level reporting outputs are prepared in a timely manner 
and in alignment with GCF requirements; 
• 
conclude and manage contracts of suppliers and services providers;  
• 
quality assurance and enhancement of project-level reports submitted by the PMU; 
• 
ensuring implementation of activities are in alignment with the project work plan; and, 
• 
coordinating and facilitating project level audits in alignment with GCF obligations.  
• 
In its role as EE SPC, will enter into a Letter of Agreement (LoA) with UNICEF, pursuant to which 
UNICEF will provide technical assistance for specific activities identified in the LoA. This agreement 
will detail and legally define UNICEF’s roles and responsibilities as the Lead Technical Partner for 
the project.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
SPC (GEM) as EE will execute all activities through the Project Manager, who will be contracted as a 
project position, and will provide technical support to DoWR on activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.2.2, .1.3.1, 2.1.1, 
3.1.1, 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.3.1 
 
72. 
Executing Entity: The Government of Vanuatu (GoV) will be the Executing Entity for the Project 
acting through the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and 
the National Water Resources Advisory Committee (NWRAC)  
 
The Ministry of Finance – will receive GCF resources from the AE and allocated these into the CAP 
accounts to be administered by the DoWR.  
 
The DoWR - housed within the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources, is the focal government 
institution and responsible for activity execution for this project. It is. The DoWR oversees the provision 
of safe, secure and sustainable management of community water supplies, protection of water resources, 
catchment 
management, 
and 
WASH 
disaster 
programs.  
 
The DoWR coordinates rural water supply scheme improvement plans, driven through the National 
Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Community Drinking Water (NIP). The NIP process and 
integrated plans is the primary mechanism to which water systems must comply, and through which 
efficient and effective delivery of improvement services is mobilised. Through this, DWSSPs are planned 
for over 2,000 communities across Vanuatu. In many cases the implementation of these plans is beyond 
the financial capacities of the communities. The DoWR therefore administers the CAP under the decision-
making authority of the NWRAC to support these communities in carrying out their DWSSPs through 
provision 
of 
financial 
support 
for 
infrastructure 
construction 
or 
upgrades.  
 
The Department is also the lead coordinator of the Vanuatu WASH Cluster, with DoWR acting as 
secretariat and chair during emergencies. The Vanuatu WASH cluster is very active due to the high 
number of emergencies that the country experiences, and the DoWR is experienced in responding to 
water access and security issues during disaster and other fast-onset climate events.  
 
Considering the above, the DoWR will have multiple roles in the implementation of this project: i) co-
chairing the Project Steering Committee, ii) administering the funds of the CAP, and iii) housing the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) to ensure strong alignment of project implementation to national 
processes, strategies and regulation, whilst facilitating learning and ensuring strong national ownership. 
The DoWR will therefore carryout the following tasks related to project execution:  
• 
contracting PMU staff (Provincial Project Engineers, Provincial Coordinator, Finance Officer, 
Procurement Officer and the Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Officer) 
• 
manage funds within the CAP accounts (for GCF resources these will be under a separate 
ledger account to ensure traceability of resources);  
• 
on approval of CAP funding the DoWR will administer the funds of the CAP, contracting and 
managing relevant services providers to carry out constructions at a local level and engaging with 
provincial engineers to ensure that the works are carried out to standard and in alignment with 
strengthened design specifications under Output 2; 
• 
providing guidance to support the PMU in alignment with the direction of the National Project 
Steering Committee (NPSC); 
• 
supporting the PMU to ensure that all project-level reporting outputs are prepared in a timely 
manner and in alignment with GCF requirements; and, 
• 
ensuring implementation of activities are in alignment with the project work plan. 
 
The GoV, acting through the DoWR, will execute all activities through the provincial engineers, provincial 
coordinators and other relevant PMU officers, who will be contracted as project positions. They will 
participate in the implementation of activities 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.2.2, .1.3.1, 2.1.1, 3.1.1, 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.3.1. 
 
The AE will enter into a subsidiary grant agreement with the GoV pursuant to which the AE will on-grant 
GCF Proceeds for the implementation of the activities by the GoV, acting through its DoWR, MoF and 
NWRAC. 
   
73. 
Project implementation: This section will elaborate the different governance mechanisms for project 
execution, coordination and oversight.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
41 MFAT is a long-standing partner of DoWR and funder of WASH sector initiatives in Vanuatu.  
42 At least one technical partner representative must be from a NGO/CSO focused on gender rights and empowerment. 
 
74. 
National Project Steering Committee: A National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will be formally 
established as a part of the inception workshop for the project and will be co-chaired by the Director of 
the DoWR and the NDA (or their nominated representatives). The NPSC will include the DoWR Director, 
the NDA, UNICEF Vanuatu Field Office, representative from the Vanuatu Association of NGO’s, 
representative from Department of Women’s Affairs, and a representative of the Ministry of Local 
Authorities of the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
In addition, representatives from the AE, EE, the Project Manager, the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (MFAT) Vanuatu WASH Coordinator41, and selected technical partners (identified at 
inception) will be included in the NPSC as observers42. The PMU will act as the Secretariat for the NPSC. 
The NPSC will provide implementation guidance, strategic support and financial and procedural oversight 
to the project. Specifically, the NPSC will:  
• 
provide strategic guidance and implementation oversight of the Project through review of progress 
and evaluation reports and provision of recommendations to the PMU for improved implementation;  
• 
provide guidance and direction on cross-cutting issues which require consensus from the various 
stakeholders involved in the Project;  
• 
ensure that institutional strengthening through the activities is consistent with the Project’s overall 
objective as well as national policies and strategies; 
• 
facilitate full cooperation of various stakeholders under their jurisdictions to provide access and 
support to the Project team in carrying out their tasks; 
• 
represent the interests of civil society and communities derived through NDA and DoWR bilateral 
dialogues; 
• 
approve the project's administrative, financial, accounting and operations manual;  
• 
approve the project's Annual Work Program and Budgets (AWPB); and, 
• 
ensure complementarity with other GCF-funded projects in the country. 
 
The NPSC will act in accordance with best practices and standards for governing bodies and ensure that 
the PMU delivers expected results with best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and 
effectiveness. The NPSC will meet at least annually, as well as maintain regular contact with the AE, EE 
and PMU as needed on an ad hoc basis.  
 
75. 
National Water Resources Advisory Committee: is an independent committee appointed by the 
Minister for Land and Natural Resources and is chaired by the DoWR and acts on the behalf of the GoV. 
As per Annex 22, the final decision for the approval of investments funded through the CAP will rest with 
the NWRAC.  NWRAC will, on an annual basis, review and make decisions on which community 
improvements will proceed, within the annual budget it has allocated to each province. NWRAC will notify 
the DoWR and provincial government of these decisions. On approval, the DoWR will then administer 
the GCF resourced investments through the PMU.  
 
76. 
Lead Technical Partner: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) is one of the key players of the 
WASH sector in Vanuatu (and other Pacific islands), working with governments to achieve universal and 
equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all. UNICEF’s approach is to strengthen 
national systems and capacity through a mix of community-based activities and collection of evidence. 
UNICEF Pacific’s expertise and experience will be valuable to the project as the organization, in 
partnership with the government and civil society organisations, works primarily on the rights of children 
to survival and development through improved drinking-water, sanitation and hygiene behaviour.  
 
Notably, several UNICEF Vanuatu-led assessments of the WASH sector, and WASH infrastructure have 
been used to inform the project design. Further, UNICEF has actively been engaged in the NIP processes 
and delivery of DWSSP and CAP capacity building activities at both facilitator and community level.  SPC, 
as an EE, will enter into a Letter of Agreement with UNICEF, pursuant to which UNICEF, as Lead 
Technical Partner (LTP) will support the PMU in the delivery of technical assistance and capacity building 
activities. Specifically, in relation to sub activities 1.1.1.1, 1.1.1.2, 1.2.1.1,1.2.1.1, 1.3.1.1, 1.2.1.2, 1.2.2.1, 
2.1.1.1, 3.1.1.1, 3.2.1.1, 3.2.2.1, and 3.2.1.2. In addition to this, UNICEF as LTP will provide technical 
recommendations to the PMU over implementation to ensure alignment (but not overlap) with ongoing

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
UNICEF and WASH Partner operations in the sector. This will include, but is not limited to, providing 
advice on AWPBs for submission to the NPSC for approval. UNICEF’s role in implementation of these 
activities as well as recipient of funds will be governed by a Letter of Agreement with SPC in its capacity 
as EE.   
 
77. 
Project Management Unit: The PMU will be established under the Subsidiary Agreement between the 
SPC and the GoV. Staff will be contracted by DoWR or SPC, who will manage and support the PMU as 
described above. On implementation matters, the PMU will carry out AWPBs (in consultation with the 
LTP as a long-standing WASH sector support agency  in the country) in alignment with NPSC approved 
documentation. Further, the PMU will be embedded within the DoWR to allow the Department to play a 
central role in guiding implementation of project activities in line with country regulations, policies, 
processes, and local contexts. Project implementation will be strongly aligned with national water safety 
and sanitation execution processes, with national and provincial DoWR staff providing guidance on the 
activity level. This will ensure more effective implementation through enhanced knowledge transfer 
between PMU staff and DoWR extension agents both formally and tacitly through day-to-day interactions. 
 
The PMU will consist of various positions hired by both EEs in an open competitive process. The selection 
and recruitment PMU staff by SPC will follow SPC recruitment practices and be done in close consultation 
with the DoWR, who will provide no objection to Terms of Reference and will provide a country 
representative to participate in the interview panel. All positions will be advertised at local levels and 
preference will be given to local applicants if they meet the positions criteria. These positions include:  
 
Project Manager– will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the PMU, within the parameters 
laid down by the NPSC through the approved AWPBs and in alignment with their guidance and 
recommendations. They will also be responsible for monitoring project risks and maintaining the project 
risk log and will ensure regular communication with all selected service providers, CSO organisation and 
provincial governments in target locations. This will ensure smooth feedback across all project 
stakeholders and facilitate implementation as needed.  With support from PMU members as required, 
the Project Manager will draft and finalise i) AWPBs and other relevant documentation for NPSC approval 
and ii) all reports required to meet GCF obligations under the FAA. Overall, it is the Project Manager’s 
responsibility to ensure efficient and effective implementation of the project.  This role will be recruited 
as a project position by SPC GEM. 
 
Project Administrative Assistant – will support the PMU through carrying out all necessary 
administrative tasks required for the smooth operation of the project. They will also carry out secretariat 
roles for organisation for NPSC meetings and ad hoc communications as needed.  This role will be 
recruited as a project position by SPC GEM. 
 
National Project Engineer (NPE) – will review DWSSP and CAP proposals with a focus on the 
infrastructure design works to be conducted under the project. They will assess infrastructure designs 
recommended by the DoWR and provide technical updates to enhance climate resilience in design 
guidelines as necessary. Capacity building sessions will also be provided to support DoWR engineers 
and enhance their technical knowledge. In addition to technical assistance, the National Project Engineer 
will act as the focal point for provincial engineers, supporting them on highly technical designs and serving 
as quality assurance for DWSSP and CAP proposals. This role will be recruited as a project position by 
SPC GEM, in consultation with the LTP.  
 
Provincial Engineers– six provisional engineers/water management specialists will be locally hired and 
will support the NPE in engaging with relevant RWCs to provide technical support on DWSSPs and CAP 
proposal designs. They will also work closely with provincial officials, selected service providers and 
relevant stakeholders to monitor construction and implementation of infrastructure and DWSSPs. 
Monitoring information and data will be coordinated in alignment with the MEL officer and the projects 
M&E plan. These roles will be recruited as a project positions by the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
Provincial Coordinator – will be responsible for liaising with the Provincial Engineers and the National 
Project Engineer, identifying areas of support required for the provincial operations and ensuring 
equitable division of technical assistance between them. He/she will support the MEL Officer in 
coordinating data collection and aggregation for monitoring and evaluations and support the Finance 
Officer with liaising with relevant provincial staff for financial figures and reporting from the provincial 
level. Further, he/she will interact with the PWRACs and facilitate the submission of provincial

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
submissions to the NWARC, acting as the focal point to ensure equitable spread in submissions targeting 
GCF resources.  This role will be recruited as a project position by the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
Project Finance Officer – will be responsible for supporting the Project Manager in managing the project 
budget and tracking finances in compliance with GCF obligations signed under the FAA and will 
contribute to the drafting of AWPBs. They will work in close collaboration with DoWR finance officers and 
provide technical advice and support on through capacity building to DoWR staff throughout project 
implementation. This role will be recruited as a project position by the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
Procurement Officer – ensures that all contracts and goods and services procured through the use of 
project funds are in alignment with GCF procurement standards. He/she will work closely with the Project 
Engineer who will have the technical knowledge to advice on the procurement of technical equipment 
and materials as well as the experience and skill sets of service providers targeted for works.   This role 
will be recruited as a project position  by the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
Project Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Officer – will ensure that the M&E plan is followed and 
implemented on schedule, liaising with Provincial Engineers/Water Specialists on a regular basis. He/she 
will make sure all data collection and monitoring of IRMF and project-level targets in the logical framework 
and gender action plan is carried out in a timely and effective manner for reporting to GCF and the NPSC 
within appropriate timeframes. Further, the MEL officer will utilise this data to create learning products 
for dissemination and support the Project Manager in drafting any reports as needed. To facilitate this, 
he/she will also engage directly with PWRACs to gain feedback from local stakeholders and incorporate 
this into lessons learned for adaptive management. T This role will be recruited as a project position  by 
the Government of Vanuatu. 
 
Project Environment and Social Safeguards Officer – will support project implementation through 
providing technical assistance to enhance ESS (including gender related topics) into enhance DWSSP 
design processes, supporting training of extension agents and RWC proponents on ESS (including 
Gender) integration into DWSSPs and supporting the MEL Officer in conducting relevant monitoring and 
evaluation of project implementation against the ESMP and GAAP.  This role will be recruited as a project 
position by SPC GEM as the EE. 
 
78. 
The PMU may hire ad-hoc experts from local and international sources identified based on project needs, 
with the concurrence of the NPSC, to provide adaptive management support. Agencies and service 
providers specialized in WASH in Vanuatu, and other specialized entities will be linked to the PMU 
through this modality. The PMU will provide the NPSC with semi-annual progress reports and close its 
operations when the final project terminal evaluation report and other documentation required by the 
GCF and the SPC has been completed and submitted to the NPSC. 
 
79. 
Provincial Rural Water Advisory Committees (PWRACs):  At the local-level, PWRAC will coordinate 
closely with provincial entities (such as WASH officers, Area Administrators and service providers) and 
committees (such as existing Rural Water Committees – RWCs, and new RWCs established during the 
project cycle through the new DWSSPs) to select communities for DWWSSP development, carryout risk 
ranking to assess DWSSPs for consideration to CAP access, ensure smooth ground coordination in 
project implementation, provide ownership and ensure sustainability. The PWARCs will not have binding 
execution capacity but will be key in this context. 
 
They will facilitate stakeholder understanding of the roles, functions, and responsibilities provided by the 
Project, including accessibility and accountability mechanisms to ensure conflict resolution as well as 
publishing the grievance redressal at local levels throughout the project implementation phase. Provincial 
stakeholders will be engaged throughout implementation and will provide feedback on the progress of 
the project to enable adaptive project management in response to the needs and priorities of the 
communities.  
 
80. 
Service Providers: The PMU will recruit and work with Service Providers at the activity level. Service 
Providers will be selected through a procurement process, in alignment with policies and procedures 
compliant with SPC’s policies, and will be managed by the Procurement and Finance Officer in the PMU. 
The Service Providers will receive funds, upon successful delivery and acceptance by the Project 
Manager that the conditions of their recruitment have been fulfilled.  Service providers will be recruited 
by the Government of Vanuatu under subsidiary agreements in its capacity as EE.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
43
 List 
of 
WASH 
Vanuatu 
WASH 
Cluster 
Partners 
can 
be 
found 
at: 
https://events.gov.vu/4w/index.php?action=partners&PHPSESSID=sghct5bh5cprfpfcgh14tlmnvm  
44 The GLAAS report can be accessed here: http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/glaas-report-2017/en/  
 
81. 
WASH Partners: The purpose of Vanuatu WASH Sector Partners is to ensure the adequacy, coherence 
and effectiveness of overall humanitarian outcomes by mobilising all stakeholders in the WASH sector. 
The WASH Sector is led by the DoWR and co-led by UNICEF and is made up of Partners43 deemed as 
crucial in the sector. These partners are expected to support the DoWR and UNICEF in facilitating the 
Sector objectives and activities, and to meet on a regular basis to share information and set priority 
activities for the Sector. Considering this remit and their ongoing work in the water sector in Vanuatu, the 
WASH Partners are deemed as an important group to provide technical guidance and enhance planning 
and coherence in the sector. They WASH Sector will meet regularly and coordinate with DoWR as the 
EE, providing feedback and advice on project operations (but will not have any implementation of 
decision-making authority related to the project). Similarly, the DoWR will provide guidance and updates 
to the WASH Sector Partners on the ongoing operations of the project.  
 
82. 
Flow of Funds: On successful completion of conditions precedent to disbursement listed in the Project 
FAA, GCF will disburse funds to the AE. The SPC in its capacity as AE will then disburse funds to the 
DoWR as EE. Further, SPC, in its capacity as EE, will transfer funds to UNICEF as LTP (as a pre-selected 
technical partner) for provision of specific technical assistance activities detailed under the LoA, in 
alignment with the first AWPB approved by the NPSC at inception. Resources will be used to staff the 
PMU, secure service providers and goods/materials for implementation of activities.  
 
All subsequent allocations and disbursements will be requested by the PMU based on AWPBs approved 
by the NPSC. The AE will make subsequent allocations and disbursements to the EE only in the case 
that previous instalments have been utilised in accordance with the GCF financial obligations and 
reported in Annual Progress Reports. Once there is consensus on the previous instalments financial and 
technical reporting, and on approval of the AWPB by the NPSC for the forthcoming disbursement request, 
the latter will be accepted and communicated to the EE. Following which disbursement will be made.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
83. 
This section presents the financial barriers preventing the Government of Vanuatu from transitioning to 
CR-WASH in rural and remote contexts, and then presents conclusions from Annex 3 – Economic and 
Financial Analysis to demonstrate how the GCF funding will be mobilized for different Outcomes and 
the cost-benefit analysis of such adaptation investments. 
 
84. 
Financial barriers: the DoWR has limited resources available for WASH in general, and is even more 
constrained for delivering climate-resilient water management and infrastructure. The latest GLAAS 
report44 determined that the average national expenditure globally on WASH is $50 per capita or 1.27% 
of GDP. Vanuatu faces multiple constraints, leading an average expenditure of only $8 per capita or 
0.26% of GDP, well below the global average. Over 90% of Vanuatu’s WASH activities are funded by 
external agencies (particularly international donors), and less than 10% is through government budgets. 
The additional burden from climate change on the WASH sector exacerbates the limited public resources, 
and there are currently no dedicated financing options from the public and private sector to cope with 
increasing climate change impacts on water security and safety for rural communities in Vanuatu.  
 
85. 
It is increasingly difficult for water security and safety programmes to make lasting and climate-resilient 
improvements because of the frequency and intensity of natural hazards. It is estimated that disasters 
caused by natural hazards cost Vanuatu’s economy tens of millions of dollars a year. Funds are needed 
to repeatedly rebuild and recover after such hazards, directing resources away from long-term resilience-
building activities. There are few sources of funding from the private sector for the proposed activities, as 
water is a public good under Vanuatu law and fully managed by rural communities.  
 
86. 
Funding from GCF will allow the Government of Vanuatu to achieve a paradigm shift towards climate 
resilient water management for rural communities. To break the cycle of building and rebuilding, whether 
because of inadequate infrastructure or natural hazard impacts, this project proposes a strengthened 
approach that incorporates risk management and climate change resilience from the outset following 
government-owned and -led processes. By providing lasting, climate-resilient water security and safety 
solutions that communities can select and be trained to implement and maintain, this project will enable

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
45 Please see the RISCON database here: https://exchange.riscon.solutions/dwssp/  
communities to better prepare for and recover from climate-induced disasters and will allow stretched 
government 
budgets 
to 
be 
directed 
to 
other 
important 
needs.  
 
87. 
Funding from GCF will also ensure that government-owned and -led processes to deliver climate-
innovative and climate-resilient WASH infrastructure increases the efficiency of the DWSSP 
methodology, which has been proven in the years of its implementation. For instance, communities that 
have already formulated their DWSSPs have spent almost USD 1 million of their own resources on no- 
and low-cost improvements.45 Grant financing from the GCF is justified for this project because of the 
extreme vulnerability of Ni-Vanuatu communities to both climate change and natural disasters, and the 
lack of resources at all levels (local, provincial, national) to deal with projected climate change impacts. 
 
88. 
Summary of economic and financial analysis:  
Measure 
Baseline 
Project alternative 
  
Tariff 
required to 
achieve 
IRR=WACC 
% monthly 
income 
% 
ability 
to pay 
Minimum tariff 
(= ability to pay 
or OPEX 
coverage) 
% 
monthly 
income 
% ability 
to pay 
M1 - Rainwater 
harvesters 
 $ 38.30  
22% 
657% 
 $ 5.83  
3% 
100% 
M2 - Direct gravity 
fed system 
 $ 89.50  
52% 
1,536% 
 $ 6.00  
4% 
103% 
M3 - Water 
desalination 
systems  
 $ 214.00  
125% 
3,674% 
 $ 15.00  
9% 
257% 
M4 – IDGF systems 
 $ 104.50  
61% 
1794% 
 $ 12.00  
7% 
206% 
A financial analysis for each of the four measures was carried out. The IRR and NPV was determined for 
two cases: 1) finance provided by commercial sources including a loan (80%) and equity (20%) from the 
developer and 2) finance provided through a grant from the GCF and “equity” from an investor (donor or 
government). The tariff was adjusted to produce, a) an Initial Rate of Return (IRR) equal to the Weighted 
Average Cost of Capital (WACC) , and, b) either a tariff set at the maximum ability to pay (665 
VUV/month/household) or a tariff that would be sufficient to cover the OPEX for the technology in 
question. The results are summarized below: 
 
In all cases the monthly household tariff that would be required for a commercial loan-based investment 
would be many orders of magnitude beyond what household can pay. In the project alternative, with 
GCF grant funding, the necessary tariffs (to, at a minimum, cover OPEX costs) are higher than the 
reported ability to pay for M2, M3 and M4. Since these investments are seen as a public good these 
additional costs will be covered by public funds. 
An economic analysis of the project was performed to assess the incremental adaptation benefits to 
climate change. This analysis combines all three measures, scaled-up to the envisaged number of 
investments that could potentially be financed by the project. Additionally, the project-level analysis 
takes into account the entire proposed project budget including the costs of all the Outcomes (i.e. non-
investment Outcomes as well) and project management costs and co-finance. 
 
89. 
The following table presents the project-level cost-benefit analysis that consolidates all three previously 
elaborated adaptation measures and includes the non-investment part of the project budget. The 
discount rate of 12% was used throughout the entire analysis.

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
Table 9: Project-level cost-benefit analysis 
Label 
Unit 
Source of information 
Total 
Year 
Costs 
M1 - CAPEX costs  
USD 
M1 - Rainwater harvesters 
 $      2,981,904  
M2 - CAPEX costs 
USD 
M2 - Direct gravity fed system 
 $      6,648,840  
M3 - CAPEX costs  
USD 
M3 
- 
Water 
desalination 
systems  
 $       367,920  
M4 - CAPEX costs  
USD 
M4 - IDGF- systems 
 $      2,618,364  
Total  
USD 
Calculated 
 $     12,617,030  
Other project costs  
Total non-investment project costs 
USD 
Project proposal  
$    15,672,986 
Percentage of funds utilisation - 
project lifetime distribution  
% 
 Assumption   
  
Total 
non-investment 
project 
costs 
USD 
Calculated  
$    15,672,986 
Total investment costs 
USD 
Calculated 
  $12,617,028 
Total project costs  
USD 
Calculated 
 $28,209,014  
 
Benefits  
M1 - benefits 
USD 
M1 - Rainwater harvesters 
 $          12,153,815  
M2 - benefits 
USD 
M2 - Direct gravity fed system 
  $        58,917,056 
M3 - benefits  
USD 
M3 
- 
Water 
desalination 
systems  
 $             526,844  
M4 - benefits 
USD 
M4 - IDGF-systems 
 $          19,310,424  
Total benefits  
USD 
Calculated 
 $          91,000,000  
 
Net costs / benefits 
USD 
Calculated  
 $88,591,877  
EIRR 
% 
Calculated  
20% 
ENPV 
USD 
Calculated  
 $37,150,065  
Net costs / benefits per year 
USD / year 
Calculated  
 $3,543,675  
 
90. 
The results clearly show that the project-level ENPV is positive, USD 37,150,065 and the programme-
level EIRR is 20%. The conclusion is that the proposed programme is economically viable and can be 
justified on economic grounds, even with the non-investment budget costs and co-finance for which no 
direct benefits are envisaged. It is also noteworthy that the analysis included conservative assumptions 
and not all benefits have been included in the economic calculations since it was not possible to estimate 
their monetary values, but these benefits would nonetheless occur under the proposed interventions.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
91. 
The exit strategy for this project ensures that the barriers to climate resilience are overcome sustainably, 
so that project outcomes and processes continue beyond the planned project implementation period. 
Recognizing the importance of long-term sustainability, the project has been designed from the outset to 
align incentives between key stakeholders (through extensive consultation processes both during the 
conception and preparation phase – see Annex 7 for more details), strengthen and design delivery 
capacity and promote the long-term flow of financial resources in support of project objectives of improved 
climate resilience and water security in Vanuatu. 
 
92. 
From the outset, the long-term sustainability of the project approach is ensured through the fact that it 
is building on and operating through existing government structures and programmes, rather than one-
off project-specific processes. This includes the NIP framework, CAP investment programme and the 
DWSSP process, through which the project activities will be implemented. This prevents the creation of 
parallel structures and processes that only last for the duration of the project, instead operating through 
existing government structures and processes that have been in place before the project’s 
conceptualisation and will continue to function after project conclusion, integrating lessons learned and 
best practices from the project. Moreover, the embedding of the PMU within the DoWR ensures that

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
project activities are carried out in alignment with government activities. The strong government 
ownership of the NIP, CAP and DWSSP processes mean that the project approach will be continued 
beyond the project lifespan.   
 
93. 
The project is envisaged to run for 5 years, and will reach all rural communities through improved 
institutional processes (Outcome 3), 600 communities with new, and 100 with updated, climate-resilient 
DWSSPs and low-costs adaptation activities (Outcome 1), and 270 communities with infrastructure 
upgrades (Outcome 2). These communities will then have long-term, climate-resilient water security 
and improved knowledge of climate risk management. The project will build technical capacity of the 
communities to undertake maintenance of the climate-resilient infrastructure (as part of Outcome 2). 
This means that after completion of the the GCF-funded activities, the communities will be empowered 
to operate and maintain their water security and safety infrastructure, and they will still be able to 
access government-funded support through the improved TAP and CAP.  
 
94. 
The project will also provide training to community facilitators, water officers and other members of the 
water governance structures, who will be up-skilled and empowered to continue to work in the WASH 
sector and better address risks and impacts from climate change, thereby enhancing the overall 
capacity of the sector. In particular, this will improve the outcomes of the already existing NIP, CAP and 
DWSSP processes, ensuring that they will continue to deliver climate-resilient water security benefits 
beyond the lifespan of the project and outside of project-specific communities. The project also creates 
a positive feedback loop between adoption of climate-resilient water management and water 
governance structures by mobilising existing, government-owned processes. The project interventions 
are designed to reduce vulnerability to climate risks and burdens on water sector, which then provides 
a direct impetus to communities (who will be trained) to maintains system improvements to existing 
WASH infrastructure as well new WASH infrastructure. Additionally, an Operation and Maintenance 
Plan (Annex 21) has been designed as a part of the preparation phase, which has reviewed existing 
standards, and maintenance protocols. This will be mobilized in the implementation stage as well.  
 
95. 
At the local level, the project has been designed through a participatory process involving all 
stakeholders, including water governance actors at the local level (municipal governments, 
departmental governments, chiefs and local governance bodies), local communities and beneficiaries. 
This ensure that the actions proposed in the project are socially viable, having built stakeholder 
ownership from the outset of the project design process. Likewise, the project contemplates effective 
local inclusion and participation in governance and decision-making during project implementation, 
through full recognition of the rights of women, men, and youth living in remote and rural communities. 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan provides more details on the gender-specific 
approaches and benefits that will be realised under the project.  
 
96. 
By being fully integrated into existing national programmes, and in line with national policies and 
strategies of Vanuatu, as indicated in the table below, the project’s outcomes and outputs will be 
sustained through central government funding that will continue to be provided, including for monitoring. 
At the same time, this project will be transformative by leveraging the very small amount of public funds 
used for water security and safety programmes. By addressing primarily the rural population, this project 
will ensure climate resilience is included in existing programs and allow government to include a focus 
on monitoring and maintenance rather than merely on service delivery.  
Table 10: Legislation, policies and plans relating to the WASH delivery for the DoWR, MoET and MoH 
Sustainable Development Goals 
- SDG 6 
National Sustainable 
Development Plan 2016 -2030 
Decentralisation Act 2013 
Key 
Agency 
DoWR 
MoET 
MoH 
Act(s) 
Water Resources Management 
Act 2002 /   2016 Amendment 
Education Act 2014 
Public Health Act 1994 / 2018 
Amendment 
  
  
Water Supply Act 1988 /   2016 
Amendment  
  
  
Vanuatu National Drinking 
Water Quality Standards 2016 
  
  
Strategies 
Vanuatu National Water 
Strategy 2018-2030 
Vanuatu Education and Training 
Sector Strategic Plan

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
National WinS Strategy 2019 - 
2029 
Policies 
Vanuatu National Water Policy 
2017-2030 
  
National Sanitation Hygiene 
Policy 
  
  
  
Vanuatu National Environment 
Policy and Implementation Plan 
2016-2030 
Drinking Water Safety and Security Plan 
Safe Water 
Planning 
National Implementation Plan for 
Safe and Secure Community 
Drinking Water 
WASH in Schools Improvement 
Plan 
WASH in Healthcare Facilities 
 
 
 
 
Climate 
Change 
Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030 
Nationally Determined Contributions – 
NDCs  
• 
Target Wa1: By 2030, 100% of water-climate 
vulnerable rural communities in the six provinces 
have developed DWSSP and are able to address 
water needs in normal and (climate, disaster and 
environmentally) stressed times. 
• 
Target Wa2: By 2030, 6 climate-resilient water 
protection zones declared and sufficiently provides 
urban water supply needs in normal and (climate, 
disaster and environmentally) stressed times. 
Standards 
Guidelines 
Design and Construction 
Standards for Rural Water 
Supply 
WinS Facilities Guide  
WinS 3-star indicators 
Sanitation and Hygiene 
Guidelines

=== PAGE 47 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
C. 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) 
Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
 23.325033 
million USD ($)  
GCF 
financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter 
% 
equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
23.325033  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
4.940981 
million USD ($) 
Name 
of 
institution 
Financial 
instrumen
t 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
& 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Government 
of 
Vanuatu 
Grant  
In kind 
3,736,081 
668,900 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
SPC 
In kind 
0.09  
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
UNICEF 
In kind 
0.470 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter 
text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
28.290014 
million USD ($)  
(d) 
Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Leveraged finance includes operation and maintenance costs (OPEX) for the installed 
equipment post infrastructure works completion, amounting to $6,447,000 over the 
equipment lifetime. This financing is only possible post GCF investment through the CAP 
and completion of the infrastructure works. RWCs leverage the infrastructure works to 
generate the required OPEX finance for long-term operation and maintenance of the 
infrastructure post completion.  
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name 
of 
Institutions 
Outcome 1: 
Communities 
are 
empowered to 
Output 1.1 New 
and existing 
DWSSPs 
incorporate 
                    
0.315  
                  
0.256  
 Grants  
                  
0.059  
 In kind  
Government 
of 
Vanuatu 
and UNICEF

=== PAGE 48 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
plan and 
manage 
climate-
resilient water 
resources 
incremental 
improvements 
to mainstream 
adaptation 
solutions 
Output 1.2 
Awareness, 
capacities and 
skills of 
communities 
and area 
administrators 
on climate-
resilient water 
management 
improved 
                    
0.777  
                  
0.672  
 Grants  
                  
0.105  
 In kind 
UNICEF  
Output 1.3 
Vulnerable 
communities 
are supported 
to develop and 
implement their 
DWSSPs  
(600 by the end 
of the project 
cycle) 
                    
5.165  
                  
4.712  
 Grants  
                  
0.453  
 In kind  
Government 
of 
Vanuatu 
and UNICEF  
Outcome 2: 
Communities 
have 
enhanced 
climate-
resilient rural 
water 
infrastructure 
Output 2.1 
Vulnerable 
communities 
supported to 
construct, 
operate, and 
maintain 
climate-resilient 
water 
infrastructure 
(270) 
                    
20.063  
               
16.093  
 Grants  
                  
3.970  
 Grants & In 
kind 
 
Government 
of 
Vanuatu 
and UNICEF 
Outcome 3:  
Provincial and 
national 
institutions are 
strengthened 
to address 
climate risks 
associated 
with water 
security 
Output 3.1 
National- and 
provincial-level 
staff and 
WASH sector 
partners trained 
on climate-
resilient water 
management 
                    
0.269  
                  
0.144  
 Grants  
                  
0.125  
In kind 
UNICEF 
Output 3.2 
Knowledge 
management 
through data 
sharing 
mechanism 
established for 
climate-resilient 
water 
management 
                    
0.100  
                  
0.100  
 Grants  
                    
-    
  
 
Output 3.3 
Monitoring, 
learning and 
evaluation 
framework 
established for 
improved 
learning for 
                    
0.499  
                  
0.474  
 Grants  
                  
0.025  
In kind 
UNICEF

=== PAGE 49 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
climate-resilient 
water 
management 
Project 
Management 
Component 
                    
1.076  
                                               
0.874  
                                                                    
0.203  
Indicative total cost (USD) 
                    
28.290  
                                               
23.325  
                                                                    
4.965 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. 
Does 
GCF 
funding 
finance 
technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a 
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent 
possible. 
Capacity building is a key element of this project and takes place under all three Outcomes. A summary of the training and 
GCF funding for each is given in the table below: 
1.1.1 Two one-week training sessions of DWSSP facilitators in Port Vila including venue 
hire, travel and DSA costs 
 $32,100  
1.2.2 Area administrator training, 3 times (one training+ two refreshers) for each of the 6 
provinces 
 $138,100  
1.2.2 Knowledge sharing events or activities with TA and training for water committees (3 
in each province) 
 $260,700  
1.3.1 Refresher training for DWSSP facilitators 
 $16,050  
2.1.1 Training for facilitators based on updated CAP processes incl. plumber training, 
water management committee training 
 $11,100  
2.1.2 Training workshop costs for each community prior to each project  (plumber + 
water committee training), including community mobilisation and handover ceremony 
 $4,107,500  
3.1.1 Two trainings for each of the 6 provinces that last one day each  
 $64,400  
3.1.2 Two times trainings of one week each for WASH Sector partners on climate change 
risks, resilience and water safety 
 $16,500  
3.3.1 Training sessions on M&E for WASH partners 
 $16,500  
3.3.1 Workshop to discuss and disseminate best practice. 
 $8,600  
TOTAL 
 $4,671,550

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
D. 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
97. 
Water safety and security is vital for community resilience in the long-term as well as in the immediate aftermath 
of climate-induced disasters. GCF funding will positively impact and contribute to the management of water-
related impacts from the observed and projected climate change effects in Vanuatu. This project will address 
three water-related impacts from climate change in Vanuatu, which are increases in: (i) water-related disasters; 
(ii) areas suffering from water stress; and (iii) loss of human life induced by poor water quality.46 It will thus deliver 
on priority interventions identified in Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme47 (pipeline project AA1). 
 
98. 
The project will operate through and enhance the functioning of the government-owned DWSSP processes to 
deliver climate-resilient WASH infrastructure in tandem with training and capacity building. Since 2016, the 
DoWR has worked to consistently develop and standardise Vanuatu’s planning for safe water. The NIP and 
DWSSP development have increasingly incorporated government agencies (at all levels), communities, NGO, 
and civil societies. The NIP process standardises the implementation of DWSSPs for communities, facilitators, 
government agencies, and donors. This process is a framework of logical steps required to develop, assess, 
fund and deliver DWSSP improvements, through which the project will operate to mobilise, utilise and finetune 
systems for delivering improved climate-resilient water supply safety and security. 
 
99. 
The project’s impact in reducing climate risks for water security is reinforced by recent revisions of the DWSSP 
processes. These significantly strengthen climate change and vulnerability considerations within DWSSPs, from 
training of trainers, community training and facilitation to data collection, improvement planning, operations and 
maintenance. The revised DWSSP also establishes a basis for parallel revisions of programmes such as the 
Ministry of Education’s WASH in Schools and Ministry of Health’s WASH in Healthcare Facilities. The DWSSPs 
have been generally well received and understood, with some resources committed to support rollout. By further 
improving these existing water management processes and community-based planning – particularly through 
enhanced integration of climate change into planning – the project will increase the adaptive capacity of rural 
communities to better cope with the additional burden of climate change on water security and safety, providing 
explicit capacity building and transitioning towards climate-resilient water management planning.  
 
100. Through these actions, the project will provide climate-resilient water security benefits to 85,650 direct 
beneficiaries (including 42,825 women) and a further 216,980 indirect beneficiaries (see Table 7 for a more 
complete breakdown of direct and indirect beneficiaries across Outcomes). This contributes to GCF’s fund-level 
impact A2.0 “Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security” and indicator A2.3 
(number of males and females with year-round access to reliable and safe water supply despite climate shocks 
and stresses). This will in turn contribute to achievement of GCF’s fund-level outcome A7.0 “Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks”, to be measured through indicator A7.1 (use by 
vulnerable households, communities, businesses, and public-sector services of Fund-supported tools, 
instruments, strategies and activities to respond to climate change and variability). 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
101. This project will contribute to the second paradigm-shifting pathway identified in GCF’s Water Security Sectoral 
Guide, namely “strengthening integrated water resources management and water management”, and will deliver 
on both sub-areas: (i) preservation of existing water resources; and (ii) development of new water supply sources. 
 
102. As outlined in Section D.1, climate mainstreaming into the government-owned DWSSP process is nascent. While 
climate considerations are increasingly being integrated in water security and safety management, there remain 
significant needs for improvements to deliver climate-resilient water security benefits for rural communities in 
Vanuatu. By scaling up the number of climate-resilient DWSSPs registered (Outcome 1) and then delivering 
climate-resilient infrastructure and system improvements through prioritized DWSSPs (Outcome 2), the project 
will strengthen a whole-of-government approach to achieving climate-resilient water safety and security through 
the DoWR with associated decision-making processes that are decentralized, transparent, participatory, 
community-focused, gender-mainstreamed and evidence-based.  
 
103. In doing so, the project will transition the current precarious water security and safety situation experienced by 
Vanuatu’s rural communities in the face of climate change to one of a reliable and predictable supply of safe 
 
46 GCF Water Project Design Guidelines (v 0.98 – 28 September 2021 – developed by Deltaeres). 
47 Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme is available here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/country-programme-
vanuatu.pdf

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
water. This will occur through climate-resilient, community-led planning and management practices (Outcome 1), 
and through the delivery of climate-resilient water infrastructure (Outcome 2). By building and operating climate-
resilient water infrastructure, interruption to services during and after disasters will be reduced or avoided. 
Therefore, this GCF project will reduce the costs associated with continual repairing and rebuilding after disasters, 
allowing the limited public funds available to be leveraged for investment in new WASH infrastructure and 
sustainable exploration of water sources.  
 
104. By empowering and supporting communities, with a focus on increased women’s participation through Rural 
Water Committees (RWCs), to manage and operate their own water supplies in a climate-resilient menner 
(through dedicated activities under Outputs 1.4 and 2.1), this project will help to break the cycle of “build-neglect-
rebuild” characterising many WASH programmes in Vanuatu in the past. Not only will the project change the 
knowledge and practices of WASH sector partners, but it will also improve the longevity of the current TAP and 
CAP’s impacts through institutional strengthening (Outcome 3) at local, provincial and national levels.  
 
105. The key pillars of the project’s transformational impact will be the increased awareness, knowledge, skills and 
capacities at all levels (Outputs 1.2 and 3.1), the establishment of a community of practice at the local level 
(Output 1.2), and the mechanisms and systems strengthened for enhanced knowledge management, data 
sharing and MEL (Outputs 3.2 and 3.3). 
 
106. The paradigm shift will also support transitioning towards gender-transformational WASH investments, as outlined 
in Section E where the gender co-benefit towards mandatory representation of women in rural water committees 
is described. The GoV, DoWR as well as SPC recognize that Vanuatu’s currently limited WASH service delivery 
and infrastructure affect women and men differently. Traditionally, gender roles involve women and girls providing 
more labour and spending more time than men and boys in managing the household’s water, sanitation and 
hygiene needs.48 Increased time spent by women and girls to obtain water during dry seasons or after climate-
induced emergencies increases their exposure to gender-based violence (GbV). Conversely, improving 
predictability and location of water sources - with better access points created through more resilient and 
securitised (such as improved lighting, locks) infrastructure - will reduce exposure to such risks, increasing 
personal 
safety 
and 
security 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
safety 
and 
security 
of 
water 
supply.  
Similarly, the participation of women in RWCs and in decision-making processes under the DWSSPs will ensure 
that gendered needs are mainstreamed into the design of new and maintenance of existing WASH infrastructure. 
This is in line with UNICEF research, which revealed that women-led as well as increased women’s participation 
in water user committees result in better management such as improved fee collection and regular meetings of 
water supply points and sources. See Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Action Plan for more detail on this 
issue.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
107. This project will generate significant environmental, social and economic benefits that will contribute to positive 
sustainable development outcomes for Vanuatu in the long term. For example, it will reduce the negative 
environmental impacts of poor wastewater management by improving water management behaviour and 
practices through the sanitation component of DWSSPs (Outputs 1.2 and 1.4). The project will also achieve better 
protection of water sources and forested water catchment areas (Output 1.4), through no- and low-cost 
community improvements, resulting in improved environmental quality. 
 
108. Furthermore, the project will contribute to equitable access to water as a basic human right in Vanuatu, targeting 
especially the most vulnerable groups in rural communities. Significant social benefits resulting from project 
activities include positive health outcomes (as greater water safety and security lead to reduced stunting and 
diarrhoea) and improved social standing for women through their visible and meaningful roles in water committees 
(with 40% female members mandatory for registration of rural water committees). With the identified gender co-
benefit, the project will catalyse gender mainstreaming for water governance through community-based, climate-
resilient water management. 
 
109. Similarly, the project will provide economic benefits through avoided health care costs (as improved water security 
and sanitation practices lead to improved health outcomes) and avoided damages in case of disasters (as climate-
resilient infrastructure and training on maintenance thereof reduce the level of damage inflicted). 
 
 
48 Halcrow et al. (2010), Resource Guide: Working effectively with women and men in water, sanitation and hygiene programs, International 
Women’s Development Agency and Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney, Australia, available at: 
http://www.genderinpacificwash.info/system/resources/BAhbBlsHOgZmIj4yMDExLzAxLzI0LzE5LzA0LzI3LzIwMi9XQVNIX1JFU09VUkNFX
0dVSURFX2ZpbmFsNHdlYi5wZGY/WASH%2520RESOURCE%2520GUIDE-final4web.pdf

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
110. The project responds directly to SDG13 – Climate Action, SDG6 – Clean Water and Sanitation, and SDG5 – 
Gender Equality through its objective of building climate-resilient and gender-equitable water safety and security 
in Vanuatu. Finally, by transitioning the water sector towards climate resilience and the management of climate 
risks, the project contributes towards the objectives of Vanuatu’s National Sustainable Development Plan 2016–
2030 and the Vanuatu National Water Policy 2017–2030. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
111. This project will address vital needs relating to water security for rural communities in Vanuatu. Over 24,000 
households across the country are reliant on either rainwater or surface water for their primary drinking water 
supply. Also, one third of households have no alternative source of drinking water. These challenges have 
historically been, and will continue to be, exacerbated by climate change.  
 
112. The project addresses the fundamental human right of access to safe drinking water. Those communities that 
have elevated levels of vulnerability, low access to WASH services and are exposed to climate risks will be 
targeted through an existing, nationally-owned prioritisation process that the project will enhance. Besides those 
communities most in need of climate-resilient water management interventions to be directly targeted, the project 
will ultimately benefit all rural communities by strengthening the enabling environment for resilient interventions.  
 
113. The project recognizes the primary challenge for water safety and security in Vanuatu, namely that while access 
to a proximate source of drinking water is high (94% access to an improved drinking water source and 86% 
access on the premises)49, the safety and reliability of the water consumed by most people in Vanuatu is unknown. 
Particularly in rural areas, the absence of market signals (such as prices and permits) as well as inadequate 
planning and incentive structures destabilise water security.  
 
114. Rural communities in Vanuatu use a combination of groundwater, surface water and rainwater that are 
increasingly precarious due to limited climate proofing of infrastructure and processes. Of these sources, 
rainwater systems are most common, with over 66% of all surveyed water supplies drawing from such 
infrastructure rising to over 75% of supplies in Malampa and Penama50. A significant portion of the population 
(36% of households overall and 44% in rural areas) relies on rainwater as either its primary or secondary water 
supply 51. Groundwater-based water sources are less common, comprising only 13% of surveyed systems. 
Likewise, piped systems made up just 11% of surveyed water systems, of which 54% are fed by springs, 32% by 
surface water, and 14% by boreholes and wells. Only one third of households have access to water 24 hours per 
day, every day of the year. In more remote areas, using water from unprotected sources is common52; while the 
national average is around 12%, in area councils such as Erromango and Tanna, this rises to 70%.  
 
115. Water rationing, both for household use and sanitation, and water shortages are common during the dry season. 
The DoWR WRI indicates that many of the water sources are not available or have inadequate yields during the 
dry season. Conversely, rainfall often manifests as intense periods of extreme precipitation, leading to floods that 
further exacerbate the WASH context. For sanitation purposes, households outside of urban centres and 
provincial hubs (where flush toilets are available) are reliant on shared or private pit latrines or have no toilets at 
all. This is particularly true in Penama where 83–100% of households rely on these types of sanitation 
infrastructure.53  
 
116. The direct impacts of limited water supply and water security, contaminated drinking water and inadequate WASH 
infrastructure are increased morbidity (diarrhoea, stunting and other illnesses) and increased mortality, among 
both children and adults. Significant improvements in the management, operation and maintenance of rural water 
systems are needed to ensure water services are managed safely. The project will address these by introducing 
safely managed and climate-resilient WASH and drinking water services critical for preventing diseases and 
protecting human health during infectious outbreaks, including the current COVID-19 pandemic. Water insecurity 
also has secondary impacts on food security, as most Ni-Vanuatu rely on rain-fed agriculture. 
 
 
49 UNICEF (2020). Rural water supplies in Vanuatu in need of significant improvements. (WASH Technical Paper/13/2020). 
50 UNICEF (2020). Ibid.  
51 Ibid.  
52 Vanuatu National Statistical Office; World Bank. 2014. Vanuatu : Socio-Economic Atlas, available at: 
 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/18669 
53 Ibid.

=== PAGE 53 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
117. The needs of recipients in Vanuatu are mapped in Annex 2 in terms of the variations and trends in drinking water 
sources as well as sanitation infrastructure54, including: 
• The national average of households using unprotected wells or surface water for drinking water is 11.7%. 
However, regional and intra-island variation is high: in West Santo (Sanma Province), South Erromango and 
Middle Bush Tanna (Tafea Province), such households range from 53.2–73.8%. This demonstrates that 
community vulnerabilities to climate-induced risks fall across a spectrum and must be addressed through 
localized interventions (see Figure 4, Annex 2). 
• The national average of households primarily using household or shared tanks for drinking water is 34.3%. 
However, this is much lower in over 13 districts where such households form less than 12% (primarily Tafea 
Province, Maewo in Penama Province, parts of Malampa and Sanma Provinces). There is clear inequity in 
water access within and across islands, resulting in the climate burden causing water security risks being 
shared unequally in the country (see Figure 5, Annex 2). 
• The national average of households using private or shared pit latrines or with no toilet facilities is 48%. 
However, this rises to 82.7–100% in most of Penama Province, while Sanma, Malampa and Tafea Provinces 
also have more limited access to sanitation infrastructure. Climate change poses risks to households using 
such limited sanitation infrastructure, with long-standing setbacks faced during hazards as experienced 
during recent Tropical Cyclones Harold and Pam (see Figure 6 – Annex 2). 
118. The project will address these needs through a combination of institutional strengthening and capacity building 
at national and devolved levels, as well as through direct improvements to drinking water and WASH systems. 
The interventions to achieve these improvements are outlined in Section B.3. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
119. This project is listed as the first priority project in the pipeline presented in Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme55 
and has been fully co-developed with the DoWR, along with other national stakeholders. By addressing climate 
change risks and impacts on water management, and by working directly with vulnerable rural communities on 
community-based adaptation activities, the project is fully aligned with the Government of Vanuatu’s climate 
change strategies and policies, including the Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030 
(e.g. strategic priority 7.4.3) as well as the NAPA and the NDC, which both reference water resource management 
as a top priority. In addition, the project is fully in line with Vanuatu’s National Sustainable Development Plan 
2016–2030 (e.g. objective ECO2.2) and National Water Policy 2017–2030.  
 
120. The project responds directly to the Government of Vanuatu’s goal for every rural community to have a DWSSP 
by 2030, as outlined in the Water Resource Management Act56 and the Water Supply Act57. The DoWR will be 
leading the implementation of the project by following the NIP and DWSSP processes, through which the project 
will scale up system improvements and WASH infrastructure in rural contexts. These processes are fully owned 
by DoWR, which is also the lead coordinator of the Vanuatu WASH Cluster, acting as the secretariat and chair 
during emergencies. This WASH cluster is very active due to the high number of emergencies that the country 
experiences, and the DoWR is experienced in responding to water access and security issues during disaster 
and other fast-onset climate events. There is thus already strong ownership of such processes and activities by 
DoWR, which this project will build on. 
 
121. The Government of Vanuatu has also committed USD 3.9 million co-financing to support delivery of the project 
outcomes. This will flow primarily through the CAP process to support development of DWSSPs, further indicating 
the ownership and commitment of DoWR to the project activities and objectives.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
122. The overarching project goal is to ensure climate-resilient water security in vulnerable rural communities across 
Vanuatu. To do so, the interventions will address the social, gender, regulatory, financial, ecological, and 
institutional barriers that hinder communities from coping with the additional burden of climate change on water 
security management (see Section B1). The project thus serves to shift the water sector development pathway 
for rural communities in Vanuatu in a more climate resilient direction. A comprehensive description and illustration 
of the theory of change is presented in Section B2.  
 
54 World Bank (2014). Vanuatu: Socioeconomic Atlas, available at: 
 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/827661468098051596/pdf/876750WP0P1336089B00PUBLIC00Vanuatu.pdf  
55 Vanuatu’s GCF Country Programme is available here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/country-programme-
vanuatu.pdf  
56 https://mol.gov.vu/images/docs/Water_Resources_Acts/DoWR_Files_2018/Water-Resource-Management-Ammendment-2016.pdf 
57 https://mol.gov.vu/images/docs/Water_Resources_Acts/DoWR_Files_2018/Water-Supply-Act-1955--Revisions.pdf

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
 
123. The proposed project will build climate resilience and adaptation capacities in Vanuatu’s WASH sector through 
the implementation of proven and efficient water management technologies. This will follow the nationally owned 
DWSSP processes that support the identification of locally led interventions and in doing so, lay the foundations 
for further scaling-up beyond the project lifetime. 
 
124. The focus of the adaptation investments is on resilient and reliable water infrastructure. It will include:  
- 
Community Rainwater harvesting (RWH) systems. These simple, modular systems consist of roof 
catchment, gutters, first flush and tank storage. The roof catchment could be household or community 
buildings. Storages can be linked and augmented as needed. Water can be extracted from a tap directly from 
the tank, a nearby tap stand, or several tap stands in a small distribution system.  
- 
Gravity-fed systems. Gravity-fed systems deliver water through pipe and storage networks to demand 
centres. They typically collect water from reservoirs, springs, rivers and groundwater sources, and can vary 
in capacity and distance. Direct Gravity Fed (DGF) systems use only gravity to convey water from the source 
to demand centres, whilst Indirect Gravity Fed (IDGF) systems use pumping to elevate water before gravity 
conveys it to demand centre(s). DGF systems can provide large volumes of water at high pressure without 
on-going running costs. Their flexibility and scalability of distance and capacity is only hampered by source 
safe yield, and topology. 
- 
Desalination. Solar-powered reverse osmosis desalination is increasingly being adopted around the world 
for its ability to reliably provide excellent quality water with low greenhouse gas emissions.  
- 
Groundwater systems. Includes rehabilitation and construction of new groundwater wells systems.  
 
Based on above, the project has the potential to generate a broad range of environmental, social, and economic 
benefits and co-benefits, ensuring that the project is holistic, efficient and effective:  
• Increased capacity to identify, develop, and implement tailored and focused adaptation/water security 
measures and needs. 
• Avoided losses associated with low water supply during extreme climate events. 
• Avoided losses associated to water import which is costly due to Vanuatu’s topography and remoteness.  
• Avoided health care-related costs associated with water-borne diseases (WBDs). 
• Avoided loss of human life associated with WBDs. 
• Avoided loss related to labour for gathering water from remote, unsanitary, and non-adapted water sources.  
• Avoided GHG emissions through renewable energy-based technologies. 
 
125. Annex 3 – Economic and Financial Analysis demonstrates the viability of this project in greater detail. The financial 
analysis shows that without grants, the costs would be many orders of magnitude beyond what households can 
pay (ranging from 657% to 3,674% of ability to pay), and a substantial portion of average monthly incomes. With 
GCF grant funding, the financial analysis shows that for rainwater harvesters and direct gravity fed systems, an 
affordable tariff can be reached, whereas for water desalination and groundwater systems, additional public sector 
funding will be required. Concerning the economic analysis, the project-level ENPV is positive, USD 37,150,065 
and the programme-level EIRR is 20%. This project is thus economically viable and can be justified on economic 
grounds, even though non-investment budget costs (including co-finance) have no envisaged direct benefits. This 
is the case even though the analysis included conservative assumptions and not all benefits were included in the 
economic calculations as it was not possible to estimate their monetary values. Nonetheless, such benefits will 
accrue to project beneficiaries in addition to those included in the analysis. Therefore, the adaptation project is 
expected to be highly effective. 
 
126. The efficiency of the DWSSP process will also contribute to the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the project. 
This will be the primary modality through which the project will identify and prioritise communities in need of 
system improvements and the activities to bring about such improvements. Those communities that have already 
created DWSSPs have cumulatively spent almost USD 1 million of their own money on no- and low-cost 
improvements.58 The project will benefit from the existing structures and policy frameworks to efficiently scale up 
investments by finetuning and mobilizing the DWSSP process through the DoWR. 
 
 
58 Please see the RISCON database here: https://exchange.riscon.solutions/dwssp/

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
127. The project will increase the adaptive capacity of rural communities to better cope with the additional burden of climate change on water security and safety, 
by improving climate-resilient water management community- based planning, providing explicit capacity building, and fostering adaptation actions through 
improved local management practices and resilient infrastructures. Water safety and security is indeed particularly vital for community long-term resilience and 
in the immediate aftermath of climate-induced disasters. 
 
128. This project will contribute to the second paradigm-shifting pathway that the GCF has identified in its Water Security Sectoral Guide: strengthening integrated 
water resources management and water management and will deliver on all two sub-areas: (i) preservation of existing water resources; and (ii) development of 
new water supply sources. Below, three assessment dimensions – scale, replicability and sustainability of this paradigm shift pathway are expounded. 
 
129. 700 communities will be direct beneficiaries as part of Outcome 1 (improved planning and community-based activities on climate-resilient water management), 
of which 220 will also benefit from improved climate-resilient water infrastructure as part of Outcome 2. An additional 50 communities with existing DWSSPs will 
be targeted under Outcome 2 during the first year of the project. This makes a total of 750 communities directly benefiting from Outcomes 1 and 2. A preliminary 
estimate
36, of direct beneficiaries is 85,650 (including 42,825 women), that is around 27% of the total population in Vanuatu. Indirect beneficiaries include the 
entire rural population in Vanuatu (216,980 individuals which is 73% of the total population), mostly through enhanced institutional capacities and processes 
leading to climate-resilient water security for rural communities (Outcome 3). 
 
Outcome 
Targeted communities 
Indirect / direct beneficiaries 
1 
700 
79,940 direct beneficiaries (including 39,970 women), which is 25.2% of the total population of Vanuatu.  
2 
270 (including 220 already targeted by 
Outcome 1, and 50 additional ones) 
30,834 direct beneficiaries (including 25,124 from Outcome 1 and 5,710 additional ones); which is 8% (2% additional) of the 
total population in Vanuatu. 
3 
2,000 
Indirect beneficiaries: the entire rural population in Vanuatu (around 216,980 individuals, which is 73% of the total population)

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessme
nt 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme 
will contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Based on the data available, there are 
2,447 registered water systems in 
Vanuatu. Of these, 11% (277) have 
DWSSPs registered and received 
system improvements. Nearly 90% of 
water 
supply 
systems 
therefore 
require DWSSPs to be developed 
and implemented.  
 
Current DWSSPs do not address 
climate-resilient WASH infrastructure. 
Most sources of drinking water cannot 
provide 24/7 service year-round due 
to climate related restrictions as 
detailed in section B2. . 
Low 
The 5-year project will reach 600 
communities with new, climate-
resilient DWSSPs and low-cost 
adaptation activities (Outcome 1), 
100 
communities 
with 
existing 
DWSSPs will also be updated in 
Outcome 1, and 270 communities 
(of which 220 communities will be 
those with new DWSSPs delivered 
through 
Outcome 
1, 
with 
an 
additional 50 communities which 
have 
existing 
DWSSPs) 
with 
infrastructure upgrades (Outcome 
2) and all ~2000 rural communities 
(216,980 
individuals) 
through 
improved institutional processes 
(Outcome 3). 
The current total of DWSSPs 
delivered (277, according to DoWR 
data) 
will 
be 
scaled 
up 
by 
dispensing investments through the 
government-owned DWSSP and 
NIP 
processes. 
This should lay the groundwork for 
upscaling 
as 
government 
mechanisms will be utilized and 
improved, while attracting potential 
donors for later phases, with a 
similar goal of improving climate-
resilient water security in rural 
Vanuatu. 
Through Outcome 1 & 3 (see 
B2a), the project will address the 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
barriers in Vanuatu – particularly, 
the limited financial and technical 
capacity that restricts the DoWR, 
provincial 
institutions 
and 
communities from scaling up 
existing technology as well as 
shift towards new technology.  
 
By project conclusion, Vanuatu 
will have 600 new DWSSPs and 
100 updated DWSSPs which will 
focus 
on 
delivering 
climate-
resilient WASH infrastructure, and 
improving 
water 
access 
and 
security.

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
 
Replicabilit
y 
One of the primary barriers in 
Vanuatu 
is 
limited 
WASH 
infrastructure 
and 
water 
supply 
sources 
that 
include 
climate 
adaptation considerations.  
 
Although the project will benefit from 
established 
mechanisms 
for 
implementation (DWSSPs, NIP, TAP 
and CAP), investments in climate-
resilient WASH infrastructure has 
been minimal, and the project will 
need to initiate this paradigm shift in 
Vanuatu.  
 
Low 
This project will aim to improve the 
ability of rural communities and 
water systems to anticipate, adapt 
to and recover from the negative 
effects of climate change through all 
three Outcomes. 
With the investments earmarked for 
infrastructure 
rehabilitation 
and 
development 
in 
rural 
Vanuatu 
through established mechanisms of 
identifying needs, prioritization and 
selection, and disbursement, the 
project will replicate interventions 
sub-nationally. 
Post 
project 
replication of this model is possible 
more widely across the country and 
in other SIDS in the region and 
globally. 
Investments in rural water supply 
infrastructure (whether new or 
improved), will be at once a 
private good (providing water 
supply to households), but when 
used correctly and consistently, 
also a wider, public good key to 
replicating success and achieving 
climate resilience and SDG 6 
targets in Vanuatu, and (more 
broadly) in the Pacific SIDS.  
Further, 
having 
relevant 
institutional 
documentation, 
systems and capacity building in 
place (under Outcome 3) will 
ensure that the project outputs 
are replicable post project, and 
that DoWR staff have capacity to 
continue 
to 
replicate 
project 
outputs across the country at 
scale beyond completion. 
Sustainability
The DoWR – and other WASH sector 
partners – have been proactive in 
increasing 
sustainability 
of 
investments by establishing country-
owned processes that this project will 
utilize during implementation (NIP, 
CAP and the DWSSP). Additionally, 
given the impacts of two recent 
Tropical Cyclones (Pam and Harold) 
– Vanuatu’s National Water Policy 
identifies 
that 
sustaining 
infrastructure 
through 
climate-
proofing as an important step towards 
water security. 
 
Medium 
 
The project will utilize existing 
institutional processes (NIP, CAP 
and DWSSP) to embed adaptation 
measures in both the design and 
ongoing 
maintenance 
of 
infrastructure.  
This will ensure communities in 
Vanuatu 
will 
develop 
climate 
resilience through improved water 
security, provided by infrastructure 
investments, as well as improved 
water management plans, which will 
help sustain these investments in 
the long term. 
By being fully part of existing 
national programmes, and in line 
with 
national 
policies 
and 
strategies of Vanuatu, this project 
will 
be 
transformative 
by 
leveraging the limited amount of 
public funds used for water 
security and safety programmes. 
The project’s outcomes will be co-
financed 
through 
central 
government funding, including for 
monitoring, 
and 
sustained 
through the same mechanisms 
after the end of the project. Work 
in Outcome 3 will enhance the 
institutional processes and build

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity 
to 
contribute 
to 
sustainability.  
The project will build technical 
capacity of the communities to 
undertake maintenance of the 
climate- resilient infrastructure 
(as part of Outcome 2). The 
communities will also receive 
regular monitoring visits from the 
provincial 
and 
national 
government officials (as part of 
Outcome 
1). 
Post 
project, 
communities will operate and 
maintain their water security and 
safety 
infrastructure, 
with 
government-funded 
support 
through the improved TAP and 
CAP processes. 
The 
project 
will 
also 
build 
technical capacity of DoWR staff 
which will improve the institutional 
capacity of the DoWR to continue 
to 
deliver 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure following the end of 
the project. 
Throughout the project training 
will be given to relevant extension 
agents, 
key 
institutional 
personnel and local communities 
on the impacts of climate change 
and what measures can be put in 
place 
to 
overcome 
these 
challenges. 
Training 
will 
be 
embedded in the institutional

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 
processes 
for 
ongoing 
sustainability. 
This includes training on:  
- climate vulnerability, risks and 
updated water management 
planning (Outcome 1) 
- operation and maintenance of 
water infrastructure installed 
in the project, to ensure long 
term 
operation 
of 
the 
investments (Outcome 2). 
- specific 
enhancement 
of 
engineering 
standards 
to 
ensure improved and more 
sustainable infrastructure is in 
place in the future (Outcome 
3).  
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may 
be selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to 
measure any given project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific 
indicators).  
GCF Result 
Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means 
of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final59 
 
 
 
Sources 
of 
information 
and 
methods used to 
collect and report 
data /information 
to 
measure 
The starting point or current value of 
the 
indicators 
before 
the 
implementation of the project 
 
The 
estimated 
value 
of 
the 
indicator at the 
mid-point of the 
implementation 
The 
estimated 
value 
of 
the 
indicator at the 
completion 
of 
the 
implementation 
Externalities and factors outside 
project management's control that 
may impact the outcomes 
Data sources and methodologies 
applied for estimating baseline 
and targets 
 
59 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of 
the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
 
progress against 
targets 
TOTAL  
 
(Under 
ARA1, 
ARA2 
and 
ARA3) 
 
Core 2: Direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached 
 
Please refer to 
relevant 
rows 
below 
Please refer to relevant rows below 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
34,260 - 10.8% 
rural population 
(male: 
17,130 
female: 17,130) 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
91,360 - 29.2% 
of the population 
 
(male: 
45,680 
female: 45,680) 
 
 
 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
85,650 - 27% 
rural population 
(male: 
42,825 
female: 42,825) 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
216,980 73% of 
rural population 
 
(male: 108,490 
female: 
108,490) 
 
 
 
Noting that beneficiaries to the 
CAP overlap with those of the 
DWSSP.  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communitie
s 
 
Core 2: Direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached 
 
 
 
Annual reporting 
based 
on 
monitoring 
and 
verification, 
national surveys, 
WHO/UNICEF's 
JMP survey, and 
independent 
interim and final 
evaluations 
carried 
through 
the 
project, 
0 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
34,260 - 10.8% 
rural population 
(male: 
17,130 
female: 17,130) 
 
 
 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
85,650 - 27% 
rural population 
(male: 
42,825 
female: 42,825) 
 
 
 
Total direct beneficiaries =  
Total beneficiaries from Outcome 
1 
(79,940 
beneficiaries) 
and 
additional 
beneficiaries 
under 
Outcome 2 (5,710). Targeting 
criteria for project activities is to 
target 
the 
most 
vulnerable 
communities to climate change 
impacts, this is prioritised through

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 
completion 
reports 
of 
trainings 
and 
infrastructure 
investments. 
Quality assessed 
by the AE and 
EE. 
 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
91,360 - 29.2% 
of the population 
 
(male: 
45,680 
female: 45,680) 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
216,980 73% of 
rural population 
 
(male: 108,490 
female: 
108,490) 
 
 
 
40% delivery by mid-term, and 
100% by end-term is expected. 
 
The 
project’s 
institutional 
strengthening in expected to 
indirectly impact 100% of the 
rural population = a total of 
216,980 
additional 
indirect 
beneficiaries to the 85,650 direct 
beneficiaries.. This represents 
73% of the total population.  
 
 
All 
communities 
have, 
on 
average, an equal population. 
Sex ratio favours males – there 
are 105 males : 100 females as of 
2020, and this may be reflected in 
the gender-disaggregation of the 
beneficiaries. For the purposes of 
estimation 
during 
preparation 
stage, 50-50 ratio has been used. 
 
Procurement is carried out on 
time and there are no political 
factors that slow down or interfere 
with project implementation.  
 
No natural disasters or extreme 
events 
cause 
catastrophic 
damages 
that 
impede 
the 
implementation of the project.  
 
Stakeholder 
engagement 
continues to be strong and there 
is a willingness at the beneficiary 
level to engage with the project.

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA2 
Health, 
well-being, 
food 
and 
water 
security 
 
Supplementary 
2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
with 
more 
climate-resilient 
water security 
 
 
 
Annual reporting 
based 
on 
monitoring 
and 
verification, 
national surveys, 
WHO/UNICEF's 
JMP survey, and 
independent 
interim and final 
evaluations 
carried 
through 
the 
project, 
completion 
reports 
of 
trainings 
and 
infrastructure 
investments. 
Quality assessed 
by the AE and 
EE. 
 
 
 
 
0 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
34,260 - 10.8% 
rural population 
(male: 
17,130 
female: 17,130) 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
91,360 - 29.2% 
of the population 
 
(male: 
45,680 
female: 45,680) 
 
 
 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
 
85,650 - 27% 
rural population-  
(male: 
42,825 
female: 42,825) 
 
 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
 
216,980 73% of 
rural population 
 
(male: 108,490 
female: 
108,490) 
 
 
 
Total direct beneficiaries =  
Total beneficiaries from Outcome 
1 
(79,940 
beneficiaries) 
and 
additional 
beneficiaries 
under 
Outcome 2 (5,710).  
 
40% delivery by mid-term, and 
100% by end-term is expected. 
 
The 
project’s 
institutional 
strengthening in expected to 
indirectly impact 100% of the 
rural population = a total of 
216,980 
additional 
indirect 
beneficiaries to the 85,650 direct 
beneficiaries. 
This 
represents 
73% of the total population.  
 
 
All 
communities 
have, 
on 
average, an equal population. 
Sex ratio favours males – there 
are 105 males: 100 females as of 
2020, and this may be reflected in 
the gender-disaggregation of the 
beneficiaries. For the purposes of 
estimation 
during 
preparation 
stage, 50-50 ratio has been used. 
 
Procurement is carried out on 
time and there are no political 
factors that slow down or interfere 
with project implementation.  
 
No natural disasters or extreme 
events 
cause 
catastrophic 
damages 
that 
impede 
the 
implementation of the project.

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stakeholder 
engagement 
continues to be strong and there 
is a willingness at the beneficiary 
level to engage with the project.  
 
ARA3 
Intrastructur
e and built 
environmen
t 
Core 2: Direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached 
 
Monitoring 
surveys 
and 
reports provided 
by the PMU and 
quality assessed 
by the EE and AE 
to 
ensure 
alignment 
with 
the indicator and 
that no double 
counting or bias 
has 
been 
included. 
 
 
Engineering 
reports 
on 
completion 
of 
constructions 
provided 
by 
implementing 
partners 
submitted 
to 
PMU and EE’s 
for 
quality 
assurance 
and 
verification 
against 
the 
indicator.  
 
Lessons 
learnt 
and best practice 
guide 
on 
 
0 
 
 
No individual has accessed CAP 
resources for enhance CR-WASH 
infrastructure as this will be brought 
in by the project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14,618 
individuals 
 
7,308 female 
7,308 
male 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36,544 
individuals 
 
18,272 female 
18,722 
male 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40% beneficiaries reached by 
mid-term and 100% expected by 
project conclusion.  
 
These 
beneficiaries 
partially 
overlap with the beneficiaries of 
Outcome 1. This is because 220 
DWSSPs selected will be from 
the 
600 
DWSSPs 
newly 
registered through Outcome 1 
and an additional 50 existing 
DWSSPs in need of upgraded 
infrastructure will be targeted. 
This will total 270 DWSSPs, 
against 
which 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure is delivered. 
 
By 
increasing 
technical 
assistance and options to access 
to financial support, the delivery 
of functional, climate-resilient, 
water systems is made possible 
to communities.  
 
Members of communities are 
able 
to 
benefit 
from 
these 
investments through training and 
awareness activities, with the 
requisite behavioural needed to 
maintain these systems.

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
 
technical 
interventions 
developed by the 
PMU 
and 
presented 
to 
EE’s and AE for 
quality 
assessment and 
alignment 
to 
indicator.  
 
40% communities reached by 
mid-term and 100% expected by 
project conclusion.  
 
Vanuatu is regularly exposed to 
natural hazards, which can be an 
impediment to the delivery of 
water infrastructure, particularly if 
the efforts and funds dedicated to 
water governance are redirected.  
ARA3 
Intrastructur
e and built 
environmen
t 
 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets 
made 
more 
resilient to the 
effects 
of 
climate change 
and/or 
more 
able to reduce 
GHG emissions 
 
 
 
Financial tracking 
and 
monitoring 
will 
generate 
reports 
carried 
out 
by 
the 
Finance Officer.  
Annual reporting 
based 
on 
monitoring 
and 
verification, 
national surveys, 
independent 
interim and final 
evaluations 
carried 
through 
the 
project, 
completion 
reports  
 
Reports 
for 
providers 
on 
trainings 
and 
infrastructure 
investments.  
Quality assessed 
by the AE and 
EE’s. 
The 
national 
Water 
Resources 
Inventory (WRI) conducted a water 
point mapping that identified 4,097 
water systems across 44 islands of 
which:  
• 
15% were Indirect Gravity 
Fed systems, 
• 
20% 
Direct 
Gravity 
Fed 
systems and  
• 
65% Community Rainwater 
Harvesting systems. 
 
Approximately 1/3 of these systems 
were not providing 24 hr supply, and 
half of water systems were not 
providing a year-round supply. 
USD 3,818,379 
 
Rain 
Water 
Harvesting  
USD 1,192,761 
Direct 
Gravity 
Fed 
USD 2,767,536 
Desalination 
USD 147,168 
Indirect Gravity 
Fed 
USD 1,047,345 
USD 9,545.947 
 
Rain 
Water 
Harvesting  
USD 2,981,904 
Direct 
Gravity 
Fed 
USD 6,918,840 
Desalination 
USD 367,920 
Indirect Gravity 
Fed 
USD 2,618,364 
Infrastructure 
investments 
targeted will be conducted on a 
proposal basis through the CAP 
these are therefore considered as 
unidentified 
investmtnets 
in 
design. As such it is impossible 
through design to place a value on 
the underlying infrastructure in the 
country. However, the value of 
infrastructure to be upgraded or 
created is presented in the targets 
representative of the equipment 
and construction value of the new 
infrastructure estimated at this 
point.  
 
40% delivery by mid-term, and 
100% by end-term is expected. 
 
Procurement is carried out on 
time and there are no political 
factors that slow down or interfere 
with project implementation.  
 
No natural disasters or extreme 
events 
cause 
catastrophic

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
damages 
that 
impede 
the 
implementation of the project.  
 
Please note that the baseline 
figure may change at inception 
with additional CAP investments 
over the approval and post 
approval processes period. This 
could 
marginally 
impact 
the 
percentages.  
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project 
will contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: 
Degree to which 
GCF 
investments 
contribute 
to 
strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory 
frameworks for 
low 
emission 
climate-resilient 
development 
pathways in a 
country-driven 
manner 
The Government of Vanuatu 
has put in place a water 
planning process based on a 
NIP 
and 
community-owned 
DWSSP process. At present 
this 
framework 
does 
not 
incorporate 
climate 
change 
considerations.  
low 
The project aims to achieve a paradigm shift 
towards climate resilient water security for rural 
communities across Vanuatu, by enhancing 
community-based planning and adaptation for 
climate-resilient water management (Outcome 
1), developing climate-resilient rural water 
infrastructure (Outcome 2), and creating an 
enabling environment at provincial and national 
level to better address climate risks associated 
with water security (Outcome 3).  
Through activities under Outcome 1, the 
DWSSP design process will be enhanced to 
incorporate climate resilience directly into 
community level planning mechanisms. Further, 
institutional capacity building under Outcome 3 
will 
result 
in 
increased 
technical 
and 
implementation capacity in the DoWR and other 
relevant ministries at both state and national 
levels. Through these institutional interventions, 
The project will put 
in place a robust 
and 
replicable 
community owned 
process 
to 
incorporate climate 
change 
considerations into 
infrastructure 
improvement.  
The 
capacity 
of 
Vanuatu’s 
institutions 
to 
deliver, 
maintain 
and increase these 
gains will grow. 
National 
level 
(one 
country)

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
the entire rural population of Vanuatu (216,980 
individuals and 73% of the total population) will 
benefit indirectly from strengthened national 
and state institutions to enhance climate 
resilience. 
Core Indicator 6: 
Degree to which 
GCF 
investments 
contribute 
to 
technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or 
transfer 
and 
innovation 
Rural Vanuatu has a relatively 
high 
coverage 
(90%) 
of 
improved water supplies
60 , 
although significant inequalities 
exist geographically. 
61
62 
However, 
these 
“improved” 
systems do not incorporate 
climate 
resilience 
considerations 
and 
are 
susceptible to the negative 
impacts of climate change.  
Rural 
communities 
use 
a 
combination of groundwater, 
surface water, and rainwater, 
but rainwater systems are most 
common.
63  Despite 
having 
access, these systems often fail 
to provide 24-hour supply and 
year-long supply as well.64 
 
low 
Direct beneficiaries include those beneficiaries 
in communities targeted under Outcomes 1 and 
2 that result in development and dissemination 
of 
new 
climate 
resilient 
DWSSPs 
and 
deployment of upgraded climate resilient 
infrastructure. Estimated direct beneficiaries is 
85,650 (including 42,825 women), ~27% of the 
total population in Vanuatu.  
Indirect beneficiaries include the entire rural 
population of Vanuatu (216,980individuals and 
73% of the total population), mostly through 
enhanced institutional capacities and processes 
toward climate-resilient water security for rural 
communities (Outcome 3 – provincial and 
national 
institutions 
are 
strengthened 
to 
address climate risks associated with water 
security). In the long-term these activities and 
outputs will result in greater technology 
deployment, dissemination and innovation 
transfer benefiting the whole rural population. 
Community owned 
planning will take 
place 
and 
investments 
in 
infrastructure will be 
made – technology 
deployed 
and 
transferred.  
National 
level 
(one 
country) 
 
 
60 WHO/UNICEF define an improved drinking-water source as one that, by nature of its construction or through active intervention, is protected from outside contamination, in particular from 
contamination with faecal matter. Improved water sources include piped water into dwelling, plot or yard; piped water into neighbour's plot; public tap/standpipe; tube well/borehole; protected dug well; 
protected spring; and rainwater. 
61 Government of Vanuatu (2017 – 2030). Vanuatu National Water Policy. Ibid. found 93% “improved”, which is broadly consistent with the 2015 WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme’s (JMP) 
estimate that 89% of the rural population of Vanuatu has access to an improved water source (one source of water). 
62 UNICEF (2020). Ibid. 
63 UNICEF (2020). Ibid. 
64 UNICEF (2020). Ibid. 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/program
me results  
(outcomes/ 
outputs)  
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water resources 
Output 1.1 
New and existing 
DWSSPs 
incorporate 
incremental 
improvements 
to 
mainstream 
adaptation 
solutions 
• 
Percentage of new or 
updated DWSSPs that 
incorporate 
climate 
resilience 
 
 
 
Monitoring 
by 
PMU 
submitted to the EE’s for 
quality 
assessment/verification 
against the indicator. This 
will 
include 
summary 
information 
from 
the 
DWSSP 
approval 
processes 
under 
the 
DoWR.  
 
 
0% 
 
 
0 
existing 
DWSSPs 
 
 
 
 
60% 
new 
DWSSPs 
 
60 
existing 
DWSSPs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100% 
new 
DWSSPs 
 
100 
new 
DWSSPs 
 
 
 
60% 
registration 
of 
DWSSPs by mid-term and 
100% expected by project 
conclusion. In alignment 
with expectation that the 
DWSSPs will be carried 
out in fist 3 years of the 
project.  
 
Limited information on the 
DWSSPs process among 
communities may hinder 
this outcome.  
 
DWSSPs 
updated 
or 
developed 
using 
the 
methodology 
are 
expected 
to 
result 
in 
identification of climate 
responsive 
measures 
needed 
at 
community 
level, and aid in the 
prioritization of dispensing 
investments. 
Output 1.2 
Awareness, 
capacities 
and 
skills 
of 
communities and 
area 
administrators on 
climate-resilient 
water 
• 
Number 
area 
administrators trained 
for greater technical 
knowledge 
on 
CR-
WASH 
 
• 
Number 
of 
RWC 
members 
with 
increased CR-WASH 
awareness 
and 
Monitoring 
reports 
including 
training 
evaluations and summary 
of 
trainings 
by 
PMU 
submitted to the EE’s for 
quality 
assessment/verification 
against 
the 
indicator. 
Reports 
to 
included 
qualitative and anecdotal 
0 
 
Area 
Administrators 
= 38 
 
RWC members 
= 
180 
(90 
female) 
Area 
Administrators 
= 96 
 
RWC members 
= 
450 
(225 
female) 
40% 
beneficiaries 
reached by mid-term and 
100% expected by project 
conclusion.  
 
16 area administrators 
trained per province

=== PAGE 68 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
management 
improved 
capacity  
information 
gathered 
through 
community 
engagements 
through 
implementation 
and 
supervisions.  
 
Training 
registration 
sheets 
collected 
and 
provided by trainers to the 
M&E Officer for collation 
into reports.  
 
 
 
 
3 trainings per province 
with 25 RWC members 
attending each. 
 
6 
knowledge 
sharing 
events and activities with 
TA and training for rural 
water committees. The 
events 
would 
bring 
together a large group of 
stakeholders, and ensure 
that 
committees 
registered 
though 
DWSSPs can be brought 
together as a community 
of practice.  
 
Members 
of 
the 
communities 
are 
interested 
in 
climate-
resilient 
water 
management 
and 
are 
available 
for 
training. 
Trained 
area 
administrators 
perform 
that role for a period long 
enough 
to 
allow 
for 
transmission 
and 
multiplication 
of 
knowledge.  
There is uptake among 
diverse members of the 
communities, 
due 
to 
active processes ensuring 
access and inclusion. 
Output 1.3 
Vulnerable 
communities 
are 
supported 
to 
• 
Number 
of 
communities, 
who 
developed 
new 
DWSSPs 
using 
Reports 
from 
DWSSP 
facilitators on completed 
DWSSPS 
included 
in 
interim and final progress 
0 
 
 
 
240 
 
 
 
600 
 
 
 
40% 
registration 
of 
DWSSPs by mid-term and 
100% expected by project 
conclusion.

=== PAGE 69 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 
develop 
and 
implement 
their 
DWSSPs  
 
updated methodology 
(though Output 1.1) 
 
 
reports submitted to the 
EE’s 
for 
quality 
assessment/verification 
against the indicator. 
 
 Lessons learnt and best 
practice 
guide 
on 
technical 
interventions 
developed by the PMU 
and presented to EE’s and 
AE for quality assessment 
and 
alignment 
to 
indicator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governance conditions in 
the 
target 
sites 
are 
favourable 
and 
communities are able to 
demonstrate no and low 
cost investments.  
There is uptake of the 
training 
provided 
and 
widespread 
understanding 
of 
the 
updated 
DWSSP 
processes.  
Trained 
community 
members 
and 
area 
administrators  
perform that role for a 
period long enough to 
allow for transmission and 
multiplication 
of 
knowledge. 
 
Please note at the time of 
project 
design 
301 
DWSSPs 
had 
been 
designed 
to 
date 
– 
therefore total DWSSPs 
at the time of completion 
in country is expected to 
be >901.  
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure 
Output 2.1 
Vulnerable 
communities 
supported 
to 
construct, 
operate, 
and 
maintain climate-
• 
Number 
of 
communities 
supported 
to 
construct, 
operate, 
and maintain climate-
resilient 
water 
infrastructure 
Monitoring 
reports 
provided by the PMU and 
quality assessed by the 
EE’s and AE to ensure 
alignment 
with 
the 
indicator 
and 
that 
no 
0 
 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communities 
partially 
overlap 
with 
the 
beneficiaries of Outcome 
1. This is because 220 
DWSSPs selected will be 
from the 600 DWSSPs 
newly registered through

=== PAGE 70 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
 
resilient 
water 
infrastructure 
double counting or bias 
has been included. 
 
 
Travel 
log, 
meeting 
minutes and other reports 
for study tours presented 
in 
APR’s 
and 
quality 
assessed by the PMU and 
EE 
and 
verified 
data 
against 
the 
indicator 
logged.  
 
Lessons learnt and best 
practice 
guide 
on 
technical 
interventions 
developed by the PMU 
and presented to EE and 
AE for quality assessment 
and 
alignment 
to 
indicator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 
1 
and 
an 
additional 
50 
existing 
DWSSPs 
in 
need 
of 
upgraded 
infrastructure 
will be targeted. This will 
total 
270 
DWSSPs, 
against which CR-WASH 
infrastructure is delivered. 
 
By increasing technical 
assistance and options to 
access 
to 
financial 
support, the delivery of 
functional, 
climate-
resilient, water systems is 
made 
possible 
to 
communities.  
 
Members of communities 
are able to benefit from 
these 
investments 
through 
training 
and 
awareness activities, with 
the requisite behavioural 
needed to maintain these 
systems.  
 
40% 
communities 
reached by mid-term and 
100% expected by project 
conclusion.  
 
Vanuatu 
is 
regularly 
exposed 
to 
natural 
hazards, which can be an 
impediment to the delivery 
of water infrastructure, 
particularly if the efforts 
and funds dedicated to

=== PAGE 71 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
 
water 
governance 
are 
redirected.  
 
Please note at the time of 
project design 47 CAP 
investments 
had 
been 
approved 
to 
date 
– 
therefore 
total 
CAP 
investments at the time of 
completion in country is 
expected to be >317. 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks associated with water security 
Output 
3.1 
National- 
and 
provincial-level 
staff and WASH 
sector 
partners 
trained on climate-
resilient 
water 
management 
 
• 
Number of provincial 
and 
national 
institutions / offices 
strengthened through 
training of staff 
 
 
Baseline, interim and final 
assessment 
reports 
provided by the PMU and 
submitted to the EE’s for 
quality assessment.  
 
Pre- and post-training self 
assessments carried out 
by 
DoWR 
staff 
and 
assessed and collated by 
the M&E officer 
 
0 
 
7 
35 
Within these trainings 420 
GoV (210 female) staff will 
be trained. This will be 
tracked 
an 
verified 
through 
attendance 
sheets.  
 
Alongside the DoWR, the: 
Ministry 
of 
Agriculture, 
Livestock, 
Forestry, 
Fisheries and Biosecurity;  
Ministry 
of 
Climate 
Change; 
Ministry of Education and 
Training, and the 
Ministry of Health will 
benefit 
from 
these 
trainings.  
 
By mid-term, trainings for 
DoWR will be prioritised 
and completed, and the 
remaining cross-sectoral 
trainings on CR-WASH 
will 
be 
provided 
by 
conclusion of the project.

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, 5 institutions 
will 
be 
strengthened 
nationally, alongside their 
provincial offices in each 
of the 6 provinces.  
 
Staff from the DoWR and 
other relevant governance 
institutions, 
at 
both 
national and provincial 
level, are available for 
training sessions.  
 
Staff are retained by these 
organizations for a period 
long enough to allow for 
transmission 
and 
multiplication 
of 
knowledge. 
Output 
3.2 
Knowledge 
management 
through 
data 
sharing 
mechanism 
established 
for 
climate-resilient 
water 
management 
• 
Data 
platform 
established, 
with 
robust 
knowledge 
management 
protocols 
Monitoring 
reports 
provided by the PMU and 
quality assessed by the 
EE’s and AE to ensure 
alignment 
with 
the 
indicator 
and 
that 
no 
double counting or bias 
has been included. 
 
Data platform established 
and published online and 
verified by the EE.  
 
No 
mechanism 
and framework for 
robust knowledge 
management. 
DoWR has a data 
portal, 
that 
requires upkeep.  
Knowledge 
management 
protocol 
established 
Data 
portal 
improved 
and 
strengthened 
and operational 
online. 
Stakeholders 
are 
interested in participating 
in 
coordination 
and 
consultative processes for 
knowledge management 
and 
data 
sharing 
mechanisms and can be 
trained 
on 
protocols 
established.  
 
Output 
3.3 
Monitoring, 
learning 
and 
evaluation 
framework 
established 
for 
• 
M&E 
process 
established 
within 
DoWR 
Monitoring 
reports 
provided by the PMU and 
quality assessed by the 
EE’s and AE to ensure 
alignment 
with 
the 
indicator 
and 
that 
no 
Nascent 
processes 
exist 
but 
require 
strengthening.  
Monitoring, 
learning 
and 
evaluation 
protocol 
established 
after 
Monitoring, 
learning 
and 
evaluation 
operationalized 
with 
wide 
access 
Stakeholders 
are 
interested in participating 
in 
coordination 
and 
consultative processes for 
the 
M&E 
framework 
established.

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
improved learning 
for 
climate-
resilient 
water 
management 
double counting or bias 
has been included. 
 
consultation 
with DoWR and 
other 
WASH 
sector partners 
 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1 
Improved gender parity in 
representation of women 
in 
Rural 
Water 
Committees (RWCs) 
Registration of RWCs with 
members 
(indicating 
a 
minimum 
of 
40% 
of 
women) 
Women are not 
well-represented 
across 
water 
governance 
or 
devolved 
utility 
authorities across 
Vanuatu – exact 
figures 
are 
currently 
unavailable. 
40% of RWCs 
registered, with 
40% of women 
in each. 
Remaining 
60% of RWCs 
registered, with 
40% women in 
each.  
40% RWCs registered by 
mid-term 
and 
100% 
expected 
by 
project 
conclusion.  
There is political will in 
involving 
women 
in 
different 
sub-national 
contexts and in water 
governance institutions.  
 
Women 
may 
not 
be, 
however, 
able 
to 
participate 
meaningfully 
participate 
due 
to 
sociocultural barriers, and 
demands on their time 
due to unpaid care work 
within the household. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
1.1.1: 
Implement 
DWSSPs 
processes 
that 
incorporate 
incremental 
improvements 
to 
mainstream 
adaptation solutions 
and update existing 
DWSSPs 
 
The DWSSP methodology has been updated 
recently with significant overhaul towards climate 
mainstreaming.  
 
It is expected that the methodology will be further 
updated - with annual improvements. 
In the new DWSSPs developed with communities, 
the updated methodology will be used to ensure 
climate risks are mainstreamed. 
 
For the existing DWSSPs – workshops and technical 
assistance will be provided to ensure these plans are 
1.1.1.1: Review uptake and delivery of 
updated methodologies, making incremental 
improvements annually  
1.1.1.2: Integrate updated methodology into 
DWSSP processes triggered during the 
project  
1.1.1.3: Update existing DWSSPs, when 
appropriate 
 
1 annual review and stocktake of 
DWSSP process per implementation 
year, tabulating new and updated 
DWSSPs in specific communities 
achieved per year

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
retrofitted to better reflect climate risks and 
adaptation solutions. 
 
1.2.1: Train area 
administrators and 
develop material for 
communities 
on 
climate 
vulnerability, 
risks 
and 
updated 
DWSSP 
methodology 
For Activity 1.2.1, targeted trainings will be provided 
through technical assistance. Area administrators, if 
relevant, can be paired with DWSSP facilitators to 
ensure that trainings are not duplicated (this activity 
will tie in with 1.2.1). 
 
1.2.1.1: Conduct training targeting area 
administrators on climate vulnerability and 
risks and updated DWSSP methodology 
1.2.1.2: 
Conduct 
training 
targeting 
communities on DWSSP processes, with 
interactive content and WASH advocacy 
materials 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
reporting, 
consolidating 
evaluations of training of area 
administrators and communities on 
climate-resilient 
WASH 
risk 
indicators:  
 
number of participants – gender 
disaggregated 
 
number and location of training 
courses delivered. 
 
1 
consolidated 
document 
of 
interactive 
training 
material 
and 
learning notes. 
1.2.2: 
Organize 
knowledge sharing 
events 
For Activity 1.2.2, interactive training material and 
learning notes will be developed. This could be done 
in partnership with UNICEF which already has tried 
and tested community-led efforts in Vanuatu. 
1.2.2.1: 
Organize 
community-level 
knowledge 
sharing 
events 
to 
ensure 
widespread 
dissemination 
among 
communities 
Annual event report will be produced.  
1.3.1 
Identify 
vulnerable 
communities 
through 
the 
NIP 
process to prioritize 
delivery of DWSSPs 
Through this output, the project will deliver DWSSPs 
to 600 communities, through the NIP process. 
Activity 1.3.1 will involve PWRAC identifying 
vulnerable communities who request DWSSPs 
through the NIP process.  
For the new DWSSP facilitators – and existing staff 
– training will be provided on the DWSSP 
methodology. This will focus on climate risks and 
how these can be adapted to through the DWSSPs. 
Rural Water Committees (RWCs) will be established 
through the DWSSPs – with a mandatory quota of 
40% women. Climate vulnerability assessments and 
community engagement are undertaken to ensure 
600 DWSSPs developed during the project cycle are 
informed by the observed climate impacts. 
1.3.1.1: Recruitment of provincial engineers 
– these positions will be embedded in the 
DoWR and will provide centralised technical 
support at the provincial level  
1.3.1.2: Refresher for community DWSSP 
facilitators halfway through the project to 
serve as a refresher training and to 
incorporate 
the 
various 
incremental 
improvements 
over 
the 
intervening 
implementation period incorporated under 
Output 1.1.  
1.3.1.3: Development of 600 DWSSPs 
informed by best-available climate science, 
local information and traditional knowledge  
1.3.1.4: Establish and register local water 
committees.  
1.3.1.5: Support provided by Provincial 
Engineers and Provincial DoWR officers  to 
1 annual review and stocktake of 
DWSSP process, tabulating new and 
updated 
DWSSPs 
in 
specific 
communities achieved per year  
[Part of reporting for 1.1, including 
following indicators, for reporting on 
1.3: 
i. number of community facilitators 
recruited and trained, gender 
disaggregated 
ii. 600 
local 
water 
committees 
established 
(at 
least 
40% 
participation of women) 
iii. 600 
climate 
vulnerability 
assessments  
 
Number of no and low cost measures 
delivered]

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
implement no and low-cost measures in 
communities 
 
2.1.1: Improve CAP 
request 
prioritization, 
with 
gender and ESIA 
screening 
for 
chosen sites  
 
 
These activities will establish climate-resilient 
drinking water infrastructure and build capacity 
among vulnerable communities to maintain and 
operate these, thus ensuring a paradigm shift from 
build-neglect-rebuild approach.  
 
Activity 2.1.1 will focus on improving the CAP risk 
matrix 
to 
ensure 
that 
vulnerable, 
remote 
communities are prioritized through the project.  
 
 
2.1.1.1: Assess and update multi-criteria 
analysis for risk ranking process to prioritize 
CAP 
requests 
to 
identify 
sites 
for 
infrastructure planning 
2.1.1.2:  Conduct relevant surveys, gender, 
environment 
and 
social 
safeguards 
screening and impact assessments in 
chosen sites 
 
 
 
 
 
1 report on communities supported 
and infrastructure delivered 
[merged with deliverable for 3.1] 
 
1 consolidated, training reports on 
operation and maintenance capacity 
in communities 
[indicators:  
 
number of participants – gender 
disaggregated  
 
number and mapping (where in 
Vanuatu) 
of 
training 
courses 
delivered.] 
 
2.1.2: Upgrade CR 
WASH 
infrastructure, with 
adequate 
O&M 
training 
Activity 2.1.2 will deliver CR-WASH infrastructure to 
communities with selected DWSSPs. 
2.1.2.1: 
Construct 
and 
upgrade 
infrastructure for climate resilient water 
sources, distribution, and storage 
2.1.2.2: Train RWCs on operation and 
maintenance 
for 
the 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure 
2.1.2.3: 
Finalise 
O&M 
for 
CR-WASH 
infrastructure for each community 
 
3.1.1: 
Deliver 
enhanced 
administrative 
and 
technical 
capacity 
training for water 
management 
 
This activity will focus on enhancing the capacities of 
national and provincial level staff on climate-resilient 
water management and water governance. Activity 
3.1.1. will attempt to expand the skill set available to 
the DoWR through external technical support. 
3.1.1.1: Train PWRAC and DoWR staff on 
updated DWSSP, climate risks and water 
management 
3.1.1.2: Host engineers (50% male 50% 
female) in  each of the 6 provinces through 
humanitarian engineering assistance 
1 training report on PWRAC & DoWR 
training 
[indicators:  
i. number of participants – gender 
disaggregated  
ii. number and mapping (where in 
Vanuatu) 
of 
training 
courses 
delivered.] 
3.1.2: 
Update 
engineering 
standards 
and 
conduct workshops 
for WASH sector 
partners 
Activity 3.1.2 will provide the necessary impetus to 
engage coordination between different WASH sector 
partners, as well as ensuring engineering standards 
are updated, approved with consensus to minimize 
or remove risks, are analysed through a robust 
safeguarding process and then, deployed. 
 
3.1.2.1: Update engineering standards and 
deploy in provinces for new infrastructure 
3.1.2.2: Workshops with WASH sector 
partners (incl. MoH, Med., and CSOs) on 
updated DWSSP, climate risks, and water 
management 
1 written report on progress of 
updated engineering standards and 
how they have been rolled out 
presented at mid-term. 
 
Workshop reports on WASH sector 
partner events. 
[indicators:

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
i. number of participants – gender 
disaggregated 
ii. number and mapping (where in 
Vanuatu) of workshops delivered. 
3.2.1: 
Improve 
knowledge 
management 
processes  
These 
activities 
will 
focus 
on 
knowledge 
management for the project, and improve data 
sharing portals in Vanuatu. Support will be provided 
to WASH sector partners to be able to employ data 
for decision-making.  
 
3.2.1.1: 
Review 
existing 
knowledge 
management and identify gaps to be 
strengthened 
3.2.1.2: Establish knowledge management 
protocol through consultative process 
1 
consolidated 
report 
on 
KM 
mechanism 
and 
data 
platform 
established and reported through the 
DoWR’s M&E unit 
 
3.2.2: 
Operationalize data 
sharing platform  
 
3.2.2.1: Integrate data collected through 
DWSSPs 
into 
government 
knowledge 
management platforms, such as DoWR data 
portal 
3.2.2.1: Set and disburse relevant data 
management procedures to ensure data is 
compatible and aggregable within the 
system. 
3.2.1.2: Engage relevant stakeholders to 
support effective utilization of data for 
decision-making by WASH sector partners 
3.3.1: 
Collate 
existing 
MEL 
practices 
within 
water 
governance 
structures 
in 
Vanuatu, 
and 
establish a robust 
MEL protocol 
This activity will take stock of existing MEL practices 
within government-owned process, and upgrade this 
system by introducting robust protocol using a 
consultative process, as well as through SPC’s 
existing processes through the PEARL policy and 
rebbilib. See Section E.7 for details.  
3.3.1.1: Stocktake existing MEL processes, 
and collate lessons learnt, case studies, and 
best practices available  
3.3.1.2: Create an inventory of existing 
reports  
3.3.1.3: Introduce robust MEL protocol, 
identified through a consultative process 
1 consolidated report on MEL system 
established and reported through the 
DoWR’s M&E unit 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
130. In its role as Accredited Entity, SPC CCES will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project, in accordance with the agreement signed between 
SPC and the GCF. SPC GEM, in capacity as EE, through the PMU will be responsible for project-level MEL and reporting in compliance with approved SPC 
policies and GCF requirements under relevant agreements. Further, SPC coordination between its CFU, Strategy, Performance and Learning (SPL) Team 
and the NPSC will provide supervision and technical assistance as needed to support the PMU implement tools and methods to monitor, evaluate and learn 
from the project activities.

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65  Pacific Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Capacity strengthening Rebbilib / by Pacific MEL, Strategy Performance and Leaning (SPL) Unit, Office of the Director-General, SPC 
https://www.spc.int/DigitalLibrary/Doc/SPC/Publications/Pacific_Monitoring_Evaluation_and_Learning_Capacity_Strengthening_Rebbilib.pdf 
66 DoWR (Organizational Chart): https://mol.gov.vu/images/News-Photo/water/DoWR_File/Vanuatu_DoWR_Org_Chart.pdf 
67 https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/evaluation-policy.pdf  
131. In 2020, SPC along with the New Zealand Government Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and BetterEvaluation co-designed a participatory process to 
assess and understand the current MEL system and opportunities for capacity strengthening for projects in the region.65 This MEL system is informed by a 
set of principles: Pacific ownership, a strengths-based approach to capacity development, adult learning, and supporting situationally appropriate choices of 
MEL methods and processes. The MEL for the project will derive from this rebbilib announced in conjunction with Pacific leaders and communities.  
 
132. The logical framework contains performance indicators by Outcome and outputs, which will be monitored by the PMU and regular (semi-annual) updates 
provided to the NDA, NPSC and SPC CCES during program implementation. Additionally, the project will undertake rigorous KM and MEL exercises through 
Output 3.2 (knowledge management through data sharing mechanism established for climate-resilient water management) and Output 3.3 (monitoring, 
learning and evaluation framework established for improved learning for climate-resilient water management). Activities under these Outputs will improve 
the knowledge management platform (particularly the data portal) available in the country in line with GCF policies. Support will be provided to WASH sector 
partners to be able to employ data for decision-making.  
 
133. A Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning Officer will be hired under the PMU to coordinate MEL across the project. This will include establishing M&E 
systems that are aligned with GCF, NDA and SPC policies and results framework. This MEL Officer will work together with the Project Manager under the 
guidance of the NPSC and the EE to develop a set of MEL tools, approaches and reporting arrangements for project activities. This will include annual 
performance reports and project closure reports. The training, coaching and support provided to beneficiaries of MEL capacity building will include capacity 
development in MEL, with a focus on how this can be used to maximize activity outcomes while building the evidence base for the results and impact of the 
initiative.  
 
134. Monitoring will enable the PMU to make adjustments to respond to unexpected events during the implementation phase as well as to build trust and respond 
to stakeholders and affected communities. The scope, robustness, and frequency of project monitoring, and reporting will vary depending on the type of 
activities (as per section E above) and the significance of risks/impacts identified through the screening process. In addition, monitoring requirements will 
take into consideration the circumstances in which the project takes place and is implemented. 
 
135. For the CR-WASH infrastructure to be installed through the DWSSP processes, Rural Water Committees (RWCs) set up as local water governance 
mechanisms will conduct participatory monitoring, reporting and evaluation, which will feed into the Activity Coordination Group, and scaled up to the 
provincial water governance bodies (consisting of Provincial Water Supervisor and Community Water Development Officers) for documentation and policy 
adjustments. One of the main units of the DoWR is the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit66 – which will be responsible for ensuring the newly registered and 
existing DWSSPs are functional.  
 
136. Finally, the CFU and GEM team will be jointly responsible for coordinating the independent interim and final evaluations for the GCF. The evaluations will 
be conducted using a question-driven approach, and will include assessments against the criteria of relevance, effectiveness and sustainability, among 
others. The evaluation criteria are further described in Appendix II of the GCF Evaluation Policy (2022)67. The Interim Evaluation will be instrumental in 
contributing (through operational and strategic recommendations) to improve implementation, setting out any necessary corrective and adaptive 
management measures for the remaining period of the project, and identifying relevant lessons learned for stakeholders in Vanuatu as well as the broader

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
Pacific region. The final evaluation will assess the relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability, replicability and scalability 
of results, differential impacts and lessons learned.  
 
137. The evaluation should also assess the extent to which the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in 
adaptation to climate change in Vanuatu. Both evaluations will contribute to the evidence base for adaptation to climate change in Vanuatu and across the 
Pacific region and will be published on the SPC website and other relevant platforms.

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Limited interest of engagement from local communities 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
High 
Description 
Limited interest of engagement from local communities might lead to underdeveloped projects and reduced impacts 
given poor ongoing maintenance after installation of equipment.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will build on the NIP and the DWSSP which have been well received across the country and reinforced 
through consultations. These mechanisms are further supported through resources and training and are working 
mechanisms to improve rural communities’ water supply systems. The process is triggered by communities and in most 
cases coordinated through area secretaries and Provincial Water Officers. By building on this process the project will 
be aided by and reinforce community ownership. Provincial authorities have been included in the development of the 
proposed project and have indicated considerable interest in the proposed activities. The project will target communities 
where supplies of reliable water is at risk so there is high interest in the proposed activities and an interest to maintain 
water infrastructure after installation. The project has been designed in such a way as to strengthen participatory 
governance, with focused outreach, engagement, and delivered benefits through trainings support to communities, to 
build leadership and ownership of the communities. 
Geographic remoteness of project sites 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
High 
Description 
Some communities are located in remote islands and provinces. Transportation to, and communication and 
outreach/engagement with these remote communities is a significant challenge, that can result in project delays as 
materials required for infrastructure works are not obtained within planned timeframes, or travel of extension agents is 
limited, reducing interactions with communities and delaying training delivery.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Under the project, communities, and provincial authorities will be engaged through the DoWR and building on the 
established NIP and DWSSP processes to deliver project results – this dispersed approach, making use of existing 
delivery mechanisms helps to mitigate the risk, which will be strengthened within this project. This engagement will 
include communicating project needs to provincial authorities, and communities based on the relative geographic 
isolation of their community. SPC has well established and efficient procurement protocols, meaning greater flexibility 
in procurement to adjust to needs, and the SPC and DoWR teams will adjust to transportation and communication 
needs accordingly. 
Interagency co-ordination 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Limited coordination between government ministries, SPC, communities, NGOs/CBOs, private sector and other 
stakeholders reduces the efficiency and effectiveness of implementation of project interventions. Further, this could 
result in project delays as decision-making processes are delayed by lack of inter-stakeholder coordination. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Strong institutional and implementation arrangements for the project’s management framework will ensure effective 
coordination and collaboration between project partners. The PMU will facilitate constant dialogue between project 
partners and stakeholders and ensure that the main stakeholders communicate regularly and coordinate actions. The 
project will also build institutional capacities for coordination between national and regional government, executing 
entities and supporting organisations (outcome 3) covering data collection, communication, and knowledge

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
management processes and tools. Moreover, project activities focus specifically on building capacities in relevant 
institutions.68 
Insufficient capacity and resources to implement projects 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
High 
Description 
Communities have insufficient technical capacity and financial/material resources to implement priority projects which 
results in stranded or underperforming projects and limited results for local communities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Existing technical capacity within communities, area committees and provincial authorities is quite limited which is why 
the project deliberately builds capacity within all these stakeholder groups on climate change, project development, and 
project management as well as provides sustained technical support, guidance, and oversight from project support 
bodies. In the event stakeholders need additional support beyond this in order to successfully implement a project the 
DoWR at the national level and the GEM division of the SPC, through the PMU will assist delivery, serve as the financial 
and procurement provider and directly support project implementation in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders. 
Localized data and information are insufficient to help support development of priority projects 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Localized data and information are insufficient to help support development of priority projects leading to 
underdeveloped projects, sub-optimal design, siting, and implementation of sub-grant activities, and ultimately limited 
climate adaptation outcomes. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project works directly with national and provincial agencies to catalogue existing climate, vulnerability, and other 
data to help engage communities through the DWSSP process to prioritize investments, carry out necessary studies 
(for example related to groundwater) and identify gaps that need to be addressed. This data will be stored in a on a 
centralised and open access data repository to facilitate data use and learning and support local project development.  
Unfavourable exploitation of groundwater resources  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
High 
Description 
In the case new boreholes would be needed as part of Outcome 2 activities (to be confirmed during the project 
preparation), there is a risk that groundwater abstraction might not be sustainable. All other activities will aim at 
improving the sustainable use of water resources. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
For boreholes, if any, locations will be selected in advance and additional information (incl. water balance and 
sustainability of groundwater abstraction per aquifer via yield tests) will be provided when developing the funding 
proposal. A properly conducted yield test will ensure no over extraction. DoWR is currently developing national 
standards on borehole preparation, and design and installation of solar pump systems. The project design 
documentation will also clearly state monitoring and maintenance protocols that determine roles and responsibilities 
for water users that should be adhered to both during and past project implementation. The monitoring protocols will 
have strict threshold values determined from the yield tests to prevent over extraction beyond these thresholds, 
extraction does not exceed provisioning rates and ensure that water resources are sustainably managed. 
Difficulty in sourcing of technology and other inputs for project activities 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
 
68 No persons or entities listed on any UN Security Council sanctions list, including the UN Consolidated Sanctions list will be involved in any 
manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer, or beneficiary.

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
Description 
Procurement for the project in Vanuatu is complicated given the diverse, dispersed geographies of Vanuatu as well as 
constrained supply chains ongoing from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Existing capacity in communities, and within provincial authorities for procurement is limited. The project will support 
effective procurement through 1) centralised procurement by SPC following SPC’s procurement policy to ensure that 
international standards of best practice are adhered to and costs are kept as low as possible, 2) strengthening DoWR 
procurement processes, and 3) technical support, guidance, and oversight provided by project support bodies. Beyond 
this the project will provide) training on climate change project development and project management to provincial 
authorities, including dedicated sessions of procurement practices. This should ensure more robust procurement 
practices beyond the project timeline. 
COVID-19 constraints for engagement and operations 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Depending on the timeline of the extended pandemic, stakeholder engagement could still be constrained by COVID-
19 and the resulting shifts in staff and protocols. Further, there is a risk to execution officers and beneficiaries on 
increased exposure to the virus through project activities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has been adaptive and proactive in finding pathways to engage with needed stakeholders at the local level 
during the COVID-19 pandemic by leveraging highly effective national consultants and local networks. This foundation 
will help the project to proactively plan for alternative pathways for stakeholder engagement. In addition, during cases 
of increased incidence of the virus, in alignment with government recommendations all necessary precautionary and 
protective measures will be in place for in person meetings (personal protective equipment use, hand sanitation, social 
distancing etc) and wherever feasible online virtual platforms will be used as appropriately. 
AML/CFT and Prohibited Practices 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Low 
High 
Description 
Potential risks related to Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The SPC has adopted Financial Policies for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing to prescribe the 
principles and minimum safeguards to protect SPC from being misused for money laundering or terrorism financing. 
Although the risks of money laundering and terrorism financing are considered “low” for Vanuatu, SPC will take steps 
to ensure that its funds are not used to finance any illegal acts related to money laundering or terrorism financing. The 
Director-General will implement a continuous risk-based approach to identify, assess and understand SPC’s money 
laundering and terrorism financing risks, and will take appropriate steps to mitigate those identified risks. The SPC will 
undertake due diligence in engagement with the development partner, supplier, implementation partner or any other 
entity involved in the activities of the SPC as part of Know Your Customer due diligence to ensure identity and safeguard 
the practices of the entity. Detailed due diligence will enable the SPC to assess and assess the risk of money laundering 
or terrorist financing. There are currently no international sanctions against Vanuatu. As for the prohibited practices, 
the SPC has procedures to ensure their avoidance including a whistle-blower policy. Manuals and emails for reporting 
of prohibited practices can be found at https://www.spc.int/accountability. 
Financial sustainability 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description:  
Lack of financial capacity to ensure maintenance of infrastructure beyond project lifecycle 
Mitigation measures:

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
DWSSPs and infrastructure upgrades will be financed through the DoWR managed CAP. Through Outcome 2 the 
project will ensure more robust selection criteria are put in place for CAP investments, including the enhancement of 
operation and maintenance planning. Through this process, maintenance planning will include indicative budgets for 
maintenance of infrastructure post project, to be funded by communities in alignment with Operations and Maintenance 
Plans submitted in proposals. 
Major hazards 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium  
Description: 
Unexpected major natural hazards (major cyclones, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis etc) could damage 
project infrastructure or cause increased contamination of water sources. 
Mitigation measures: 
Through Outcome 1 the DWSSP methodologies will be upgraded to account for severe climate risks, such cyclones, 
ensuring that infrastructure is resilient to impacts of high winds and mitigates risk of contamination in flooding events. 
Design specifications to be provided through this project by DoWR are deemed adequate to withstand potential impact 
of climate related threats. This is based on enhanced designs standards refined by the NPE. Supporting this, operation 
and maintenance plans will be in place to implement regular assessment of infrastructure and ensure any damages 
are identified and resolved quickly.

=== PAGE 83 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
138. In the development of this funding proposal and its accompanying feasibility study, an initial risk assessment for 
the intended adaptation activities has been conducted. All project activities are expected to be limited both in 
scale and risk given the size of investments and infrastructure designs planned. In line with GCF ESS 
requirements, an initial project screening was undertaken following SPC’s SER Policy, which complies with GCFs 
standards on ESS. Following this, “Annex 6 – the Environment and Social Management Plan” has been developed 
for the project and presents a detailed environmental and social risk assessment for this project. Outcomes 1 and 
2 are deemed to be in alignment with ESS category C standards as they focus on “soft” activities. However, 
Outcome 2 will finance the construction of water-related infrastructure works for 270 communities. It is envisioned 
that a low proportion (<5-10%) of these investments will fall into ESS Category B, causing potential or minimal 
localised impacts. Consequently, the overall categorisation of the project is category B.  
 
139. For a full breakdown of assessed risks and mitigation approaches proposed for the project please refer to 
Annex 6, tables 3 and 4. A summary of potential environmental and social risks in the absence of mitigation 
measures implemented by the project are presented below.  
Environmental risks 
- 
Overexploitation of groundwater tables or surface water sources 
- 
Pollution of the immediate environment from construction processes 
- 
Salination of the immediate environment from desalination waste 
- 
Shift in surface water resources 
- 
Biodiversity lost in immediate surroundings 
- 
Soil degradation in the immediate environment from construction processes 
- 
Accidental contamination or pollution of water bodies from waste generated by construction processes 
Social risks  
- Community disputes resulting from lack of engagement in design  
- Noise during construction processes 
- Community disputes of access to water and land rights 
- Lack of access to land in the case of fenced infrastructure 
- Lack of gender equality in community decision-making processes 
 
140. To ensure the compliance of investments under Outcome 2 with best practices in environmental and social 
protection and risk mitigation, the DoWR has put in place robust ESS processes for DWSSPs applying for 
infrastructure development assistance. This includes an initial ESS screening. On categorisation of any 
project to ESS Category B, the CAP proposal must institute an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
and develop an ESMP for consideration of the investment. Further, all project investments will comply with 
a set of exclusionary criteria (as detailed in Annex 6 section 7) to ensure all activities comply with GCF ESS 
Category B+C standards. The project ESS Officer will assess all proposals through the technical assistance 
role provided under Outcome 1 and will ensure that ESS assessments are in alignment with GCF standards 
to mitigate any potential risk and that no excluded criteria are included in proposals. They will also support 
the DoWR to strengthen its assessment processes.  
 
Disclosure 
141. In the case a investment is considered to meet ESS Category B criteria for environmental or social impact, the 
ESS Officer will make the report publicly available. In line with GCF disclosure policy and were not restricted by 
any partners or service providers confidentiality requirements, the ESS Officer will act accordingly to:  
• publish the relevant report on SPC’s website;  
• ensure that copies of the report are accessible to potentially affected peoples at a local level in a local 
language if required; and  
• provide the report to the partner or service providers in line with their requirements under any funding 
agreement. 
 
Grievance Redress 
142. SPC is committed to receiving any concerns or grievances from any affected persons or community, related to the 
environmental and social impacts of any SPC project. At any time, an affected member of a community may raise 
their concerns by lodging a complaint on SPC’s website or to the PMU and NSPC in accordance with the

=== PAGE 84 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
procedures laid out in Annex 7 Stakeholder engagement plan. These mechanisms will be accessible and relevant 
to the affected person’s context. Communities and stakeholders will be able to access the grievance complaint 
form. Such grievances will be raised to SPC as the Accredited Entity as well as to the NPSC. 
 
Stakeholder Engagement  
143. National level consultations on the project were held on 27 July -1 September 2021. This included a wide range of 
stakeholders. Supporting this, further provincial level consultations were held on the 20-29th of September 2021. 
For a full list of attendees and organisations consulted please refer to Annex 7 section 4. 
 
144. Following this, the proposal has been designed in continuous collaboration with the NDA office, the DoWR and 
WASH sector partners to ensure it aligns with the needs of the target beneficiaries and the national policies and 
regulations. Including those related to Environmental and Social Safeguards. 
 
145. During project development, key women’s groups were also consulted to ensure appropriate gender 
mainstreaming and to validate the gender action plan. The Gender Analysis and Action Plan Annex 8 includes a 
summary of the outcomes of these consultations and how they were integrated into project design. 
 
146. Lastly, a final validation workshop was held with project stakeholders on the 23rd of March 2022. Project 
documentation was submitted to all participants for no objection to the proposed project formulation. All comments 
were adequately addressed for the submission to the GCF secretariat. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
147. Annex 8 - the Gender Assessment and Action Plan – presents the gender mainstreaming exercise undertaken 
during the project preparation stage. The proposed project recognises the lack of a gender-responsive approach 
in Vanuatu that could limit the potential, inclusiveness and success of the project objective, stemming from:  
• Poor or missing gender analysis or assumptions that climate services or adaptation actions are gender-
neutral69;  
• Side-lining of gender needs or ethnic vulnerabilities in adaptation design, resilience capacity-building and 
mitigation services;70 and  
• Lack or scant allocation of financial means, gender budgets and dedicated resources towards mainstreaming 
gender action71. 
 
Annex 8, therefore, presents an assessment of the different roles, rights, needs and opportunities of women and 
men, boys and girls in the project context, and mobilises project resources to tackle gender barriers, and contribute 
towards improved gender equality in Vanuatu. Using gender as a lens will also help identify the social relationships 
between women and men, and other marginalized groups in Vanuatu. The adaptation pathway chosen by this 
project recognizes that access to WASH is fundamental to development, but it can be mobilized as critical climate 
adaptation strategy for poor and vulnerable communities, as well as marginalized groups within those 
communities, including women and girls.72  
 
148. The project adheres to the GCF’s Gender Policy and Action Plan (adopted in 2014, and updated in 2019); SPC’s 
SER Policy (2018); and the Government of Vanuatu’s National Gender Equality Policy 2020 – 2030 (NGEP),73 
prepared by the Department of Women’s Affairs of the Ministry of Justice and Community Services. The NGEP 
prioritizes five strategic areas, including women’s leadership and political participation and fostering gender-
responsive and community-driven solutions to climate and disaster resilience. 
 
 
69 See Butterfield, R. (2018) ‘Bringing rights into resilience: revealing complexities of climate risks and social conflict’ in Disasters. Journal 
Article.  
70 Poor or missing gender analysis, or the lack of gender-responsive action, may lead to planners or personnel depending on women to 
assume a central role in their coping strategies, which may not be the practical reality for many vulnerable communities. Further, this also 
glosses over the existing burdens on women among such groups. See Nelson. V., Meadows. K., Cannon, T., Morton, J., & Martin, A. (2002) 
‘Uncertain predictions, invisible impacts and the need to mainstream gender in climate change adaptations’ in Gender and Development. 
Journal Article. 
71
 Department 
of 
Women’s 
Affairs 
(2020). 
Beijing 
+25 
– 
National 
Review 
Report. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.asiapacificgender.org/sites/default/files/documents/Vanuatu%20(English).pdf 
72  Winqvist, E. (ed.) (2020). Feminist Policies for Climate Justice. Stockholm: Concord. Available at: https://concord.se/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/fem-rapport-2020-final.pdf 
73 The NGEP prioritizes five strategic areas: 1) eliminating discrimination and violence against women and girls; 2) enhancing women’s 
empowerment and skills development; 3) advancing women’s leadership and political participation; 4) strengthening the foundation for gender 
mainstreaming; and, 5) fostering gender-responsive and community-driven solutions to climate and disaster resilience.

=== PAGE 85 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
149. Gender barriers identified through stakeholder consultations with Department of Women’s Affairs as well as among 
communities are:  
• Different gender groups, particularly women and girls, have gendered needs, which remain underserved by 
existing WASH infrastructure and are impacted by humanitarian emergencies; 
• Women continue to be underrepresented in water security and climate adaptation-related decision-making 
bodies, despite registering better performance when represented; 
• Insufficient, non-resilient WASH infrastructure continue to be compromised by climate risks, increasing time 
poverty among certain gender groups; and, 
• Water insecurity indirectly and directly combines to exacerbate gender inequality in other sectors (such as 
limited land rights) and limit adoption of adaptation and resilience strategies. 
 
150. The project has identified the following co-benefit as a part of its Section E: Logical Framework. 
 
151. This co-benefit will act on the finding74 that women are underrepresented in water user committees in Vanuatu, 
and establish Rural Water Committees (RWCs) through the DWSSP processes that provision for a minimum of 
40% representation.75 Women’s underrepresentation is detrimental, as UNICEF research has demonstrated that 
their meaningful participation can increase the effectiveness of community-based management models. This co-
benefit feeds into the legal pre-requisite for the registration of RWCs (40% female representation is mandatory) in 
Vanuatu, under the Water Resources (Amendment) Act No. 32 of 2016. 
 
152. This will be measured as an independent indicator and will be delivered in tandem with (primarily) Outcome 1, 
which will establish 600 new DWSSPs in Vanuatu, alongside providing policy and climate training. Further, the 
project will also ensure that infrastructure delivery (through Outcome 2), and trainings (as well as policy 
strengthening) provided through Outcome 1 and 3, incorporate findings from the gender consultations. 76 
Participants, at the community-level stakeholder consultations, identified key gender groups and articulated their 
different needs. These were summarized by a breakout group (which reflected other stakeholder groups in the 
Sanma and Tafea provinces) in Penama province below. 
 
Table 11: Climate resilient WASH needs of gender groups in Vanuatu 
Gender Group 
Needs 
Elderly (60+) 
 
Easy access/tap stands to be in close proximity 
 
Taps fitted at a lower level for accessibility 
 
Ball taps for ease of use 
 
Solar lighting in the tap use area 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit # 
Indicator 
 
Means 
of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions/ 
Notes 
Mid-term 
Final 
Co-benefit 1 
Improved 
gender parity 
in 
representation 
of women in 
Rural 
Water 
Committees 
(RWCs) 
Registration 
of 
RWCs 
with 
members 
(indicating a 
minimum of 
40% 
of 
women) 
Women are 
not 
well-
represented 
across water 
governance 
or devolved 
utility 
authorities 
across 
Vanuatu 
– 
exact figures 
are currently 
unavailable. 
40% 
of 
RWCs 
registered, 
with 40% 
of women 
in each. 
Remaining 
60% 
of 
RWCs 
registered, 
with 
40% 
women 
in 
each.  
40% RWCs registered by mid-term 
and 
100% 
expected 
by 
project 
conclusion.  
There is political will in involving 
women 
in 
different 
sub-national 
contexts and in water governance 
institutions. Women may not be, 
however, 
able 
to 
participate 
meaningfully 
participate 
due 
to 
sociocultural barriers, and demands 
on their time due to unpaid care work 
within the household.  
 
 
74 Mommen, B., Humphries-Waa, K., Gwavuya, S. (2017). “Does women’s participation in water committees affect management and water 
system performance in rural Vanuatu?” in Waterlines, v. 2017. 
75 The Rural Water Committee usually takes overall responsibility for developing their supply-specific DWSSP. However, technical and 
facilitation support will be needed to develop a DWSSP. A community DWSSP team needs to be established, usually comprising members 
of the Rural Water Committee, women’s, men’s, youth and church group representation, local plumbers and carpenters, and the head person. 
This brings together a variety of perspectives from the people who know the water supply and how it is used. Further detail can be found 
here: Vanuatu’s National Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Community Plan, available at – 
 https://mol.gov.vu/images/News-Photo/water/DoWR_File/Management_Plans/Vanuatu-NIP-Guide-annual-CAP-210818.pdf 
76 During implementation, these designs will be further defined and specified through further consultations and workshops at the community 
level. These will be dispensed through the process of developing 600 DWSSPs through Outcome 1.

=== PAGE 86 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
Disability/Disabled 
 
Easy access 
 
Ramp for wheelchair/hand-rail 
 
Solar lighting in the tap use area 
Women 
(menstruating/lactating)  
 
Separate shower facilities with dignity facilities 
 
Safe house for menstrual hygiene 
 
Separate individual tank with RWCs for menstrual hygiene / child-related water use 
 
Solar lighting for security / privacy 
LGBTQI 
 
Separate shower facilities 
 
Solar lighting for security / privacy 
6-18 years (school students) 
 
Separate water storage for: 
bathroom use and kitchen use (to reduce collection burdens)  
0-5 years 
 
Safety valves to be fixed before taps are installed 
NB. There is an urgent need to install gender-responsive signs to specifically assigned facilities at the community level. Alongside, 
working groups indicated the need for the inclusion of well-lit, demarcated WASH areas, with the provision of secure doors and 
locks – to ensure such facilities can be used by women safely. 
 
153. The proposed solution recognizes that bridging practical gender needs (e.g. access to water) with strategic gender 
interests (e.g. changes in power and roles) is critical to achieving transformational changes in gender equality in 
Vanuatu, where underrepresentation of diverse gender groups limits the efficacy of existing infrastructure and the 
potential of new investments. Through the planned trainings (where 50:50 gender balanced beneficiary distribution 
is targeted), alongside this co-benefit to ensure increased, meaningful participation of women in RWCs, the project 
will also be able to explore five WASH- and climate change-relevant elements of empowerment: participation, 
decision-making, information, capacity building and leadership. 
 
154. In doing so, the assessment operationalises gender mainstreaming activities through the project’s results 
framework by formulating a Gender Action Plan, based on the project’s Logical Framework (Section E of the 
Funding Proposal).  
 
155. This ensures that the proposed design77, to deliver improved water security and increased climate resilience at 
community level, can have climate, environmental and social co-benefits, with identified indicators, timeline and 
means of verification. In addition, with the implementation of the gender action plan and the ESMP (that accounts 
for Gender Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment) it is envisioned that the project will 
have a low risk regarding gender issues. Consequently, the ESS categorisation as presented in paragraph 137 is 
deemed accurate from a gender perspective.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
156. SPC’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS) is built on a Microsoft Dynamics NAV-based enterprise 
resource planning system that has been deployed to all of its regional offices, which provides SPC with financial 
management functionalities. Using FMIS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial monitoring 
and reporting, increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control. SPC maintains organization-
wide separation of income and expenditure by donor and project so that financial and other data can be recorded, 
classified and summarized to facilitate internal management and external reporting requirements. 
 
157. As mentioned in Section C.4., SPC as the Accredited Entity to the GCF will have overall responsibility for quality 
assurance and oversight of project implementation in accordance with its policies and procedures. In addition to 
this, the AE will be responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds according to SPC rules and regulations 
mainly contained and detailed in the SPC Handbook (including those referred to financial monitoring, audit and 
procurement). Oversight and quality assurance may include monitoring missions, spot checks and participation in 
coordination and steering committee meetings. The project will be subject to SPC’s audit regime will be conducted 
in conformity to accepted international standards on auditing as documented inGCF accreditation processes and 
approval from the GCF Board. This includes the external audit and internal audit functions with oversight provided 
by SPC’s independent Audit and Review Committee. Audits are conducted on an annual basis or on more frequent 
basis at the request of the SPC governing body or as specified in any legal agreements with external donors. As 
such, audits for this project will all be carried out in compliance with SPC audit regime and the obligations detailed 
in SPC’s Accreditation Master Agreement as well as the Funded Activity Agreement for this project. 
 
77 Please refer to Section E for the Logical Framework in the Funding Proposal (FP). The Gender Action Plan (GAP) (Section 8 of Annex 8) 
provides impact and outcome statement for each Outcome in relation to gender mainstreaming entry points and proposed actions for the 
project, to be evaluated against a set of indicators and targets as well as delineation of timeline, responsible parties and costing. The paradigm 
shift potential of the results framework is captured in the Theory of Change, available in the FP as Section B.2 and further described in Section 
D.

=== PAGE 87 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
158. When under implementation, financial management will remain in compliance with SPC policies and aligned with 
Vanuatu’ Public Financial Management Act to the greatest extent possible. This will support the ongoing 
sustainability of the project as it will already be operating within the framework of the rules and regulations that will 
govern the management of the project and implementation of activities after the GCF-funded period. 
 
Procurement  
159. Financial control and procurement processes of the project will be implemented as per SPC rules and regulations 
for Outcome 1 and 3, which were assessed by the GCF during accreditation. SPC has specific policies for financial 
management including “Finance Regulations”, “Anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing”, 
“Procurement” and “Grants and sub-delegation” as well as its “Staff Regulations and Manual of Staff Policies” that 
govern HR and other relevant processes and procedures. These and other policies are available on the SPC 
Intranet and are adhered to in the implementation of all SPC projects. All entities involved in the project’s 
implementation will comply with these policies. For Outcome 2, resources on-granted through the CAP will follow 
the DoWR procurement and financial management processes. A capacity assessment of GoV financial 
management services has been conducted and their systems have been deemed to be in compliance with the 
SPC procurement policies. A separate ledger account for GCF resources will be established in the CAP to allow 
traceability of GCF funds. All projects funded under this ledger account will meet ESS standards of GCF and align 
to exclusion criteria described in Annex 6 as well as align with GCF prohibitive practices policy. The PMU ESS 
Officer and Finance and Procurement Officer will ensure compliance.  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity 
is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

=== PAGE 88 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
78 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
H. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule     
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross 
cutting-projects)78 
☐ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 89 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 90 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by 
Improving Water Security in Vanuatu  
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
The Pacific Community (SPC) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Vanuatu 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, September 7, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is the official language of Vanuatu and a language 
understandable to the target population.  
Link to disclosure 
https://purl.org/spc/digilib/doc/zgdak 
Other link(s) 
https://www.spc.int/accountability/spcs-disclosure-of-
relevant-ess-measures 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirement for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment and Management Plan”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, September 7, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is the official language of Vanuatu and a language 
understandable to the target population.  
Link to disclosure 
https://purl.org/spc/digilib/doc/zgdak 
 
Other link(s) 
https://www.spc.int/accountability/spcs-disclosure-of-
relevant-ess-measures 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirement for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment and Management Plan”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A

=== PAGE 91 ===
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Thursday, September 15, 2022 
Place 
Government of Vanuatu’s National Advisory Board (NAB) 
of Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction’s disclosure 
page: https://nab.vu/node/27442  
 
Address: 
National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster 
Risk Reduction, 
Ministry of Climate Change, 
Namba 2 Area, 
Port Vila,  
Vanuatu 
 
As per the "Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
and Management Plan”, on sub project development those 
projects deemed Category B will be disclosed at physical 
locations convenient to the target communities in alignment 
with the GCF programming manual. 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 17, 2022 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 92 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP191 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving 
Water Security in Vanuatu 
Accredited entity: 
The Pacific Community (SPC) 
Country/(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The proposal targets vulnerable communities 
impacted by climate change through stronger 
floods and cyclones. 
It is important that locally self-sufficient 
operation and maintenance structures are 
established to sustain the works. 
It proposes an integrated approach to 
enhance water security by establishing new 
water management plans and developing 
essential water supply systems. 
To establish and develop water supply and 
management systems including 
infrastructures in small islands, the cost per 
beneficiary is relatively expensive compared 
to the average. 
Country ownership is high and well-aligned 
with national priorities. Government and 
other co-financing are available. 
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and in addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and
recommendations”, respectively.
II.
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 
Project background 
3.
Vanuatu is a small island developing State comprising 83 islands located in the Western
Pacific. The country’s geographical location, undiversified economic structure, and high import
dependence make it vulnerable to external shocks, especially climate change-induced disasters
and natural hazards. Climate risks and shocks greatly impact hard-earned development gains
and threaten food, energy, and water security. This project will focus on access to water
resources, which is one of the fundamental human rights.
4.
The objective of this project is to create safe, climate-resilient, and sustainable water
utilization and improved water security at community levels in Vanuatu. This will be done by
improving and scaling up the existing government-owned processes of water management,
namely the Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning (DWSSP) process and the Capital
Assistance Programme (CAP), both of which are mandated by the National Implementation Plan
for Safe and Secure Water (NIP). The project will directly benefit 85,650 people (including

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 93 
 
 
42,825 women) in rural communities, which account for about 27 per cent of the whole 
population of Vanuatu. These are the most vulnerable populations who are directly exposed to 
climate risks in Vanuatu and lack access to drinking water as well as water, sanitation, and 
hygiene (WASH) services. They will be targeted through an existing, nationally-owned 
prioritization process and benefit from the implementation of the project’s interventions. The 
project will also indirectly benefit an additional 216,980 rural people (73 per cent of the 
population). 
5. 
The total project financing is USD 28,290,014, with a request for GCF grants of USD 
23,325,033. The Government of Vanuatu will provide co-finance of USD 3,736,081 in the form of 
grants and USD 668,900 in the form of in-kind contribution. The United Nations Children's Fund 
(UNICEF) and SPC will also provide in-kind contributions in the amount of USD 470,000 and 
USD 90,000, respectively. The project is submitted under environmental and social safeguards 
(ESS) category B.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water resources 
(total cost: USD 6.26 million; GCF cost: USD 5.64 million, or 90 per cent) 
6. 
Component 1 aims to improve water security for rural people of Vanuatu by enhancing 
the existing DWSSP process and mainstreaming climate change adaptation solutions in these 
plans. Since 2006, the Government of Vanuatu, through the Department of Water Resources 
(DoWR) and the Ministry of Health’s Environmental Health Unit, has been improving the DWSSP 
process under the NIP. This is one of the official processes by which the government ensures 
that all people have reliable access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure. It is also 
a community engagement process through which communities identify and discuss threats to 
safe and secure drinking water and collectively make plans to manage these threats. The 
resulting DWSSPs guide day-to-day water supply operation and maintenance (O&M) as well as 
improvements to community water systems.  
7. 
Drinking water safety planning is an internationally accepted approach to manage water 
resources. This was included in the 3rd edition of the World Health Organization Guidelines on 
Drinking Water Quality in 2004. Vanuatu adopted this approach in 2005 following the World 
Health Organization Workshop on Drinking Water Quality Standards and Monitoring in Pacific 
Island Countries. The addition of a second “S” (security) was done in response to the need to 
also plan for adequate supply of water especially in anticipation of and during times of drought. 
DWSSPs provide for a framework through which community-owned WASH systems (new 
and/or improved) can be sustainably managed. The process is triggered by communities, and 
through multiple steps including the formation and training of Rural Water Committees (RWCs), 
DWSSP related training, and simple no/low-cost improvements of the existing water facilities 
by the communities. The DWSSP process improves not only the water planning processes but 
also communities’ ownership of their water resources and facilities.  
8. 
The DWSSP methodology will be updated through this component with a specific focus 
on strengthening the mainstreaming of climate resilience. It will address the shortfalls in the 
existing design and engineering standards in the DoWR by analysing conventional design 
protocol, making changes in the design criteria, and providing the relevant staff with exposure 
and experience in climate resilient designs. The DWSSP methodology will be updated to 
mainstream climate resilience in the plans and will be further refined incrementally on an 
annual basis to account for the lessons learned during the five-year project implementation 
period. The upgrades will enhance the hazard risk assessments and develop improvement and 
preparedness plans as well as climate change risk and improvement plans. The updated 
methodology will be integrated into the DWSSP process, and training will be provided to all the 
DWSSP facilitators at the national level covering all the provinces.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 94 
 
 
9. 
Moreover, there are currently 301 completed DWSSPs and, as a result of this proposed 
project, 600 additional communities will benefit by developing their DWSSPs. These 
communities will be identified based on prioritization of vulnerability to climate impacts. The 
600 additional DWSSPs will utilize the enhanced methodology that mainstreams climate 
resilience in planning while the existing DWSSPs will also be retrofitted to better reflect climate 
risks and adaptation solutions. Further to this, 100 DWSSPs from the current 301 established to 
date will be updated to follow the new climate-resilient methodology. In total, this component 
will benefit 700 communities or 79,940 direct beneficiaries (including 39,970 women), which is 
25.2 per cent of the entire population of Vanuatu. Furthermore, various capacity development 
and knowledge sharing activities will be delivered to communities and area administrators 
within the government extension structure.  
Component 2: Communities have enhanced rural water infrastructure (total cost: USD 20 million; 
GCF cost: USD 16.1 million, or 80 per cent) 
10. 
Component 2 represents the core investment envisioned under this funding proposal in 
order to strengthen climate-resilient WASH facilities in rural communities of Vanuatu, 
accounting for about 70 per cent of the total project cost. The aim of this component is two-fold: 
(i) increase access to safely managed drinking water in rural Vanuatu through the rehabilitation 
or construction of small-scale infrastructure projects identified through the country-owned 
DWSSP and NIP processes; and (ii) increase engagement of communities in management, 
oversight and accountability of drinking water service points and infrastructure (through, 
particularly, the RWCs). 
11. 
This will be achieved through scaling up the existing CAP that the Government of 
Vanuatu has successfully deployed to strengthen water facilities in Vanuatu. DWSSPs and the 
CAP are closely linked; an approved DWSSP is the essential prerequisite to making an 
application for CAP funding. Moreover, communities can apply for CAP funding only after they 
make an attempt to improve their own water systems (through simple no/low-cost 
enhancements). An approved DWSSP ensures that the requested financial assistance addresses 
priority threats to providing safe and secure drinking water and is for a sustainable upgrade or 
improvement option. Additionally, when communities go through the DWSSP process, it also 
means that they already have an RWC, which administers a plan for ongoing financial, 
operational, and managerial sustainability of water supply. All these prerequisites ensure that 
the facility improvements through the CAP funding do not end up being a one-off investment 
without proper maintenance afterwards. As such, this component is synergetic to component 1 
in a sense that the technical capacities enhanced through activities under component 1 will 
ensure that CAP requests incorporate greater emphasis on climate resilience in the design of 
water facilities and ensure sustainability of the interventions.  
12. 
Out of the 301 completed DWSSPs, 47 have had their water facilities upgraded through 
the CAP so far. With the activities under this component, this number will increase to 317 (270 
additional DWSSPs will receive CAP funding, of which 220 are already targeted by component 1 
and 50 are additional). This translates to approximately 30,834 beneficiaries (including 25,124 
from component 1 and 5,710 additional beneficiaries).  
13. 
This component will also assess the CAP criteria for funding and upgrade the screening 
process to be more robust and provide a greater focus on climate vulnerabilities. In addition, the 
Project ESS Officer will support the Provincial Engineers and DoWR Provincial Officers in 
providing technical support to communities that will need to develop ESS category B 
interventions (estimated at less than 5 per cent of applications, based on the trend of CAP 
applications to date). The upgraded CAP process, including the improved screening criteria, will 
also contribute to the wider rural communities of Vanuatu when the communities that would 
not be covered under this project will have their upgrades through other sources of funding.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 95 
 
 
Component 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks 
associated with water security (total cost: USD 0.893 million; GCF cost: USD 0.718 million, or 80 
per cent) 
14. 
The Government of Vanuatu recognizes that essential to the effective delivery of the NIP 
are standardized support tools and processes, the foundation being community-level DWSSPs. 
Additionally, it also recognizes that essential to efficient delivery of the NIP is reaching as many 
communities as possible by devolving responsibility and support to provincial governments, 
coupled with national oversight and coordination of the many government agencies, 
implementing partners, and technical support agencies. Keeping this mandate as context, 
component 3 will work towards strengthening institutional capacity at provincial and national 
levels to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of the NIP and other related water 
management processes to manage the adverse effects of climate change.  
15. 
This component will focus on providing training to different levels of staff within the 
water governance structure, as well as to WASH sector partners, to ensure climate change and 
management of climate risks are mainstreamed within existing processes of water safety and 
security. Moreover, knowledge management and data sharing mechanisms will be established 
through this component, which would provide different stakeholders of the water and climate 
change sectors with better access to data and an opportunity to learn from each other. In 
addition, this component will establish a monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL) framework 
for improved learning for climate-resilient water management. Having an MEL system, 
particularly for the sanitation and hygiene subsector will: ensure that inputs and activities lead 
to their intended results and outcomes; adjust course where necessary (during the project 
lifetime); establish whether progress is being made; and lastly, document lessons learned and 
best practices.  
Project management (total cost: USD 1.08 million; GCF cost: USD 0.87 million) 
16. 
The GCF portion of this project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                                  Scale: N/A 
17. 
Six hundred communities will be direct beneficiaries as part of component 1 (improved 
planning and community-based activities on climate-resilient water management), of which 220 
will also benefit from improved climate-resilient water infrastructure as part of component 2. 
An additional 50 communities with existing DWSSPs will be targeted under component 2 during 
the first year of the project. Further to this, 100 DWSSPs from the current 301 established to 
date will be updated to follow the new climate-resilient methodology in component 1. This 
makes a total of 750 communities directly benefiting from components 1 and 2. This will 
directly benefit 85,650 beneficiaries (including 42,825 women), which is around 27 per cent of 
the total population of Vanuatu. Indirect beneficiaries include the rest of the rural population of 
Vanuatu (216,980 individuals or 73 per cent of the total population), mostly through enhanced 
institutional capacities and processes leading to climate-resilient water security for rural 
communities (component 3). 
18. 
This project will address three water-related impacts of climate change in Vanuatu, 
which are increases in: (i) water-related disasters; (ii) areas suffering from water stress; and 
(iii) loss of human life induced by poor water quality. It will thus deliver on priority 
interventions identified in Vanuatu’s GCF country programme (pipeline project AA1). Water 
security is vital for community resilience in the long term as well as in the immediate aftermath

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 96 
 
 
of climate-induced disasters. GCF funding will positively impact and contribute to the 
management of water-related impacts of the observed and projected climate change effects in 
Vanuatu. The project’s impact in reducing climate risks for water security is reinforced by 
recent revisions of the DWSSP processes. The revised DWSSP processes significantly strengthen 
climate change and vulnerability considerations within DWSSPs, from training of trainers, 
community training and facilitation to data collection, improvement planning, and O&M.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential                                                                    Scale: N/A 
19. 
The project is a climate adaptation investment aiming to enhance climate resilience and 
increase water security of rural communities. The project will climate-proof WASH 
infrastructure and enhance water management planning systems across Vanuatu. Given that 
only 79 per cent of systems were identified as functional and only 37 per cent of these systems 
were reported as providing water 24 hours per day in 2020, climate considerations are 
increasingly being integrated in water security and safety management. However, there remain 
significant needs for improvements to deliver climate-resilient water security benefits for rural 
communities in Vanuatu.  
20. 
By scaling up the number of climate-resilient DWSSPs registered (component 1) and 
then delivering climate-resilient infrastructure and system improvements through the CAP 
(component 2), the project will strengthen a whole-of-government approach to achieving 
climate-resilient water safety and security through the DoWR with associated decision-making 
processes that are decentralized, transparent, participatory, community-focused, gender-
mainstreamed and evidence-based. Also, by building and operating climate-resilient water 
systems, interruption to water services during and after disasters will be reduced or avoided. 
Therefore, the project will reduce the costs associated with continual repairing and rebuilding 
after disasters, allowing the limited public funds available to be leveraged for investment in new 
WASH infrastructure and sustainable exploration of water sources.  
21. 
The project will also support transitioning towards gender-transformational WASH 
investments, including the gender co-benefit towards mandatory representation of women in 
RWCs. Traditionally, gender roles involve women and girls providing more labour and spending 
more time than men and boys in managing the household’s WASH needs. Increased time spent 
by women and girls to obtain water during dry seasons or after climate-induced emergencies 
increases their exposure to gender-based violence (GBV). Conversely, improving predictability 
and location of water sources—with better access points created through more resilient and 
secured (such as improved lighting and locks) infrastructure—will reduce exposure to such 
risks, increasing personal safety and security in addition to the safety and security of water 
supply. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                                                  Scale: N/A 
22. 
This project will generate significant environmental, social and economic benefits that 
will contribute to positive sustainable development outcomes for Vanuatu in the long term. It 
will reduce the negative environmental impacts of poor wastewater management by improving 
water management behaviour and practices through the sanitation component of DWSSPs. The 
project will also achieve better protection of water sources and forested water catchment areas, 
through no- and low-cost community improvements, resulting in improved environmental 
quality. 
23. 
Moreover, the project will enhance the equitable access to water in Vanuatu, which is 
one of the basic human rights. It will target the most vulnerable groups in rural communities, 
which is expected to generate significant social benefits including positive health outcomes and

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 97 
 
 
improved social standing for women through their visible and meaningful roles in water 
committees, with 40 per cent female members being mandatory for registration of RWCs.  
24. 
Another benefit arising from the project is economic through avoided health care costs. 
Improved water security and sanitation practices will lead to improved health outcomes and 
therefore reduce health care costs. Moreover, because the project will enhance climate 
resiliency of water facilities, it will also lead to avoided damages in case of disaster, which is 
another economic benefit that the project is expected to generate.  
25. 
In terms of its contribution to the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), the project directly responds to SDG 13 (climate action), SDG 6 
(clean water and sanitation), and SDG 5 (gender equality) through its objective of building 
climate-resilient and gender-equitable water safety and security in Vanuatu.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                                        Scale: N/A 
26. 
The project addresses the fundamental human right of access to safe drinking water. 
Communities that have elevated levels of vulnerability, low access to WASH services and are 
exposed to climate risks will be targeted. Besides these communities most in need of climate-
resilient water management interventions that will be directly targeted, the project will 
ultimately benefit all rural communities by strengthening the enabling environment for resilient 
interventions. This project will address vital needs relating to water security for rural 
communities in Vanuatu. Over 24,000 households across the country are reliant on either 
rainwater or surface water for their primary drinking water supply. Also, one-third of 
households have no alternative source of drinking water. These challenges have historically 
been, and will continue to be, exacerbated by climate change.  
27. 
Rural communities in Vanuatu use a combination of groundwater, surface water and 
rainwater that are increasingly precarious due to limited climate-proofing of infrastructure and 
processes. Only one-third of households have access to water 24 hours per day, every day of the 
year. The direct impacts of limited water supply and water security, contaminated drinking 
water and inadequate WASH infrastructure are increased morbidity (diarrhoea, stunting and 
other illnesses) and increased mortality among both children and adults. Significant 
improvements in the management and O&M of rural water systems are needed to ensure water 
services are managed safely. The project will address these by introducing safely managed and 
climate-resilient WASH and drinking water services critical for preventing diseases and 
protecting human health.  
3.5 
Country ownership                                                                             Scale: N/A 
28. 
The project is fully aligned with the Government of Vanuatu’s climate change strategies 
and policies, including the Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030 as 
well as the national adaptation programme of action and the NDC, both of which reference 
water resource management as a top priority. In addition, the project is fully aligned with 
Vanuatu’s National Sustainable Development Plan 2016–2030 and National Water Policy 2017–
2030.  
29. 
The project directly responds to the Government of Vanuatu’s goal for every rural 
community to have a DWSSP by 2030, as outlined in the Water Resource Management Act and 
the Water Supply Act. DoWR will be co-leading the implementation of the project by following 
the NIP and DWSSP processes, through which the project will scale up system improvements 
and WASH infrastructure in rural contexts. This project was fully co-developed with DoWR, 
along with other national stakeholders to address climate change risks and impacts on water

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 98 
 
 
management, and to work directly with vulnerable rural communities on community-based 
adaptation activities. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness                                                             Scale: N/A 
30. 
The project will build climate resilience and adaptation capacities in Vanuatu’s WASH 
sector through the implementation of proven and efficient water management technologies. 
This will follow the nationally owned DWSSP processes that support the identification of locally 
led interventions and, in doing so, lay the foundations for further scaling up beyond the project 
lifetime. 
31. 
The project-level economic net present value is positive at USD 37,150,065 and the 
programme-level economic internal rate of return is 20 per cent. This project is thus 
economically viable and can be justified on economic grounds, even though non-investment 
budget costs (including co-finance) have no envisaged direct benefits. This is the case even 
though the analysis included conservative assumptions and not all benefits were included in the 
economic calculations as it was not possible to estimate their monetary values. Nonetheless, 
such benefits will accrue to project beneficiaries in addition to those included in the analysis. 
Therefore, the adaptation project is expected to be highly effective. 
32. 
The efficiency of the DWSSP process will also contribute to the overall efficiency and 
effectiveness of the project. This will be the primary modality through which the project will 
identify and prioritize communities in need of system improvements and the activities to bring 
about such improvements. The communities that have already created DWSSPs have 
cumulatively spent almost USD 1 million of their own money on low-cost improvements. The 
project will benefit from the existing structures and policy frameworks to efficiently scale up 
investments by finetuning and mobilizing the DWSSP process through DoWR. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
33. 
Project background. The project aims to improve water security for rural communities 
by targeting 270 communities, schools, and healthcare facilities throughout Vanuatu with 
rehabilitation, upgrading or expansion of water infrastructure such as concrete protection on 
spring sources, well head aprons, and rainwater harvesting. In addition, small solar-powered 
reverse osmosis desalination units will also be installed by the project. Other activities will 
focus on capacity-building of provincial and national WASH authorities as well as communities 
to plan and manage their water resources. Expected environmental co-benefits include avoiding 
GHG emissions owing to installation of solar power. Social co-benefits are expected from 
reduced health issues associated with waterborne diseases owing to improved sanitation and 
timesaving from collecting water from remote and unsanitary sources. 
34. 
Environmental and social risk category. The confirmed and assigned environmental 
and social risk category of the project is equivalent to GCF’s medium/category B. It is within the 
accredited entity’s (AE) accreditation level. This is rationalized by rehabilitation or construction 
of small-scale community infrastructure for component 2 CAP activities that are expected to 
have risks and impacts that are generally reversible and site-specific, which can also be readily 
managed with mitigation measures. 
35. 
Safeguard instruments. The AE provided an environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA) and management plan with the funding proposal. The document provides an 
overview of the Vanuatu context for environmental and social risk assessment, potential

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 99 
 
 
environmental and social risks likely to be associated with the project activities and site-specific 
assessments and action plans that will be undertaken at the subproject level. An action plan is 
also included with proposed mitigation measures for risks that have been identified. The AE’s 
procedure for conducting an ESIA is annexed in the document. 
36. 
Compliance with GCF’s ESS standards. The paragraphs below identify the key risks 
and/or impacts as regards the GCF ESS standards and how they are addressed in the proposal: 
37. 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. Activities included in the CAP component will be screened and categorized using the 
AE’s ESS screening tool annexed in the document. Initial screening will be carried out by DWSSP 
community proponents. Less than 10 per cent of the subprojects are expected to be categorized 
as moderate environmental and social risk level and therefore require site-specific ESIAs and 
environmental and social management plans (ESMPs). The assessment of potential risks and 
impacts presented in the safeguards document is based on interventions proposed during 
consultations. Key potential risks are associated with labour and working conditions, pollution, 
community health and safety, and biodiversity. The description of baseline environmental and 
social conditions provided in the document is very minimal and will need to be elaborated at the 
subproject level.  
38. 
ESS 2: Labour and Working Conditions. Construction related activities under 
component 2 have potential occupational health and safety risks for workers involved. This will 
be remediated by providing workers with personal protective equipment to wear during 
construction, safety training, and emergency plans in case of accidents. Materials to be used in 
the project will be sourced locally as much as possible and will avoid materials originating from 
harmful practices. The AE is recommended to establish a process for assessing risks related to 
labour in supply chains and mitigating them at the subproject level. 
39. 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention. Installation of new and 
rehabilitation of existing wells and boreholes will be supported by the project where a water 
balance can illustrate the sustainability of abstraction of groundwater. In addition, long-term 
monitoring will be undertaken. Water pumps that will be installed by the project will be 
powered by renewable energy only to avoid pollution by combustion. The project seeks to 
phase out diesel-fuelled pumps to eliminate spillage of oils into community water sources. 
Measures to avoid contamination of water are centred around structural interventions that will 
be installed by the project to avoid pollution from latrines including preventing vectors, pests, 
and livestock from accessing community water sources. Waste is expected to be generated from 
construction activities. Additionally, the operational phase of the project will also generate 
waste from items such as plastic water tanks and solar components, including panels, after their 
lifespan is reached. The AE is recommended to ensure that it has a process for safe disposal of 
solar panels and batteries and handle any inconsistencies with best practices that are identified 
in the national guidelines that are yet to be finalized. 
40. 
ESS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security. Construction, retrofitting, and 
installation activities may create temporary noise and air pollution for local communities. Noise 
will be limited by operating construction equipment during the day and other mitigation 
measures will be outlined at the subproject level. Construction may also pose a safety risk to 
communities. This will be mitigated by barricading sites during construction to prevent injuries. 
Water storage facilities will be enclosed to avoid breeding vectors that may cause diseases such 
as mosquitoes. The project’s activities may fall under areas with longstanding land, communal 
or tribal disputes particularly where shared water resources are involved. Mitigation measures 
include assessment of conflicts, extensive community consultations, and obtaining community 
no-objection to selected sites. 
41. 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. Construction-related 
activities will be widely consulted with communities and a memorandum of understanding will

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 100 
 
 
be signed between DoWR, community leaders and landowners to secure land that may be 
required for water supply systems and to allow access for O&M purposes. The project excludes 
activities that will result in physical or economic displacement. However, there is a possibility 
that project activities may result in restrictions on communities in accessing natural resources 
or place constraints on some specific land uses temporarily or permanently such as cattle 
grazing. The AE is recommended to ensure that it has a process for conducting thorough due 
diligence where this risk is identified at the subproject level and apply necessary mitigation 
measures. 
42. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. There is a potential negative risk on biodiversity as a result of brine disposal from 
desalination units. The units will be designed with a low recovery rate to minimize an increase 
in salt concentration where brine is discharged. Abstraction of surface water may also 
potentially impact marine life negatively. 
43. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The project is not 
expected to negatively impact indigenous peoples and takes place within a national context 
where around 95 per cent of the country is indigenous, mainly ni-Vanuatu, with other groups 
that include Wallisians, Futunans and i-Kiribati. Community consultations are planned to be 
conducted with the representation of all indigenous groups within a community. The AE notes 
that indigenous and local knowledge will be incorporated and ensured through consultations 
with communities. In addition, community engagement will ensure that construction does not 
occur on any indigenous lands or culturally important sites without free, prior and informed 
consent.  
44. 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage. The AE’s due diligence indicates that project activities are 
unlikely to directly impact any areas of cultural heritage value. Nonetheless, a chance finds 
procedure has been outlined in the document in case tangible cultural heritage is found at the 
project sites. 
45. 
Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment. The revised GCF 
Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding 
from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The project’s 
ESMP has integrated various forms of SEAH as one of the social risks/impacts and identified 
safeguarding measures in its plan. The project will ensure that all project staff, consultants, 
facilitators, service providers and communities directly targeted are trained on prevention of 
SEAH principles and standards in alignment with GCF policies. In addition, the ESS Officer will 
lead the development of SEAH protocols into the DWSSP processes and provide training to the 
DWSSP facilitators and consultants. All these activities will contribute towards the prevention 
side of SEAH. With regard to SEAH response mechanisms (although the risks of SEAH are 
deemed to be low during the trainings), the project has also embedded SEAH responses in its 
grievance redress mechanisms (GRM). The project will post a multi-level GRM and include a 
specific SEAH protocol to ensure a survivor-centred approach is in place. This will allow for 
survivors to select multiple avenues to file a grievance. Varied options for grievance redress 
enhance confidence in the survivor to come forward and log a formal complaint as well as be 
assured of protection and confidentiality and that the perpetrator would not be involved in a 
specific GRM process. This will apply to all grievance mechanisms that will be controlled by SPC 
or the project management unit (PMU), ensuring that the rights, needs and wishes of the 
survivors are prioritized. This also ensures that their rights are upheld; privacy and 
confidentiality are maintained; non-discrimination measures are put in place; and translation 
opportunities are provided in the language the survivor feels more comfortable with. All the 
information related to GBV and/or SEAH cases will be kept confidential and identities protected. 
Moreover, the survivor must provide informed consent to progress with each stage of the 
complaints process. Should a case of SEAH or GBV be submitted, SPC will carry out duty of care 
to the survivors in line with its policies including, among others and where relevant, support for

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 101 
 
 
the provision of medical services (including psychosocial support), legal counsel, community-
driven protection measures, and reintegration of the survivor. These mechanisms are also in 
line with the national standard operating procedures for GBV service provides in Vanuatu. At 
the community level, the GRM will be addressed through the traditional governance structures 
and processes managed in individual islands, and the issues will range from utility access, 
conflicts among villagers, complaints from marginalized gender or vulnerable groups, issues 
related to water access points and GBV or SEAH. This level of the GRM will ensure that 
communities are able to resolve issues and conflicts with consensus as a first level, and then 
escalate to the project-level GRM only if deemed appropriate. The project is encouraged to 
ensure that the community-level GRM is also as inclusive and survivor-centred as possible in 
order to avoid reinforcement of gender stereotypes and/or any power imbalance that may lead 
to continuous victimization of GBV/SEAH survivors within the traditional complaints and 
grievance handling mechanisms. 
46. 
Implementation arrangements. The PMU will recruit an ESS Officer who will be 
responsible for ensuring management of matters regarding safeguards—for example, by 
conducting quality assurance on screening done by RWCs; contracting consultants to prepare 
subproject level ESIAs and ESMPs and reviewing the same; and liaising with the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Officer on monitoring and reporting. Training and capacity-building will be provided 
to DWSSP community proponents to support effective environmental and social risk 
identification and management. A budget of related costs is also outlined in the document. The 
AE will provide oversight and supervise the management of environmental and social 
safeguards matters throughout the project’s implementation. 
47. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. Consultations were 
undertaken in 2021 at the national and provincial levels. The report on stakeholder engagement 
activities undertaken during the preparation of the project describes the main outcomes of the 
consultations, which have been integrated into the project’s design. A stakeholder engagement 
plan is included in the document. It identifies the different types of stakeholders, their roles in 
the project, and when and how they will be engaged by the project. Component 1 activities allow 
for awareness and stakeholder engagement using community systems to develop plans for both 
management capacity and infrastructure and, importantly, ownership of water facilities by the 
rural communities. In addition, community members are expected to be actively involved in the 
implementation of component 2 activities. ESIAs and ESMPs of medium risk subprojects will be 
disclosed according to the GCF Information Disclosure Policy. 
48. 
Grievance redress mechanism. The contact details of the redress mechanisms of both 
the AE and GCF are included in the document. Complainants may also contact the PMU with 
their grievances. Grievances received and registered by the PMU will be handled by the AE’s 
legal experts and other relevant officers depending on the nature of the concern. In addition, 
grievance mechanisms administered by chiefs and community leaders will also be available to 
complainants. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF indigenous peoples focal 
point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
49. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan, and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy and action plan.  
50. 
 The gender assessment conducted describes the gender issues at the country level and 
indicates the existence of national policy environment and supportive practices to promote 
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Vanuatu ratified the Convention on the 
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in 1995 and has a National Gender 
Equality Policy that aims to engage in solutions to climate and disaster resilience that are

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 102 
 
 
gender-responsive and community-driven. This project is expected to contribute towards that 
goal. 
51. 
The gender assessment was undertaken through desk review and collection of inputs 
from various stakeholder consultations undertaken. The consultations and discussions were 
held with government (including with the Department of Women’s Affairs), civil society 
organizations and community members.  
52. 
The assessment indicated that the climate crisis affects women and girls in unique and 
disproportionate ways. The consultation pointed out the need to ensure the integration of the 
needs of women and other vulnerable groups in the WASH process. The finding indicates that 
lack of access to improved water supply places a disproportionate burden on women and girls 
who are the primary collectors of water for the family as in many countries. The assessment 
also points out the gaps in the existing infrastructure to serve the differentiated needs of women 
and men, and other vulnerable groups. Some of the specific needs of women that are not met 
are, for example, increased water needs during lactation and pregnancy and for the 
management of menstrual hygiene, child-related water use, and separate showers with dignity. 
These needs are not often considered in the design of the final infrastructure constructed. In 
addition, the elderly (for whom women are the primary caregivers) have increased need for 
water due to physiological requirements. Other issues presented related to the safety of 
infrastructure. The existing and newly constructed infrastructures require system 
improvements to increase safety for women. This is in terms of lighting, improved locks and 
doors as well as gated/protected areas. These are of paramount importance to ensure reduced 
incidents of GBV. In addition to safety and infrastructure design issues, women’s representation 
in the same is limited. Women continue to be underrepresented in water security and climate 
adaptation-related decision-making bodies and in water user committees despite registering 
better performance when represented. The lack of representation, compounded with the other 
factors raised earlier, affects women’s ability to access water with ease; therefore, they spend a 
lot of time in search of water. The limited year-round service of most water points, inadequate 
availability of water to meet daily needs, and dry seasons pose the greatest burden for 
communities, and women in particular as it is their job to fetch water (five hours per day). The 
water fetching role is in addition to feeding and caring for children, the elderly and people with 
disabilities as well as collecting firewood, washing clothes and gardening. Gender 
mainstreaming remains a need across all WASH stakeholders and requires ongoing 
improvement in a bid to be more responsive to the various needs of community members such 
as the elderly, female-headed households and people with disabilities, to name a few. These 
community members face inequalities in practicing and accessing the services and facilities and 
in a safe manner. Despite these challenges, the consultation held indicated that gender issues 
have been increasingly incorporated in WASH processes over the years. 
53. 
Having noted the gaps, the gender action plan was developed with relevant activities, 
indicators, targets, timelines, gender expertise and budget. The findings from the gender 
analysis indicated that water committees where women were represented in the highest 
decision-making bodies registered better outcomes in terms of water provisions and services. In 
view of that, the gender action plan is geared towards ensuring increased meaningful 
representation of women in water committees with at least 40 per cent participation, while 
ensuring safe and efficient water supply through the engagement of women in the 
infrastructure design and implementation. The improved security and privacy features—such 
as adequate lighting, secure locks, and dignity areas with curtains/covers—are expected to 
address some of the challenges faced by women. The action plan includes activities towards 
increasing women’s capacity in constructing, maintaining and operating water infrastructures 
while still assessing further, gender-based needs. Also included are activities towards effective 
knowledge management, collection of data, and documentation of lessons learned and best 
practices. The implementation of the gender action plan and mainstreaming of gender will be 
facilitated by various groups with different roles including the Gender Officer and the

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 103 
 
 
Department of Women’s Affairs. Meanwhile, technical assistance on gender responsive actions 
will be provided by UNICEF in addition to the Gender Protection Cluster, which will provide 
sensitization and advocacy support during trainings to ensure meaningful participation of 
women.  
54. 
The AE is recommended to clearly articulate and demonstrate activities that speak to 
gender transformative and gender responsive actions. It is not clear if there is a distinction 
between the two and what results could be categorized as one or the other. The AE is 
recommended to use the planned consultations to identify transformative and responsive 
activities.     
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk)  
55. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 23 million to enhance climate resilience and 
increase water security of rural communities by investing in WASH infrastructure and water 
management planning systems. The Government of Vanuatu will provide a total of USD 4.4 
million co-financing by way of grant and in-kind contribution. UNICEF and the AE will be 
providing in-kind contribution equivalent to USD 0.47 million and USD 0.09 million, 
respectively.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project 
(medium risk) 
56. 
SPC, as a direct access AE, will serve as both AE and one of the EEs for this project. 
Headquartered in New Caledonia, it has been operating in the Pacific for over 70 years. Its 
Melanesian Regional Office in Vanuatu creates close linkages with the AE and the PMU in the 
country.  
57. 
 The Government of Vanuatu, through the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the DoWR, will 
be a co-EE for the project. The capacity assessment of the DoWR has been carried out, and it 
identifies gaps and provides recommendations. However, the assessment acknowledges that the 
country lacks capacity in water supply engineering and in climate change and vulnerability 
assessment and impact mitigation throughout all levels and sectors.  
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
58. 
Project delays in remote locations: The AE identified implementation delays in 
remote islands and provinces as a main challenge and high probable risk. This is also often 
associated with high cost of travel, communication and logistics. According to the AE, different 
projects being implemented in the country will be coordinated through relevant line ministries, 
including the DoWR, for logistics and procurement.  
59. 
O&M risk: The project may face difficulties to maintain the new and upgraded 
equipment due to limited financing and/or expertise. A financing strategy for O&M is part of the 
O&M plan, and technical training (e.g., plumbers training, basic financial management training) 
on operating and maintaining the water system will be provided. Although direct revenue will 
not be generated from the programme, there will be a community household contribution that 
will depend on the financial arrangement agreed by the community through the DWSSP 
processes. However, as O&M responsibilities largely lie with the community, the project 
identified the limited technical and financial capacity of the community as one of the risks. If 
unexpected costs arise and/or migration of the trained community member happens, there will 
be constraints to ensure O&M beyond the project implementation period.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 104 
 
 
60. 
Technical risks: The installation of desalination systems or boreholes would require 
upgrades, repairs of existing distribution pipelines or new distribution systems. This will 
require well-designed construction plans and technical precision to be in line with the technical 
standards of the government. In addition, after drilling a borehole, water level check to prevent 
overextraction in the aquifer and water quality monitoring will be critical. The project will rely 
upon the technical capacity of the DoWR who will be responsible for supervision and 
monitoring.  
61. 
Project viability and concessionality: Vanuatu is a small island developing State and 
funded activities for water are public in nature. The financial analysis shows that, without 
grants support, the cost of the investment will be beyond what households can afford (ranging 
from 657 per cent to 3,674 per cent of ability to pay). Therefore, full grant financing is 
requested. The economic analysis results in the economic internal rate of return of 20 per cent 
and the AE assessed that the adaptation project is economically viable and efficient.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)   
62. 
The Republic of Vanuatu is not currently subject to any United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions (i.e. sanctions). 
63. 
SPC, as the AE for the project, confirmed that no persons or entities listed on any United 
Nations Security Council sanctions list, including the United Nations Consolidated Sanctions list, 
will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer or beneficiary. 
64. 
SPC confirmed that it has undertaken an operational capacity assessment for the 
prospective grantee—the Government of the Republic of Vanuatu—and has determined that it 
has the requisite capacity to comply with SPC requirements to implement actions through 
grants awarded by SPC. However, the comparison of policies and procedures of the grantee with 
SPC policies reveal that there are some gaps that need to be taken into consideration when 
entering into a grant agreement with the grantee. 
65. 
As part of the analysis, a review of the most recently issued audited financial statements 
of the grantee (issued on 28 October 2021) for the year ending 31 December 2017 was also 
carried out. This revealed that an adverse audit opinion was issued because of significant 
financial control weaknesses. The issues highlighted in the report may pose significant risk for 
any grant awarded to the grantee and requires action by the grantee. These issues will remain a 
risk to SPC when working with the grantee until they are addressed. 
66. 
SPC informed GCF that, to mitigate these risks, any SPC division intending to award a 
grant to the grantee must provide training to the grantee to ensure the recommendations of this 
capacity assessment are implemented. The division must also carry out regular performance 
monitoring of the grant action, appropriate for the size and risk of the project in question. 
67. 
An anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) check 
on the grantee was carried out via Sanction Scanner and no red flags were raised. 
68. 
SPC advised that it has conducted a risk assessment in relation to potential risks 
pertaining to AML/CFT as well as prohibited practices. SPC has assessed the probability of such 
risks to be low, whereas the impact would be high. 
69. 
SPC has adopted financial policies for AML/CFT to prescribe the principles and 
minimum safeguards to protect SPC from being misused for money laundering or terrorism 
financing. Although the risks of money laundering and terrorism financing (ML/TF) are 
considered low for Vanuatu, SPC will take steps to ensure that its funds are not used to finance 
any illegal acts related to ML/TF.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 105 
 
 
70. 
SPC informed GCF that its Director-General will implement a continuous risk-based 
approach to identify, assess and understand SPC’s ML/TF risks, and will take appropriate steps 
to mitigate those identified risks. SPC will undertake due diligence in engaging with the 
development partner, supplier, implementation partner or any other entity involved in the 
activities of SPC as part of Know Your Customer due diligence to ensure identity and safeguard 
the practices of the entity. Detailed due diligence will enable SPC to assess ML/TF risks. 
71. 
SPC confirmed that it had assessed the project design procurement capacity of the 
executing entities (EEs), highlighting that their procurement standards are aligned with SPC 
standards. This was accepted by GCF at the accreditation stage. Furthermore, through 
subsidiary agreements, AML/CFT obligations will be passed down to the EEs, requiring them to 
monitor and impose SPC-endorsed standards throughout their operations.  
72. 
During implementation, the SPC Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability 
(CCES) Programme will check that these standards are upheld through regular supervision 
missions and quality assurance reviews of annual performance reports and interim reports, 
including from SPC procurement specialists. In the case that any concerns are flagged in these 
processes, SPC will take appropriate measures to resolve issues and ensure no procurement 
occurs without appropriate amendment and checks in place.1 
73. 
SPC confirmed that the project is not an on-granting project. As such, no cash, vouchers 
or other items of economic value will be distributed directly or indirectly to beneficiaries.   
74. 
SPC informed GCF that it is committed to receiving any concerns or grievances from any 
affected persons or community related to the environmental and social impacts of any SPC 
project. At any time, an affected member of a community may raise their concerns by lodging a 
complaint via the SPC website or directly to the PMU and the national designated authority. 
Communities and stakeholders will be able to access the grievance complaint form. Such 
grievances will be raised to SPC as well as to the national designated authority. In further 
support, SPC also has a whistle-blower policy. 
75. 
Recommended risk rating: The Office of Risk Management and Compliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance Team has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant 
GCF Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the 
ORMC/Compliance Team has determined a risk rating of medium and has no objection to this 
request proceeding to the next steps. 
76. 
The ORMC/Compliance Team would like to remind SPC, as the AE, of its continuing 
obligations and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks for money 
laundering, terrorist financing, or prohibited practices among the intended counterparties, EEs, 
beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
77. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result areas and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
78. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary Risk Assessment 
Rationale 
Overall project 
Medium 
 
1 SPC manuals and contacts for reporting prohibited practices are available at https://www.spc.int/accountability.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 106 
 
 
AE/EE capability 
Medium 
The capacity of the AE/EE will be critical for 
successful implementation. The 
responsibility of O&M will mainly rely on 
communities, and may require additional 
support and supervision from the 
government for the sustainability of the 
project beyond its implementation period.   
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration 
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
79. 
SPC will be the AE for this project. As the AE, SPC will also be the EE. The Government of 
Vanuatu will also be an EE for the project, acting through MoF and DoWR.  
80. 
Within SPC, the AE functions will be undertaken by the CCES programme, which hosts 
the Climate Finance Unit, SPC’s focal point for GCF. The Climate Finance Unit’s role in the project 
will focus on oversight and quality assurance of project management and delivery in alignment 
with obligations agreed upon with GCF through relevant financing and legal agreements.  
81. 
SPC’s Geoscience, Energy and Maritime (GEM) Division will be the EE for the project. 
Within GEM, the Disaster and Community Resilience Programme is a key technical pillar and 
develops, implements and supports coordination of innovative applied science and technical 
action to respond to challenges faced by communities, as well as repeated disaster risks, in the 
Pacific region. As EE, GEM will coordinate actions to ensure the project is adequately staffed and 
supported to efficiently implement the project. More specifically, GEM will oversee tasks within 
the overall project management structure. SPC GEM will execute all activities through the 
Project Manager, who will be contracted as a project position and will provide technical support 
to DoWR.  
82. 
The Government of Vanuatu, acting through MoF and DoWR, will be the other EE for the 
project. MoF will receive GCF resources from the AE and allocate these into the CAP accounts to 
be administered by DoWR.  
83. 
In its role as AE, SPC CCES will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project, 
in accordance with the agreement signed between SPC and GCF. SPC GEM, in its capacity as EE 
and through the PMU, will be responsible for project-level MEL and reporting on compliance 
with approved SPC policies and GCF requirements under relevant agreements.  
84. 
SPC as the AE to GCF will have overall responsibility for quality assurance and oversight 
of project implementation in accordance with its policies and procedures. In addition to this, the 
AE will be responsible for the financial execution of GCF funds according to SPC rules and 
regulations mainly contained and detailed in the SPC Handbook (including financial monitoring, 
audit and procurement). Oversight and quality assurance may include monitoring missions, 
spot checks and participation in coordination and steering committee meetings. The project will 
be subject to SPC’s audit regime, which will be conducted in conformity to accepted 
international standards on auditing as documented in GCF accreditation processes and approval 
from the GCF Board. This includes the external audit and internal audit functions with oversight 
provided by SPC’s independent Audit and Review Committee. Audits are conducted on an 
annual basis or on a more frequent basis at the request of the SPC governing body or as 
specified in any legal agreements with external donors. As such, audits for this project will all be 
carried out in compliance with the SPC audit regime and the obligations detailed in SPC’s 
accreditation master agreement as well as the funded activity agreement for this project.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 107 
 
 
85. 
 The goal statement of the theory of change captures the project’s intervention logic. It 
included the most pertinent assumptions, risks and barriers that frame the proposed pathways 
of change to achieve increased climate resilience of rural water infrastructure and improved 
water security for vulnerable communities in Vanuatu. The Secretariat considers the barrier 
and related assumption on market signals and adequate planning and incentive structures for 
the water sector a critical assumption that could undermine the theory of change; it therefore 
included a relevant condition/covenant related to this.  
86. 
The logframe captures the selected GCF Integrated Results Management Framework 
indicators, in particular (i) core indicator 2: direct and indirect beneficiaries reached; (ii) 
supplementary 2.3: beneficiaries (female/male) with more climate-resilient water security; and 
(iii) core indicator 3: value of physical assets made more resilient to the effects of climate 
change and/or more able to reduce GHG emissions. It also included core indicators 5 and 6 to 
capture enabling environment-related results.  
87. 
At the output level, the AE has strengthened the means of verification for some 
indicators by specifying a combination of qualitative and quantitative data collection methods 
and primary and secondary sources. However, at the GCF outcome level, the means of 
verification remain highly reliant on quantitative sources, thus limiting the lesson learning 
potential from relevant monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities.  
88. 
The implementation timetable for the funding proposal has been completed 
appropriately. It shows all activities and key milestones associated with each phase of the 
project. 
89. 
The M&E plan in annex 11 now covers the indicators comprehensively and includes an 
indicative budget for the data collection activities, which can be traced back to the project 
budget in annex 4. There is a good budget provision for project monitoring activities. The AE 
also clarified, through the budget notes in the project budget, the provisions for evaluative data 
collection activities that will inform the interim and final evaluations. The portion of the AE fees 
that will pay for the interim and final evaluations has been increased and, together with the 
budget that will be covered by the project budget, the evaluation budget is now at a reasonable 
level. Overall, the M&E budget is within the recommended 2−5 per cent range of the Evaluation 
Policy and the required budget lines have been clarified.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
90. 
The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE on 8 November 2019, and it 
became effective on 10 April 2020. 
91. 
The AE has provided a legal opinion signed by Georgia Ramsay, Principal Legal Officer of 
the AE, and dated 13 September 2022 confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals and 
it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
92. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Vanuatu. GCF has signed a bilateral 
agreement on privileges and immunities with Vanuatu; however, such agreement is still 
pending its entry into force. This means that the privileges and immunities are only effectively 
accorded to GCF upon the agreement entering into effect. Therefore, until such moment, among 
other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks 
need to be further assessed.  
93. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and the Independent Integrity Unit 
have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 108 
 
 
only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the 
country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
94. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 109 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP191 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving 
Water Security in Vanuatu 
Accredited entity: 
The Pacific Community (SPC) 
Country/(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 
Impact potential 
1.
This funding proposal for a small project in environmental and social safeguards
category B is submitted by Vanuatu, a small island developing State1 in the western Pacific, with
65 inhabited islands and a population last recorded at 272,000. This is an adaptation project,
with The Pacific Community (SPC) as the accredited entity (AE) and also one of two executing
entities (EEs), together with the Government of Vanuatu through the Ministry of Finance and
the Department of Water Resources (DoWR). SPC is a regional direct access entity to the GCF,
and is an international development organization owned and governed by its 27 country and
territory members, to whom it provides scientific and technical advice and support. The total
cost of the funding proposal is USD 28.29 million, as detailed in paragraph 38 below.
2.
The overall objective of the project is to contribute to the management of water-related
impacts from observed and projected climate change effects in Vanuatu, which are increases in:
(i) water-related disasters; (ii) areas suffering from water stress; and (iii) poor water quality-
induced fatalities. The project aims to enhance climate resilience and increase water security of
600 vulnerable rural communities across all six provinces of the country. Project activities will
be undertaken to climate-proof water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure and
enhance water management planning systems, enhancing community participation in the
government-led Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning (DWSSP) process, mandated
through national policy frameworks such as the National Implementation Plan for Safe and
Secure Water (NIP) and the Capital Assistance Programme (CAP). The project will scale up the
CAP programme to improve drinking water supply through investment in new rainwater
harvesting tanks, gravity fed systems, boreholes and solar-powered desalination.
3.
Observed changes in the climate of Vanuatu show that there has been a gradual change
in climatic conditions over the last 70 years. The temperature has increased at approximately
0.1°C per decade since 1970, and 30-year projections indicate this trend will continue.
Temperature increase will cause higher evapotranspiration which, when combined with
increased seasonal variability of rainfall, will increase the likelihood of reduced soil moisture
and agricultural drought. Despite no general upward trend in overall precipitation being
observed or projected, extreme rainfall and tropical cyclone events are predicted to become
more intense. Interannual rainfall variance is large, especially in the different El Niño–Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) phases, where El Niño causes significant drought and La Niña significant
heavy precipitation. These events are predicted to increase in intensity into the future, causing
1 Vanuatu graduated out of least developed country status in 2020.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 110 
 
 
more severe drought and category 4 and 5 cyclones that can damage water infrastructure, as 
occurred with Cyclone Pam (2015) and Cyclone Harold (2020). Table 1 in the funding proposal, 
titled “Climate and non-climate drivers impacting drinking water and WASH infrastructure in 
Vanuatu”, details the specific negative impacts of increased air and water temperatures, 
increased intensity of extreme precipitation events, extreme wind speed in tropical cyclones, 
increased length of dry spells, and sea level rise on the structure and functioning of water and 
sanitation infrastructure. 
4. 
These changes are compounding existing development challenges related to water and 
sanitation service provision, and water resource management. More intense extreme events will 
increase the incidence of flooding and induce greater damage to water utilities, pipes, and 
community-based water infrastructure in the baseline scenario. Increased climate-related 
damages by extreme winds can result in redundant infrastructure, cutting communities off from 
water supplies. Soil erosion and siltation from heavy rains combined with human-caused 
deforestation can damage or pollute freshwater sources. Flooding events increasingly 
overwhelm drains and latrine pits, resulting in stagnant, contaminated water that puts the 
health and wellbeing of the ni-Vanuatu population at risk. With sea level rise, saltwater 
intrusion and increased salinity of groundwater will have direct impacts on drinking water and 
WASH infrastructure. On the other hand, increased temperatures and increased intensity of 
major El Niño events are predicted to cause increased incidence of meteorological drought. 
Consequently, climate impacts directly threaten water security and sanitation across the 
country.  
5. 
Despite ongoing investments by government and its financial and technical partners in 
infrastructure for drinking water supply, supplementing inadequate freshwater resources 
across many of the country’s 65 islands is a major challenge, intensified by climate change.  A 
number of barriers exist to effective climate change adaptation in the water sector in Vanuatu. 
Awareness and capacity are limited at community levels due to a lack of backstopping and 
outreach from extension agents to adequately design climate-resilient DWSSPs and 
infrastructure. In remote settings in rural Vanuatu there is insufficient, poorly maintained or 
lack of WASH infrastructure (a development challenge), and current design standards do not 
account for a full range of climate-resilient approaches to withstand intense rain and wind, nor 
do they provide backup or fail-safe mechanisms that could maintain water reliability during 
flood, drought or natural disasters. A number of capacity constraints exist, including obvious 
financial constraints; limited technical capacity at area council, provincial and national 
government levels; inadequate institutional capacities; and lack of robust and accessible data 
for integrated and climate-resilient water management.  
6. 
The project theory of change is that IF local planning, decision-making and water 
management processes at national and devolved levels are improved and resources are 
provided for the improvement of water resources, THEN climate resilience and water security 
of vulnerable communities will be enhanced in the rural areas of Vanuatu, resulting BECAUSE 
OF enhanced community awareness and capabilities, upgraded infrastructure to address 
climate risks and impacts, and strengthened national water governance capacities. Three 
components of the project aim at the following outcomes: 
(a) 
Outcome 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water 
resources; 
(b) 
Outcome 2: Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure; 
and 
(c) 
Outcome 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate 
risks associated with water security. 
7. 
Adaptation impact: The project is expected to have significant adaptation impact by 
enhancing water safety and security and community resilience in the long term, in the face of

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 111 
 
 
evolving climate risks as well as in the immediate aftermath of climate-induced disasters. By 
improving existing water management processes and community-based planning—particularly 
through enhanced integration of climate change into the DWSSP process—the project will 
increase the adaptive capacity of rural communities to better cope with the additional burden of 
climate change on water security and safety, providing explicit capacity-building and 
transitioning towards climate-resilient water management planning. Water systems will be 
made more resilient to the effects of climate change through updating design standards of 
infrastructure to improve the following: (i) increased storage capacity to cope with water 
shortages; (ii) more robust structures to cope with storms/floods; (iii) multiple water sources 
to provide alternatives and backups in times of emergency; and (iv) training and risk 
management approaches built into rural water committees (RWCs). 
8. 
The project will provide climate-resilient water security benefits to 85,650 direct 
beneficiaries (including 42,825 women) and a further 216,980 indirect beneficiaries, the entire 
rural population, who are expected to benefit over time from enhanced institutional capacities 
and processes leading to climate-resilient water security for rural communities (outcome 3). As 
part of outcome 1 (improved planning and community-based activities on climate-resilient 
water management), 600 communities will be direct beneficiaries, of which 220 will also benefit 
from improved climate-resilient water infrastructure as part of outcome 2. An additional 50 
communities with existing DWSSPs will be targeted under outcome 2 during the first year of the 
project, making a total of 650 communities directly benefiting from outcomes 1 and 2.  
9. 
This contributes to GCF’s fund-level impact A2.0 (increased resilience of health and well-
being, and food and water security) and indicator A2.3 (number of males and females with year-
round access to reliable and safe water supply despite climate shocks and stresses). This will in 
turn contribute to the achievement of GCF’s fund-level outcome A7.0 (strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks), to be measured through indicator A7.1 (use by 
vulnerable households, communities, businesses, and public-sector services of Fund-supported 
tools, instruments, strategies and activities to respond to climate change and variability). 
10. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) assesses the impact potential of the 
"Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu" 
project as high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
11. 
As per the funding proposal, the project “will transition the current precarious water 
security and safety situation experienced by Vanuatu’s rural communities in the face of climate 
change to one of a reliable and predictable supply of safe water”. This will occur through 
climate-resilient, community-led planning and management practices (outcome 1), the delivery 
of climate-resilient water infrastructure (outcome 2), and strengthening of institutional capacity 
(outcome 3). By building and operating climate-resilient water infrastructure, interruption to 
services during and after disasters will be reduced or avoided. Therefore, this GCF project will 
reduce the costs associated with continual repairing and rebuilding after disasters, allowing the 
limited public funds available to be leveraged for investment in new WASH infrastructure and 
sustainable exploration of water sources. 
12. 
Climate mainstreaming is still nascent in Vanuatu. While climate considerations are 
increasingly being integrated into the government-led DWSSP process, there remain significant 
needs for improvements to deliver climate-resilient water security benefits for rural 
communities. By scaling up the number of climate-resilient DWSSPs registered and then 
delivering climate-resilient infrastructure and system improvements through prioritized 
DWSSPs, the funding proposal argues that the project will “strengthen a whole-of-government 
approach to achieving climate-resilient water safety and security through the DoWR with

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 112 
 
 
associated decision-making processes that are decentralized, transparent, participatory, 
community-focused, gender-mainstreamed and evidence-based”.  
13. 
In considering the extent to which these interventions might lead to a paradigm shift in 
water resource management in Vanuatu in the face of climate change, two issues were raised by 
the independent TAP. Firstly, enquiries were made as to the political feasibility of the shift from 
a public-funded model to a market-driven approach, as set out in the Vanuatu National Water 
Policy 2017–2030: Would communities be willing to contribute significantly to operation and 
maintenance (O&M) costs through payment of tariffs? In response, SPC indicated that tariffs are 
already being charged in over 50 per cent of communities, and pointed to a survey conducted by 
the Global Green Growth Institute, which found that 70 per cent of surveyed communities 
perceive that water quality is low and that vulnerability related to water access/security 
exacerbated by climate change is high. It also found that “93% of the targeted population is 
willing and able to pay for water (around 665 VUV/Month/HH)2, and that populations agree 
with pre-paid services. As such, buy-in for the proposed systems is high and is exemplified in 
the oversubscription of CAP requests to date”—with communities showing a widespread 
willingness to make their own “low and no-cost contributions” to upgrading communal water 
infrastructure, before even receiving any government funding. In response to concerns about 
affordability, SPC stated that “Tariffs established by RWC’s are heavily consulted with 
communities and proposals are posted locally for an objection period to allow communities to 
oppose any water tariff increases that are over their willingness to pay. This process is 
implemented to ensure that water remains within an affordable threshold for all community 
stakeholders." Overall, the new approach being promoted through the project is to strengthen a 
community-owned model of WASH infrastructure, which “can more easily transition into a 
market approach as socioeconomic development occurs”. 
14. 
This also partly addressed a second issue of concern raised by the independent TAP in 
relation to paradigm shift potential. This was the weakness of the Operations and Maintenance 
Plan included with the funding proposal, which contains only checklists and forms and no clear 
recommendations on whose responsibility specific elements of O&M will be, no itemized 
costings per technology type per year, and no indication of where the budget for such O&M will 
come from post-project. The independent TAP questioned whether the AE has considered that a 
solid O&M financing and organizational plan is vital to achieving post-project sustainability and 
ensuring that, as stated in the funding proposal, “this project will help to break the cycle of 
‘build-neglect-rebuild’ characterising many WASH programmes in Vanuatu in the past”. 
15. 
In response, the AE explained that O&M costs would be covered to a significant extent by 
tariffs, with explicit training of WRCs to set appropriate tariffs, collect revenue, and carry out 
O&M, both routinely and post-extreme events. The O&M Plan in annex 21 was described as 
indicative, presenting an appraisal of the government-owned process developed by Red Cross in 
consultation with DoWR and funded by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). “All 
communities will devise their own O&M plans through the DWSSP process and refine them 
further during the Water Committee Management Training that will be based on Annex 21, 
however a generic O&M plan cannot be developed that covers all RWCs as these are 
unidentified and will need to be operated and maintained based on-site specific circumstances 
(local Kastom3 processes etc). A key aspect of CAP applications is the inclusion of a feasible (and 
financed) O&M plan in the DWSSPs. This will be cross checked by the project engineers and 
monitored through the Project. Post-project budget is expected from tariff aggregation done by 
RWCs and linked into the O&M plans. Again, this is a crucial part of the CAP approval criteria. 
Further to this, DoWR support and financing will be provided in exceptional cases, e.g. non 
climate disasters such as earthquakes.” 
 
2 Abbreviations: VUV = Vanuatu vatu; HH = household 
3 Kastom is a Bislama word used to refer to traditional culture, including religion, economics, art and magic. It 
incorporates conventions, custom or customary law, social norms and traditions.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 113 
 
 
16. 
Overall, based on the above, the paradigm shift potential of the project is assessed as 
medium. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
          
17. 
The project contributes to three Sustainable Development Goals: SDG 13 (climate 
action), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation), and SDG 5 (gender equality) through its objective of 
building climate-resilient and gender-equitable water safety and security in Vanuatu.  
18. 
Social benefits and social inclusion: The project will contribute to equitable access to 
water as a basic human right in Vanuatu, targeting the most vulnerable groups in rural 
communities. Significant social benefits resulting from project activities include positive health 
outcomes. The Environmental and Social Management Plan ensures that designs of 
infrastructure for drinking water provision will include posting layout plans at the community 
level for comments and any objections. In this period, women, men, youths, and people with 
disabilities can object to the designs and plans if they feel that their needs have not been 
adequately addressed. In response to a question from the independent TAP on the involvement 
of civil society in the project, the AE clarified that representatives from the Vanuatu Association 
of NGOs are included in the Project Steering Committee. Additionally, the Vanuatu Society for 
People with Disability and others will be included as observers, including a technical partner 
from the NGO/CSO sector with a focus on gender rights and empowerment. 
19. 
Gender co-benefits: As outlined in the Gender Assessment and Action Plan, Vanuatu’s 
limited WASH service delivery and infrastructure affects women and men differently. 
Traditionally, gender roles typically involve women and girls putting in more labour and 
spending more time than men and boys in managing the household’s WASH. Increased walking 
times to reach source water during dry seasons or climate-induced emergencies can increase 
instances where women and children are further exposed to gender-based violence. The project 
aims to reduce these burdens and risks by enhancing sustained access to good quality drinking 
water close to people’s homes. 
20. 
The project aims to achieve improved social standing for women through their visible 
and meaningful roles in RWCs, with 40 per cent female members mandatory for the committees’ 
registration. In answer to a question from the independent TAP about whether this quota by 
itself would be sufficient to ensure meaningful participation and leadership roles for women, 
given the existence of strong sociocultural barriers in many island cultures and demands on 
women’s time for unpaid care work within the household, the AE highlighted that UNICEF is 
currently assisting DoWR to hire a Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion Officer and 
Consultant, who would also provide input into the GCF project. While SPC noted that RWCs 
apply their own decision-making practices based on local traditions and Kastom, which cannot 
be directly altered by the project, trainings provided in outcomes 1 and 2 will nonetheless 
“directly target RWCs on gender equality and aim to enhance the voice of women in community 
decisions”. In response to a question from the independent TAP about the positive impact of 
women’s leadership in RWCs, the AE indicated that a UNICEF study had found that RWCs with 
female chairs are more likely to perform better on the metrics of (i) having in place a form of 
revenue collection and (ii) water users themselves covering a large proportion of repairs to 
systems. 
21. 
Environmental co-benefits: The project will reduce the negative environmental 
impacts of poor wastewater management by improving water management behaviour and 
practices through the sanitation component of DWSSPs. The project will also achieve better 
protection of water sources and forested water catchment areas through no- and low-cost 
community improvements, resulting in improved environmental quality.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 114 
 
 
22. 
In response to a query from the independent TAP about the risk of overextraction of 
groundwater, the AE responded that “potential negative groundwater impacts need to be 
checked and confirmed during the individual investment preparation. ESS screening and impact 
assessments will be completed at these sites (as they fall into ESS Cat B), including pump tests 
to mitigate the risk of overexploitation of groundwater resources. Monitoring of abstraction 
rates and depth of groundwater at regular intervals will be completed by RWC with training and 
equipment being provided to them during the water committee management training”. 
Furthermore, the AE explained that “The DoWR, Provincial Government and Area Councils will 
assist the RWC to develop appropriate rules for their water systems to mitigate the risk of over 
extraction of groundwater resources, including the provision of equipment and training to 
measure groundwater and abstraction levels and advise on appropriate levels of abstraction 
and drops in groundwater levels”. 
23. 
Economic and health benefits: The direct impacts of limited water supply and water 
security, contaminated drinking water and inadequate WASH infrastructure are increased 
morbidity (diarrhoea, stunting and other illnesses) and increased mortality, among both 
children and adults. The project will provide economic benefits through avoided health care 
costs (as improved water security and sanitation practices lead to improved health outcomes), 
and enhanced human development capacity and productivity in the long term. Providing safe 
and secure water supply especially in the aftermath of cyclones will lead to avoidance of 
waterborne diseases. Loss and damage from disasters will also be reduced, as climate-resilient 
infrastructure and training on its maintenance will reduce the level of damage inflicted. 
24. 
The independent TAP pointed out the importance of a well-planned programme to 
promote handwashing and hygiene in households, since this would be an essential 
accompaniment to water provision, in order to improve the health of the population. The AE 
acknowledged this, and noted that since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic there has been a 
continuous push by Vanuatu’s Ministry of Health and the WASH sector to promote 
handwashing, supported through a number of current sanitation and hygiene pilot projects, 
including the hiring of area level sanitarians (funded by Asian Development Bank). This has 
resulted in all business houses requiring handwashing facilities and has significantly improved 
awareness around the importance of handwashing and the use of handwashing facilities. The AE 
also reported that UNICEF is scaling up a pilot WASH in Schools programme to all provinces, 
and is currently supporting the Ministry of Health to conduct a market study to assess the 
demand and supply chain for sanitation and hygiene, which will lead to a costed implementation 
plan. 
25. 
Traditional knowledge: In response to a query from the independent TAP about the 
lack of detail in the funding proposal about how island communities’ traditional knowledge 
would be incorporated into the project, the AE explained that utilizing traditional knowledge is 
essential to ensuring safety and security of the water supply, and that such knowledge will be 
captured as part of the DWSSPs and through the engineering assessments: “This knowledge 
includes finding out about the different traditional uses of different water sources and their 
reasoning for using them for these purposes, the reliability of different water sources i.e. if the 
existing community sources ever run dry, knowledge around potential land disputes (previous 
or current) and information on if the water source is in a taboo area that means it cannot be 
developed.”  
26. 
The independent TAP assesses sustainable development potential as high. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
         
27. 
Rural communities in Vanuatu use a combination of groundwater, surface water and 
rainwater that are increasingly precarious due to limited climate-proofing of infrastructure and 
processes. Over 24,000 households across the country are reliant on either rainwater or surface

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 115 
 
 
water for their primary drinking water supply. Also, one-third of households have no alternative 
source of drinking water. The project addresses the primary challenge for water safety and 
security in Vanuatu that, while access to a proximate source of drinking water is high (94 per 
cent access to an improved drinking water source and 86 per cent access on the premises), the 
water quality is not always good. Moreover, water supply is increasingly unreliable on many 
islands, as a changing climate interacts with direct anthropogenic pressures on hydrological 
systems—for example, discharge of polluted wastewater into rivers or deforestation causing 
increased run-off, erosion and sedimentation, and less infiltration of rainwater.  
28. 
Water rationing, both for household use and sanitation, and water shortages are 
common during the dry season. The DoWR Water Resources Inventory indicates that many of 
the water sources are not available or have inadequate yields during the dry season. Conversely, 
rainfall often manifests as intense periods of extreme precipitation, leading to floods that 
further exacerbate the WASH situation. In addition, safe and secure water supply is frequently 
compromised in the aftermath of cyclone events, which are expected to become more intense 
with climate change, posing serious public health risks. The project will address these needs 
through a combination of institutional strengthening and capacity-building at national and 
devolved levels, as well as through direct improvements to drinking water and WASH systems. 
29. 
 Vanuatu has the highest score in the world on the global disaster risk index (a score of 
49.74), indicating a high degree of physical exposure, relative vulnerability and resultant risk of 
loss of life from natural hazards. This is intensified by the predicted impacts of climate change 
discussed above, combined with adaptation deficits (as well as development deficits) that need 
to be addressed to build community resilience to these impacts. Financing this adaptation gap 
has posed a significant challenge in Vanuatu, which remains highly aid-dependent despite its 
graduation in 2020 from least developed country to lower middle-income country status.  
30. 
While steadily increasing economic and social indicators over recent decades are a 
positive sign for Vanuatu’s climate resilience, gains remain unevenly distributed and the most 
vulnerable people and communities will require adaptation assistance for the foreseeable 
future, particularly given the country’s significant exposure to extreme weather events and 
other hazards. The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic—with the collapse of the 
tourism sector and reduced tax receipts, combined with the loss and damage suffered from level 
5 Tropical Cyclone Harold that hit the country in April 2020—pushed the domestic budget into 
deficit in 2020/21, and may have set Vanuatu back to gross domestic product levels typical of 
least developed countries.  
31. 
The World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic for Vanuatu (which was conducted in 
2016 with seven other Pacific Islands) emphasizes that while public expenditures tend to be 
high in relation to the size of the economies of these island nations, the absolute size of the 
public sector is still very small and often lacks the financial and human resources needed to 
provide adequate public services at national scales. This is supported by the high demand on 
CAP requests for investment in DWSSPs for water infrastructure. This has induced downscaling 
of infrastructure works or lack of funding for most appropriate climate resilience, which has, in 
turn, led to increased vulnerability as exemplified by the aftermath of Tropical Cyclone Harold. 
Financial constraints for investment in water infrastructure therefore directly presents a 
barrier to climate-resilient water security and sanitation.  
32. 
Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are rated as high. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
  
 
 
           
33. 
The project is listed as the first priority project in the pipeline presented in Vanuatu’s 
GCF Country Programme and has been fully co-developed with DoWR, along with other national 
stakeholders. By addressing climate change risks and impacts on water management, and by

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 116 
 
 
working directly with vulnerable rural communities on community-based adaptation activities, 
the project is fully aligned with the Government of Vanuatu’s climate change strategies and 
policies, including the Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030, as well as 
the National Adaptation Programme of Action and the Nationally Determined Contribution, 
which both reference water resource management as a top priority. In addition, the project is 
fully in line with Vanuatu’s National Sustainable Development Plan 2016–2030, and National 
Water Policy 2017–2030.  
34. 
As a further sign of country commitment, the Government of Vanuatu has committed 
USD 3.8 million in cash co-financing to support the project, especially component 2. This co-
finance will flow mainly through the CAP, which is part of NIP, to support development of 
DWSSPs and concomitant infrastructure. The funding proposal states that “leveraged finance 
will include operation and maintenance costs for the installed equipment after completion of 
infrastructure works, amounting to an estimated $6,447,000 over the equipment lifetime. This 
financing is only possible post GCF investment through the CAP and completion of the 
infrastructure works. RWCs leverage the infrastructure works to generate the required finance 
for long-term operation and maintenance of the infrastructure post completion”. 
35. 
The project responds directly to the Government of Vanuatu’s goal for every rural 
community to have a DWSSP by 2030, as outlined in the Water Resource Management Act and 
the Water Supply Act. DoWR will be leading the implementation of key elements of the project, 
following the NIP and DWSSP processes, through which the project will scale up system 
improvements and WASH infrastructure in rural contexts. These processes are fully owned by 
DoWR, which is also the lead coordinator of the Vanuatu WASH Cluster, acting as the secretariat 
and chair during emergencies. This WASH cluster is very active due to the high number of 
emergencies that the country experiences, and DoWR is experienced in responding to water 
access and security issues during disaster and other rapid-onset climate events. There is thus 
already strong ownership of such processes and activities by DoWR, which this project will 
build upon. 
36. 
Country ownership of the project is thus seen to be high. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
         
37. 
The results of the economic analysis conducted for the project clearly show that the 
project-level Economic Net Present Value is positive at USD 37,150,065 and the programme-
level Economic Internal Rate of Return is 20 per cent. The conclusion is that the proposed 
programme is economically viable and can be justified on economic grounds, even with the non-
investment budget costs and co-finance for which no direct benefits are envisaged. According to 
the AE, the analysis included conservative assumptions and not all benefits were included in the 
economic calculations, since it was not possible to estimate the monetary values of some of the 
co-benefits.  
38. 
The total project cost is USD 28.29 million, 82.5 per cent of which is a USD 23.33 million 
GCF grant contribution. The remaining USD 4.94 million, or 17.5 per cent of the total project 
cost, is made up of grant and in-kind contributions from the Government of Vanuatu (USD 4.4 
million), SPC (USD 90,000) and UNICEF (USD 470,000). Although Government of Vanuatu cash 
contributions to infrastructure in component 2, through the ongoing CAP, cover less than 20 per 
cent of the total costs, this contribution can be considered as significant given the country’s 
financial position. The structure of the project as 100 per cent grant-financed represents an 
appropriate level of concessionality in the country’s context, and given the fact that any 
revenues generated from sale of water to communities will be ploughed straight back into 
operating expenses (which revenues will likely not even be able to cover fully).

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 117 
 
 
39. 
The independent TAP did, however, raise a query with the AE about why as much as 80 
per cent of the cost of water infrastructure in component 2 was being covered by GCF funding, 
when section D.6 of the funding proposal on efficiency and effectiveness states that “the 
interventions will address the social, gender, regulatory, financial, ecological and institutional 
barriers that hinder communities from coping with the additional burden of climate change [the 
independent TAP’s emphasis] on water security management”. Elsewhere the funding proposal 
acknowledges that “one of the primary barriers in Vanuatu is limited WASH infrastructure and 
water supply sources", with some islands still lacking any improved systems and 21 per cent of 
existing systems being dysfunctional. The islands have fragile water resources as a result of 
factors unrelated to climate change, such as the “small scale, lack of storage and limited 
freshwater reserves”, which are now also “increasingly exposed to climate impacts”. Arguably, 
the key challenge here, i.e. lack of water safety and security, is primarily a development 
challenge, which should be tackled predominantly by government or Official Development 
Assistance resources, with GCF’s climate finance used only for the portion of the problem 
attributable to climate change. 
40. 
In answer to this, SPC argued that “the fact that communities have fragile water systems 
is immensely climate relevant on its own accord, as it directly enhances their vulnerability to 
climate related impacts. Climate change is predicted to lead to enhanced drought periods and 
inundation events. As such, water security and safety are directly at risk from climate change in 
Vanuatu. This is especially the case in ENSO positive or negative years, which are predicted to 
have more severe impacts on water systems than ENSO neutral years. The fact that the water 
systems in place are currently fragile due to ‘small scales, lack of storage and limited freshwater 
reserves’ is a direct issue that enhances community risk and exposure of climate change 
impacts, regardless of the historical cause. Limited freshwater supplies will be greatly depleted 
over drought periods that are predicted to increase under projected climate trends or can be 
easily contaminated in inundation events or through enhanced saltwater intrusion from king 
tides, sea-level rise and storm surges. Communities are therefore sorely in need of diversified 
and more secure water sources to enable them to adapt and enhance their resilience to 
predicted climate change scenarios. Investment in these systems is therefore directly 
responsive to climate change adaptation needs, justifying the need for climate finance 
resources.” 
41. 
Another area of cost-effectiveness into which the independent TAP enquired was why 
desalination is included in the project, given its relatively high cost compared with the other 
technology types. Using the figures provided in the economic analysis for the estimated average 
capacity of each of the four technology types (in litres per annum) and the upfront capital 
expenditure costs of each type, the independent TAP found that the cost per litre per annum of 
the planned desalination plants was USD 0.51, in comparison with USD 0.02 for gravity fed 
systems and USD 0.03 for groundwater systems (with rainwater harvesting systems falling in 
between at USD 0.22 per litre per annum). The AE explained that “some communities, in 
particular those located on low-lying reef islands, do not have reliable access to groundwater. 
Rainwater harvesting systems can also be unreliable during dry seasons or drought periods, 
especially within El Niño phases. In these particular contexts, solar powered desalination is 
deemed the most appropriate technology to provide these communities with safe and secure 
water sources in the face of climate change. This is not a common need, and the Project is only 
providing financing for 4 desalination units, to target the communities and locations that face 
significant water security challenges and have minimal alternative options for safe and 
sustainable sources of drinking water. This estimate is based on CAP requests to date. Despite 
the higher cost per litre of water, the need for these systems is highly context-specific and is 
justified in these rare cases, including considering the logistics and transport of fresh water to 
remote high risk areas when rainwater tanks run dry and hand dug wells become brackish”.  
42. 
Desalination sites would also be required to have strong RWCs in place, given the more 
onerous O&M requirements. At the suggestion of the independent TAP, the AE also agreed that

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 118 
 
 
recent advances in small-scale solar powered desalination technology4 would be investigated, 
and the most affordable best practice technology would be utilized in project implementation. 
43. 
The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is rated as medium. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
44. 
The independent TAP endorses the funding proposal for the project “Enhancing 
Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu”. 
 
 
4 The independent TAP highlighted emerging technologies that do not require battery storage or grid connection, but 
instead rely on sophisticated control systems to go into low/no-production mode depending on solar availability. See 
https://www.news24.com/news24/southafrica/news/revolutionary-solar-power-desalination-plant-could-
provide-cheaper-option-but-it-needs-space-20180718 and 
https://solarmagazine.com/no-batteries-needed-low-cost-solar-desalination-system-green-namibia-desert-coast/

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 119 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP191) 
Proposal name: 
Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving 
Water Security in Vanuatu 
Accredited entity: 
The Pacific Community (SPC) 
Country/(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
Impact potential 
SPC is pleased to note that the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) concurs that the 
impact potential of the project is “high”. Given Vanuatu’s high vulnerability to climate change, 
the project will provide significant adaptation impacts in terms of water security and 
community resilience in the face of extreme climate risks following government-owned water 
management processes and community-based planning. 
Paradigm shift potential 
SPC notes the iTAP assessment of the paradigm shift potential of the project as “medium”. By 
strengthening government processes through transparent, community-focused, gender-
mainstreamed and evidence-based approaches, the project will achieve a paradigm shift away 
from the “build-neglect-rebuild” cycles characterising many such investments globally and 
towards a paradigm of water security that is sustainable, participatory, equitable and climate-
resilient. 
Sustainable development potential 
SPC is pleased to note that the iTAP concurs that the sustainable development potential of the 
project is “high”. Access to safe and secure water is fundamental to Article 25 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights as well as the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals 6 
and 3, amongst others. SPC is proud to be supporting Vanuatu in their progress towards 
achievement of national sustainable development outcomes in a climate-resilient, inclusive 
and community-focused manner. 
Needs of the recipient 
SPC is pleased to note that the iTAP concurs that the needs of the recipients are “high”. 
Indeed, Vanuatu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the Pacific; notwithstanding 
underlying challenges related to water security, climate change will severely hamper the 
ability of ni-Vanuatu communities to achieve safe and secure wellbeing. This project will 
address many of these needs, providing opportunities for significantly improved living 
conditions for beneficiaries. 
Country ownership

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.34/02/Add.01 
Page 120 
 
 
 
SPC is pleased to note that the iTAP concurs that the country ownership of the project is 
“high”. As for all projects developed by SPC, it is predicated on a direct request to SPC from 
the government of Vanuatu for assistance in addressing national climate change priorities. 
The project has thus been government-owned from its inception and its design was 
government-led throughout. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
SPC notes the iTAP assessment of the project’s efficiency and effectiveness as “medium”. 
While some interventions were assessed to have comparatively high financial cost, it is 
noteworthy that the costs to human lives, livelihoods and wellbeing of not taking such action 
or making such investments cannot be measured in financial terms. It is also significant that 
the costs associated with such investments in an island country such as Vanuatu are 
comparatively larger than similar investments elsewhere. In this context, such high costs are 
justified given the expected adaptation and sustainable development impacts vis-à-vis the 
needs of the recipients.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
SPC is pleased to note that the iTAP has endorsed the funding proposal for the project 
“Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu”.

=== PAGE 121 ===
Annex 8: 
Gender 
Assessment and 
Gender Action 
Plan 
07 September 2022 
Gender documentation for FP191

=== PAGE 122 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
2 
This Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan have been prepared for The Pacific Community 
(SPC), to inform the project design of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Funding Proposal titled: 
Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu.   
This project will deliver adaptation action for Vanuatu’s water infrastructure and community 
users and will ensure gender mainstreaming in the paradigmatic shift being proposed. 
Project Manager: 
Dr. Grant BALLARD-TREMEER 
Authors: 
Ms. Debasmita BORAL ROLLAND 
Last edited: 
07 September 2022 
Status: 
Final 
Disclaimer: 
This document is issued for the party which commissioned it and for specific purposes 
connected with the above-captioned project only. It should not be relied upon by any other party or used for any 
other purpose. We accept no responsibility for the consequences of this document being relied upon by any other 
party, or being used for any other purpose, or containing any error or omission which is due to an error or omission in 
data supplied to us by other parties. This document contains confidential information and proprietary intellectual 
property. It should not be shown to other parties without consent from us and from the party which commissioned it. 
The views expressed in this report are those of E Co. staff and associates and they are not necessarily those of the 
commissioning party of anyone else.

=== PAGE 123 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
3 
Contents 
Contents 
3 
COVID-19 in Vanuatu 
5 
Definitions 
6 
1. 
Introduction to the GCF – Annex 8 
8 
1.1 
Objective of the study 
8 
1.2 
Gender barriers in Vanuatu: a summary 
10 
2. 
Methodology note for Annex 8 
14 
2.1 
Primary data and information collected through key informant interviews and focused 
working groups 
14 
2.2 
Secondary data and information collected through literature review 
15 
2.3 
Concurrent triangulation of primary inputs and secondary data and information 
collection 
16 
3. 
Policy environment for gender- transformative CR-WASH in Vanuatu 
17 
4. 
Socioeconomic and gender baseline in Vanuatu 
19 
4.1 
Methodology for the baseline 
19 
4.2 
National aggregate statistics with SDG indicators 
19 
4.3 
Composite indices (HDI, GDI, GII, GGI) 
24 
5. 
Gender at the Green Climate Fund & the Pacific Community 
26 
6. 
Gender mainstreaming for CR-WASH in Vanuatu 
27 
6.1 
Problem statement: WASH baseline in Vanuatu 
27 
6.2 
Rationale: gender and climate-resilient WASH 
28 
6.3 
Barrier analysis: gender, water insecurity and climate-induced risks 
29 
6.4 
Co-benefit of the project: increased representation of women in climate-resilient 
water governance 
33 
6.5 
Overall impact of the project: decreased time poverty for women and youth 
35 
7. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism, in the case of SEAH and GbV 
37 
7.1 
GCF Grievance Redress Mechanism 
38 
7.2 
Grievance related to Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and/or harassment 
39 
7.3 
SPC’s Grievance Redress Mechanism 
40

=== PAGE 124 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
4 
7.4 
Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
41 
7.5 
Community-level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
41 
8. 
Key recommendations 
43 
9. 
Gender Action Plan 
45 
Annex A: Implementing roles and responsibilities for gender mainstreaming 
56 
Annex B: Gender questionnaire for field missions 
58 
1. Can you provide us an overview of gender mainstreaming for WASH at the policy level? 
58 
2. How familiar are you with this SPC- and DoWR-led GCF project? 
59 
3. Overall gender baseline and gender-based violence in Vanuatu 
59 
4. Gender-specific issues for WASH? 
59 
5. Additional questions during provincial field missions 
60 
(please note interviewee name, with consent, location, date, time and their gender). 
60 
a) Are sector meetings at community level organized to overcome cultural barriers to women’s 
participation, (cultural norms, seating arrangements, language and meeting times)? 
60 
Annex C: Bibliography 
61

=== PAGE 125 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
5 
COVID-19 in Vanuatu 
During the development of this report, the global community continues to grapple with the 
coronavirus pandemic, which is wreaking havoc on the lives of millions of people, both with 
regard to health and wellbeing, and socioeconomic indicators. COVID-19 is also having distinctive 
gendered impacts around the world.1 The COVID-19 pandemic and major natural disasters hit the 
Vanuatu economy severely in 2020. Due to the authorities’ decisive measures, Vanuatu primarily 
avoided domestic transmission of COVID-19, but the border closure, according to the 
International Monetary Fund, brought tourism (a key economic sector) to a virtual stop. 
 
At the time of writing Annex 8 (March 2022), Vanuatu’s health authorities announced community 
transmission of COVID-19, with restrictions on mobility and economy imposed on the main island 
of Efate (and its surrounding islands). A curfew running from 06:00 to 18:00 has severely 
constrained women’s economic activity and incomes, notably female food sellers or vatu 
mamas.2 
 
The coronavirus pandemic has exposed entrenched inequalities and stark disparities in power, 
clearly illustrating how a global crisis like this impacts people differently depending on where 
they live, their gender, their age and their socioeconomic status. The consequences of this crisis 
for gender equality are devastating, as has been anecdotally observed in Vanuatu during the 
stakeholder consultation processes for the project preparation phase. Worldwide, there has been 
increasing cases of gender-based violence, and a reversal of advances in sexual and reproductive 
health and rights. This is particularly concerning in the case of Vanuatu – which, along with the 
broader Pacific region, is endemic for heightened gender-based violence and violence against 
women.  
 
The project has attempted to cover these nuances throughout this assessment, paying particular 
attention to how gender, WASH and climate change interact and identifying actionable 
interventions such as increasing women’s representation in community-based water management 
groups and providing inclusive (and accessible) training on climate-resilient water management. 
Through the project’s paradigm shift pathway, vulnerable (often remote) communities in 
Vanuatu (and marginalized groups such as women and girls within them) are expected to be able 
to benefit from overall increase in climate resilience and improved water safety and security.  
 
1 These links provide an overview of gendered impacts of COVID-19 globally:  
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(21)01651-2/fulltext 
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/332080/WHO-2019-nCoV-Advocacy_brief-Gender-2020.1-eng.pdf 
https://www.who.int/news/item/03-05-2021-expanding-reach-addressing-gender-barriers-in-covid-19-vaccine-
rollout 
https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2020/09/gender-equality-in-the-wake-of-covid-19 
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/covid-19-and-gender-equality-countering-the-
regressive-effects 
2 Latest figures on COVID-19 for Vanuatu are available on: https://covid19.who.int/region/wpro/country/vu

=== PAGE 126 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
6 
Definitions 
To ensure a baseline understanding of climate issues, and the development of the analysis based 
on impact and exposure on women, men, girls and boys, the following definitions, adapted from 
the USAID Climate Change Adaptation Project Preparation Facility for Asia and the Pacific (Adapt 
Asia-Pacific)3, are provided as reference for this Annex-8:  
 
Term 
Definition 
Gender 
A culturally-defined set of economic, social, and political roles, responsibilities, rights, 
entitlements obligations, associated with being female and male, as well as the power relations 
between and among women and men, boys and girls. The definition and expectations of what it 
means to be a woman or girl and a man or boy, and sanctions for not adhering to those 
expectations, vary across cultures and over time, and often intersect with other factors such as 
race, class, age and sexual orientation. Transgender individuals, whether they identify as men or 
women, 
are 
subject 
to 
the 
same 
set 
of 
expectations 
and 
sanctions.  
(OHA/PEPFAR, modified from the Interagency Gender Working Group – IGWG) 
 
Gender Equity 
The process of being fair to women and men, boys and girls. To ensure fairness, measures must 
be taken to compensate for cumulative economic, social, and political disadvantages that prevent 
women 
and 
men, 
boys 
and 
girls 
from 
operating 
on 
a 
level 
playing 
field.  
(IGWG training resources) 
 
Gender Equality 
The state or condition that affords women and men equal enjoyment of human rights, socially 
valued goods, opportunities, and resources. Genuine equality means more than parity in numbers 
or laws on the books; it means expanded freedoms and improved overall quality of life for all 
people. (IGWG training resources) 
 
Gender-blind 
are project designs and activities that ignore gender factors including roles and relations and can 
lead to reinforcement of gender-based discrimination and existing inequities. (USAID) 
 
Gender-balance 
requires that men and women be equally represented - either in equal numbers or in proportion 
to their presence - in particular settings. (USAID) 
 
Gender 
Mainstreaming 
Process of incorporating a gender perspective into organizational policies, strategies, and 
administrative functions, as well as into the institutional culture of an organization. This process 
at the organizational level ideally results in meaningful gender integration as outlined below. 
(adapted from IGWG training resources)  
 
Gender 
and  
Socioeconomic 
Analysis 
is the process of collecting information about gender, age and other social differences and 
analyzing the impacts of changing circumstances (i.e., climate change) on specific groups of 
people. This type of analysis provides the basis for identifying key gender considerations and 
designing a ‘socially inclusive approach’ that responds to the unique circumstances and needs of 
all project beneficiaries. (USAID) 
 
 
3 Gender and Social Inclusion Strategy of this project can be found here: 
https://www.nab.vu/sites/default/files/documents/Annex%208%20-
%20Gender%20_social%20inclusion%20%20Strategy.pdf

=== PAGE 127 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
7 
Gender-based 
Violence  
In the broadest terms, “gender-based violence” is violence that is directed at individuals based 
on their biological sex, gender identity, or perceived adherence to culturally- defined 
expectations of what it means to be a woman and man, girl and boy. It includes physical, sexual, 
and psychological abuse; threats; coercion; arbitrary deprivation of liberty; and economic 
deprivation, whether occurring in public or private. GBV is rooted in economic, social, and 
political inequalities between men and women. GBV can occur throughout the lifecycle, from 
infancy through childhood and adolescence, the reproductive years and into old age (Moreno 
2005), and can affect women and girls, and men and boys, including transgender individuals. 
Specific types of GBV include (but are not limited to) female infanticide; early and forced 
marriage, “honor” killings, and female genital cutting/mutilation; child sexual abuse and 
exploitation; trafficking in persons; sexual coercion, harassment and abuse; neglect; domestic 
violence; economic deprivation, and elder abuse.  
(adapted from USG Strategy for the Prevention and Response to Gender-based Violence)  
 
Sexual 
Exploitation, 
Abuse and Sexual 
Harassment 
SEAH is the term used to refer to sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment. Although 
sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment can happen anywhere in society, when used 
as an umbrella term within the development and humanitarian sector, the term refers to 
SEAH perpetrated by those working in, or with, development and humanitarian organisations 
and within Peacekeeping Missions. (adapted from the Safeguarding Support Hub)

=== PAGE 128 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
8 
1.
Introduction to the GCF – Annex 8
1.1 Objective of the study 
This Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan (GA-GAP) is a supporting document for the 
design of the proposed GCF project: Enhancing adaptation and community resilience by 
improving water security in Vanuatu. It is the Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal, which is 
being proposed as a full-scale project by the Accredited Entity (AE) - The Pacific Community 
(SPC) to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and has been developed in close coordination with 
Vanuatu’s Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and WASH sector partners.  
SPC is currently implementing the FP169: Climate change adaptation solutions for Local 
Authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia 4 and has a track record in implementing 
gender-responsive adaptation solutions, within its broader portfolio of designing and 
implementing projects – as well as leading regional research – on cross-cutting issues such as 
climate change, disaster risk management, food security and human rights. The organization 
recognizes that: 
•
Climate adaptation and mitigation pathways are not gender-neutral5;
•
Gendered needs and vulnerabilities of marginal groups, such as Indigenous Peoples, need to
be mainstreamed into adaptation design, resilience capacity-building and mitigation
services;6 and
•
Gender-transformative impact can be driven through robust financial means, gender budgets
and dedicated resources towards mainstreaming gender action in climate change and
deforestation.7
Without gender and socioeconomic analysis, and a thorough Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal), the benefits of increased support and access 
to climate-resilient WASH infrastructure, in tandem with awareness-raising and capacity-
building, may accrue to better-off households or more mainstream groups that are able to 
capitalise on new opportunities and respond better to changes implemented through the project. 
4 More information on this project is available here: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp169 
5 Current literature on climate change, and its effects and emergent risks, are predominantly produced in scientific 
circles. Yet, there is increasing evidence that adopting social science methods, and situating resilience and 
adaptation practice within a broader science-policy interface and right-based perspectives, can gear projects 
towards environmental and socioeconomic co-benefits. Particularly, this could better prepare communities to avoid 
resource strife and respond to the complexity of social arrangements, reducing far-reaching impacts of climate risks. 
See Butterfield, R. (2018) ‘Bringing rights into resilience: revealing complexities of climate risks and social conflict’ 
in Disasters. Journal Article.  
6 Poor or missing gender analysis, or the lack of gender-responsive action, may lead to planners or personnel 
depending on women to assume a central role in their coping strategies, which may not be the practical reality for 
many vulnerable communities. Further, this also glosses over the existing burdens on women among such groups. See 
Nelson. V., Meadows. K., Cannon, T., Morton, J., & Martin, A. (2002) ‘Uncertain predictions, invisible impacts and 
the need to mainstream gender in climate change adaptations’ in Gender and Development. Journal Article. 
7 OECD (2014). Making climate finance work for women. See: oecd.org/environment/making-climate-finance-work-
for-women.

=== PAGE 129 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
9 
A ‘gender lens’8 is both necessary and relevant for the project to maximise its outcomes for the 
CR-WASH sub-sector, and ensuring resilience of water infrastructure against natural and climate-
induced hazards, disasters and weather variations that cannot be avoided. This gender-
responsive approach is also crucial for establishing institutional structures and broad-based 
political momentum and socioeconomic frameworks to mobilise medium- and long-term 
adaptation action in the country and derive socioeconomic and gender benefits from increased 
water security in the communities. Particularly, this project will aim to increase institutional 
representation and meaningful participation of women in community-based management of 
water sources, system improvements and new WASH infrastructure. Improved gender parity will 
help deliver the adaptation pathway chosen by the project, as well as sustain results to ensure 
that communities are able to transition to a water-secure and climate-resilient future. 
 
The overall objective, therefore, of the gender assessment will be to provide a tool to promote 
gender mainstreaming in Vanuatu through the project paradigm – particularly, by identifying 
relevant entry points that the project can benefit from given its focus on water security and the 
climate-resilient water, sanitation, and hygiene (CR-WASH) sub-sector. Using gender as a lens 
will also help identify the social relationships between women and men, and other marginalized 
groups in Vanuatu.  
 
Access to WASH is fundamental to development but it can be mobilized as critical climate 
adaptation strategy for poor and vulnerable communities, as well as marginalized groups within 
those communities, including women and girls.9 The levels of global climate finance directed to 
the WASH sector are currently limited (according to WaterAid), which reflects that improved 
WASH is yet to be recognized as a key climate adaptation strategy, and for gender equality. 
The focus of this study, therefore, is to present an assessment of the different roles, rights, 
needs and opportunities of women and men, boys and girls in the project context, and mobilise 
project resources to tackle gender barriers, and contribute towards improved gender equality in 
Vanuatu. In doing so, the assessment will seek to operationalise gender mainstreaming activities 
through the project’s results framework by formulating a Gender Action Plan – Section 8, based 
on the project’s Logical Framework (Section E of the Funding Proposal).  
 
This will ensure that the proposed design10 to deliver improved water security and increased 
climate resilience at community level in Vanuatu can have climate, environmental and social co-
benefits in Vanuatu, with identified indicators, timeline and means of verification. The logical 
framework of the project has three Outcomes, two of which are focused on water infrastructure 
management and planning in tandem with a Outcome dedicated to institutional strengthening.  
The outcome and outputs are detailed below: 
 
8 It is important to note that gender is socially constructed, and gender relations are contextually specific and often 
change in response to altering circumstances. MOSER, C. O.N. (1993): Gender Planning and Development: Theory, 
Practice and Training. New York: Routledge. 
 
9 Winqvist, E. (ed.) (2020). Feminist Policies for Climate Justice. Stockholm: Concord. Available at: 
https://concord.se/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/fem-rapport-2020-final.pdf 
10 Please refer to Section E for the Logical Framework in the Funding Proposal (FP). The Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
(Section 8) provides impact and outcome statement for each Outcome in relation to gender mainstreaming entry 
points and proposed actions for the project, to be evaluated against a set of indicators and targets as well as 
delineation of timeline, responsible parties and costing. 
The paradigm shift potential of the results framework is captured in the Theory of Change, available in the FP as 
Section B.2.a.

=== PAGE 130 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
10 
 
Outcome 1: 
Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water 
resources 
Output 1.1:  
New and existing DWSSPs incorporate incremental improvements to mainstream 
adaptation solutions 
Output 1.2:  
Awareness, capacities and skills of communities and area administrators on 
climate-resilient water management improved 
Output 1.3: 
Vulnerable communities are supported to develop and implement their DWSSPs  
(600 by the end of the project cycle) 
Outcome 2:  
Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure 
Output 2.1:  
270 vulnerable communities supported to construct, operate, and maintain 
climate-resilient water infrastructure 
Outcome 3: 
Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks 
associated with water 
Outcome 3.1: 
National- and provincial-level staff and WASH sector partners trained on climate-
resilient water management 
Outcome 3.2: 
Knowledge management through data sharing mechanism established for climate-
resilient water management 
Outcome 3.3: 
Monitoring, learning and evaluation framework established for improved learning 
for climate-resilient water management 
 
Through these Outcomes and outputs, the proposed project will mainstream gender by: 
• 
Analysing and enhancing the baseline of gender and social inclusion in the National 
Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Community Drinking Water (NIP); Capital Assistance 
Program (CAP) and more broadly, by equitably targeting beneficiaries through the Drinking 
Water Safety and Security Plans (DWSSPs); 
• 
Establishing gender-transformative approaches for the design, delivery and maintenance 
plans of water infrastructure, whether existing or newly built or in the pipeline; 
• 
Promoting gender parity, to the extent possible, through the technical and maintenance 
capacity-building outputs, alongside the institutional development targeted for increased 
water security in Vanuatu; and, 
• 
Mainstreaming gender analyses and praxis for GCF investments in the CR-WASH subsector, 
both as a best practice in Vanuatu and for similar contexts in the Pacific Island Countries 
and Territories (PICTs). 
 
1.2 Gender barriers in Vanuatu: a summary 
A kaleidoscope of overlapping cultural, socioeconomic and political roles form gender norms, 
relations, uneven power dynamics and vulnerabilities in Vanuatu. For these reasons, the climate 
crisis affects women and girls in unique and disproportionate ways. The archipelago nation is 
spread out over 80 islands and has repeatedly been featured as one of the most at-risk and 
exposed country to climate change, notably in the 2019 World Risk Index.11 
 
11 Rurh Universität Bochum (2019). World Risk Report (focus on water supply). Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/WorldRiskReport-2019_Online_english.pdf

=== PAGE 131 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
11 
Vanuatu is also classified as a Small Islands Developing States or SIDS12, which are a distinct group 
of developing island countries facing specific social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities. 
As with other nations with SIDS status, repeated exposure to climate events and natural disaster 
phenomena presents a major obstacle to the sustained eradication of poverty and promoting 
shared prosperity in Vanuatu and undermines progress on gender equality indicators. This is 
compounded by SIDS characteristics such as: remoteness and deprivation from the benefits of 
scale, low income and assets, small domestic markets and heavy dependence on a few external 
markets and international support, high volatility of economic growth, fragile natural 
environments, and socioeconomic as well as gendered vulnerabilities.13  
 
Additionally, until December 2020, Vanuatu was a Least Developed Country (LDCs).14 During its 
graduation from the LDC list, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development recognized 
consistent strides made by the country to improve its social and economic development 
indicators but also that the exposure to environmental and economic vulnerabilities remain high, 
particularly in the face of climate change and other external shocks.15  
 
In terms of gender characteristics, Vanuatu can be identified as a traditionally male-
dominated and largely patriarchal society, with skewed sex ratio (105 males:100 females) in 
the islands. Overarching gender barriers include: 
Limited participation of women in policy and decision-making spheres 
Women have limited participation in decision-making spheres, with low representation in 
Parliament, as well as within devolved institutions of power. The national government’s Beijing 
+25 review report, for example, highlights that no women were elected to parliament in the last 
two elections.16 Further, in 5 out of 6 provincial councils, no women have been elected, with a 
sole female councillor elected in the sixth. Socio-anthropological research in Kurumambe and 
Purau villages in Tongoa, for example, highlighted how women must navigate strict rules 
governing their presence and speech in the nakamal (chief’s meeting place) – effectively 
excluding them from holding titles or wielding decision-making power even at localised levels of 
governance.17 
 
12 SIDS were recognized as having special status both for their environment and development at the Earth Summit, 
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. Updated list of SIDS can be found on: https://www.un.org/ohrlls/content/list-
sids. 
13 UN-OHRLLS – Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing 
Countries, and Small Island Developing States (2015). Small Island Developing States in Numbers: Climate Change 
Edition 2015. Report. Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2189SIDS-IN-
NUMBERS- CLIMATE-CHANGE-EDITION_2015.pdf  
14 See UNCTAD’s LDC list here: https://unctad.org/news/vanuatu-graduates-least-developed-country-status 
15 See UNDESA’s LDC profile for Vanuatu:  https: //www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-
content/uploads/sites/45/LDC_Profile_Vanuatu.pdf 
16 Department of Women’s Affairs (2020). Beijing +25 – National Review Report. Available at: 
https://www.asiapacificgender.org/sites/default/files/documents/Vanuatu%20(English).pdf 
17 Granderson, A. (2017) “The role of traditional knowledge in building adaptive capacity for climate change in 
Vanuatu” in Weather, Climate and Society. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317071599_The_Role_of_Traditional_Knowledge_in_Building_Adaptive_C
apacity_for_Climate_Change_Perspectives_from_Vanuatu

=== PAGE 132 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
12 
Inequity in economic lives as well as gendered capacity and input gaps among men and 
women 
Vanuatu is an agricultural society in which 75% of the total population lives in rural areas and 
depends largely on subsistence agriculture and fishing for daily subsistence and livelihoods, 
according to the Vanuatu National Statistics Office (2016). The 2016 mini-census found that 88% 
of household engage in some form of vegetable crop production, 57% in cash crop production, 
69% in livestock production and 49% in fishing. A Country Gender Assessment led by the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) found that women and men participate in almost equal numbers 
in the agricultural sectors, but inequality manifests in the crops that are grown (often: men may 
grow cash crops) and in the technology employed (often: men have better access to agricultural 
inputs, owing to cash income from more lucrative crops).18 Additionally, traditional and faith-
based norms continue to operate and undermine gender equality in the essential inputs for 
productive and remunerative agricultural livelihoods, such as by: excluding women from 
matrimonial property, inheritance, and land rights).  
Disproportionate share of unpaid care work continues to be undertaken by women 
As in many other societies, the World Bank’s Gender and Investment Climate Reform Assessment 
for Vanuatu finds: economically active women suffer from a double workday – combining 
responsibilities for home and family with their economic activities 19 . Although parity in 
enrolment rates has been achieved at primary and junior secondary school level, women remain 
less likely than men to have a completed secondary school education and to go on to tertiary 
education. This hints towards a gendered gap in educational achievements and skills, which 
translates into women being limited into low-skilled, low-paying jobs that are often found 
primarily in the informal sector.  
In rural contexts, women face barriers in finding productive and remunerative work, and may be 
contributing to subsistence agriculture as well as various unpaid work in the household, thereby 
exhibiting high levels of time poverty.20 Through stakeholder consultations for this project, it 
was revealed that women are primarily agents of domestic water provision, along with teenagers 
and young adults, which is corroborated by existing research by UNICEF and academics.21 
 
High incidence of gender-based violence in Vanuatu  
Vanuatu has one of the highest prevalence rates of violence against women and girls globally. 
Research conducted by the Vanuatu Women’s Centre (in 2011) established that ~60% of women 
with an intimate partner had experienced physical violence, ~68% experienced emotional 
violence, and ~69% coercive behavioural control by men.22 According to the World Bank’s 2012 
 
18 FAO (2020). Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu. 
Available at: https://www.fao.org/3/ca7427en/ca7427en.pdf 
19 AusAID & IFC (2010). Gender and Investment Climate Reform Assessment – Vanuatu. Available at: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25925/111536-WP-IFC-
GenderICReformAssessments-Vanuatu.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
20 Time poverty is the burden of competing claims on an individual’s time that reduce their ability to make 
unconstrained choices in how they allocate their time leading to increased work intensity and to trade-offs among 
various tasks. (A. Kes and H. Swaminathan. 2005. Gender and Time Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa. In C. Blackden 
and Q. Wodon, eds. Gender, Time Use, and Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.) 
21 J. Willetts et al. 2010. Addressing Two Critical MDGs together: Gender in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Initiatives. Pacific Economic Bulletin. 25 (1. 
22 World Vision (2018). Evaluation Report: Reducing GbV Project (Vanuatu Counselling Approach). Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Counselling%20Evaluation%202018%20.pdf

=== PAGE 133 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
13 
World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development, between 60 – 70% of women 
in Vanuatu (alongside Kiribati and Solomon Islands) experience some form of domestic violence.23 
Male family members and boyfriends perpetrate most of the violence and it occurs in all 
provinces and islands, across age groups, education levels, socio-economic groups and 
religions. It is higher in rural (63%) than in urban (50%) areas. Social values held by both women 
and men reinforce the acceptability of violence towards women and girls and ~60% of women 
agree with at least one “reason” for men to beat their wives. In Vanuatu, gender-based 
violence, and particularly intimate-partner violence, is used as punishment and discipline and 
is accepted and condoned as ‘normal’ behaviour in many communities. This impacts both 
women and children. 
Stakeholder consultations conducted during the project highlighted the need for introducing 
security and safety Outcomes for system improvements and new WASH infrastructure planned 
through the project – particularly demarcation of women and men’s toilets, locks and doors, 
as well as lighting to ensure safe passage and accessibility. Therefore, working to mainstream 
gender interests and ensuring dignity for women and girls (also around menstrual hygiene 
management) through planned project activities will overall increase community well-being, 
ensure social co-benefits and the success of the project adaptation pathway.  
 
 
 
 
 
23 See: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2012/11/25/raising-awareness-of-violence-against-women-in-
the-pacific

=== PAGE 134 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
14 
2. 
Methodology note for Annex 8 
2.1 Primary data and information collected through 
key informant interviews and focused working 
groups  
Due to pandemic-related obstacles, this gender assessment has been prepared using primary 
information and data collected by national stakeholder engagement experts between June – 
September 2021. An Inception Workshop, convened on 30th June 2021, commenced these 
consultations and engagement processes.24 Following the Inception Workshop, one to one/face 
to face consultations were held with key stakeholders actively working or involved in the national 
water governance processes, humanitarian responses for water and utilities as well as the overall 
improvement of WASH service delivery in Vanuatu.  
Using semi-structured interviewing methodology, ranging from one to two persons at a time and 
in accordance to COVID-19 guidelines laid down by the Government of Vanuatu, interviews were 
conducted with the Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and other key ministries; civil 
society organizations (CSOs); and, UN entities active in Vanuatu, particularly UNICEF (an 
important WASH sector partner for this project). The stakeholders ranged from employees of the 
DoWR to provincial government leaders and community members, who play a key role in ensuring 
water security in Vanuatu. Participants and stakeholders were identified using a combination of 
purposive and snowball sampling during the field missions led by the DoWR, and consulted 
according to their levels of knowledge, exposure and access on climate change, water 
infrastructure, and gender as well as socioeconomic issues to prioritise and vet information and 
data received. 
The Department of Women’s Affairs (DoWA) was among the key stakeholders consulted as a 
part of this process. A key finding from this consultation was that gender has been increasingly 
incorporated in WASH processes over the years. However, mainstreaming remains a need across 
all WASH stakeholders that requires ongoing improvement. WASH design interventions and 
processes within government sectors and NGOs need to be more responsive to the needs of 
children, the elderly and LGBTQIA+. Given the reach of the proposed project down to community-
level interventions, it was determined consultation at the provincial level was also necessary to 
inform the project preparation stage. Accordingly, with guidance from DoWR, the provinces of 
Penama, Sanma and Torba25 were selected. The consultations identified ongoing relevant water 
 
24 The workshop was conducted by SPC and involved the participation of key players including the Vanuatu 
Nationally Designated Authority (NDA) – Ministry of Climate Change, the Department of Water Resources, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Vanuatu Meteorology & Geo-hazards Department, Department of Strategic Planning, Policy & Aid 
Coordination. WASH sector partners included United Nation’s Children Fund, Asian Development Bank, International 
Organization on Migration and the New Zealand High Commission. 
25 The Torba Province consists of the Torres and Banks group of islands in the north of Vanuatu. The Torres group is 
located in the extreme north of Vanuatu and comprises of 5 islands: Hiu, Metoma, Tegua, Loh and Toga. The Banks 
group include Mota Lava, Mota, Merik, Ureparapara, Vanua Lava and Gaua islands. The provincial centre or 
headquarters is located on the island of Vanua Lava. Penama encompasses the three islands of Pentecost, Ambae

=== PAGE 135 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
15 
security work that are being implemented by government and NGOs in the provinces, that provide 
a basis for future development opportunities in the sector. Participants also identified the key 
gender groups at the community level and articulated their different needs that should be 
incorporated into the design of new water security/WASH projects and programmes so that 
interventions are responsive to the needs and special circumstances of all beneficiaries. 
 
The funding proposal package, including this Annex 8, was subsequently presented at a 
Validation Workshop, on 23rd March 2021. This ensured that national-level and provincial 
stakeholders were engaged, and their consensus was sought for, the gender mainstreaming goals 
identified by the project.  
 
2.2 Secondary data and information collected through 
literature review 
To collect secondary information and literature, the gender expert conducted an in-depth 
desktop review in tandem with the primary and formative remote research through national 
experts in the islands. The literature review focused on gender mainstreaming, water security 
and resilience as a broader topic, drawing from key players in the water industry such as the 
Global Water Partnership – GWP, the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery – GFDRR, 
United Nations Development Programme – UNDP, United Nation’s Children Fund – UNICEF and the 
World Bank, as well as donor agencies active in the Pacific region, such as Australian Aid (AusAID), 
Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID).  
Existing gender assessment and gender action plan for prior GCF investment in Vanuatu (FP03526), 
were also reviewed to understand the scope of gender-climate resilience work through prior GCF 
investment in the islands. Lessons learnt and best practices were reviewed from recently closed 
and ongoing projects such as: UNDP (V-CAP project) and Secretariat of the Pacific Regional 
Environment Programme – SPREP (VAN-KIRAP project). These studies and reports were 
supplemented by research from think tanks and research groups such as the International 
Institute on Environment and Development (IIED) and the World Resources Institute (WRI). Entries 
in peer-reviewed anthropology, geography- and climate-focused journals such as Anthropology 
Today, Gender and Development, Disasters (among others) were also reviewed to ensure that 
the assessment is able to capture latest studies and research in Vanuatu on the broader domains 
of climate resilience, WASH and gender. 
 
and Maewo with the provincial headquarters located on Ambae, while Sanma covers the islands of Espiritu Santo and 
Malo where the provincial headquarter is located in the northern town of Luganville on Santo. 
 
26 The FP035: Climate Information Services for Resilient Development Planning in Vanuatu is a project being 
implemented by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme to build technical capacity to 
harness and manage climate data and develop practical CIS tools in the country.  
See https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp035 for more.

=== PAGE 136 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
16 
2.3 Concurrent triangulation of primary inputs and 
secondary data and information collection 
The study employs a concurrent triangulation methodology, and deliberately sidesteps 
sequential research processes. In sequential designs, either the qualitative or quantitative data 
are collected in an initial stage, followed by the collection of the other data types during a 
succeeding, second stage.27 In contrast, concurrent designs are characterized by the collection 
of both types of data during the same stage (which was the case for the development of this 
assessment).28  
Within 
these 
two 
categories, 
there 
can 
be 
three 
specific 
designs 
based 
on: 
(a) the level of emphasis given to the qualitative and quantitative data (equal or unequal),  
(b) 
the 
process 
used 
to 
analyze 
and 
integrate 
the 
data, 
and  
(c) whether or not the theoretical basis underlying the study methodology is to bring about social 
change or advocacy.29 
This approach has been deemed suited to this gender assessment, given that it will operationalize 
GCF and co-financing investments towards improved gender outcomes (such as: increased 
participation of women in rural water governance bodies, gender-transformative WASH 
infrastructure design and reinforced policy framework), through the paradigm of increased 
climate resilience and water security in Vanuatu.  
Additionally, the stakeholder consultations undertaken in the islands, was formative in nature 
and rapid in mandate, necessitating a prompt methodology to establish an inventory of 
information and a gender baseline that can be operationalized to cover the complex aspects of 
CR-WASH in Vanuatu. Therefore, the concurrent approach is suited because of: the flexibility to 
use secondary quantitative and qualitative findings for the comprehension of the studied 
phenomenon in the primary research (mainly the stakeholder consultations), and the accuracy it 
can provide to samples of intermediate or small size (the stakeholders consulted during the 
fieldwork conducted by the national experts).  
This also ensures that the assessment and action plan are able to propose measures that are 
relevant for the delivery of outputs identified in the results framework, particularly the 
identified gender-responsive co-benefit in Section E of the Funding Proposal: improved gender 
parity in the representation of women in Rural Water Committees (a minimum of 40%). 
Additionally, the project will be targeting a 50:50 ratio of beneficiaries at the community level 
in the 600 new DWSSPs, as well as among the chosen DWSSPs (270) that receive infrastructure 
support. The project will also upgrade the requirements for DWSSPs, mandating the inclusion of 
gender factors in the broader prioritization framework, as well as upgrading the methodology of 
the DWSSP. 
 
 
27 Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL, Gutmann ML, Hanson WE. Advances in mixed methods research designs. In: 
Tashakkori A, Teddlie C, editors. Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research.  
 
28 Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL, Gutmann ML, Hanson WE. – Ibid.   
 
29 Ibid.

=== PAGE 137 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
17 
3. 
Policy environment for gender- 
transformative CR-WASH in Vanuatu  
This section takes stock of the policy environment and legal frameworks available for gender-
responsive climate change adaptation in the Vanuatu (including international conventions such 
as the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women or CEDAW, 
national laws and policies, strategy documents on gender and climate change). It is important to 
note that one of the five strategic areas of the Government of Vanuatu’s National Gender 
Equality Policy is fostering gender-responsive and community-driven solutions to climate and 
disaster resilience, which this project will contribute to by delivering gender-responsive, 
climate-resilient WASH infrastructure in rural and remote contexts of Vanuatu.  
 
Identification of legal tools and enabling policies, particularly at the baseline, is crucial in 
ensuring that gender inequality can be addressed through government-owned and formal 
procedures. These tangible processes can also help drive ownership of the project, and its social 
impacts. Additionally, the inclusion of local and national gender partners develops capacity and 
technical knowledge towards future gender efforts while establishing ownership of the project 
and the change narrative being implemented.  
 
Details 
Year 
Information 
CEDAW 
1995 
Vanuatu ratified the CEDAW in 1995, and has received concluding 
observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports of 
Vanuatu in 2016. 30  CEDAW has recognized Vanuatu’s progressive 
reforms in Family Protection Act, the initiation of a new National 
Gender Equality Policy, Gender Equity in Education Policy, while 
reiterating the need for establishing effective remedies in both the 
formal and traditional justice systems. Awareness raising for women’s 
rights, particularly through civil society organizations, is also key.  
National 
Sustainable 
Development 
Plan (NSDP)  
 
2016 – 2030  
The NSDP 2016–2030, prepared by the Department of Strategic 
Policy, Planning and Aid Coordination, includes three main focus 
areas or ‘pillars’ that focus on 1) the environment; 2) the economy; 
and 3) society. The NSDP notes that Vanuatu aspires to “…an 
inclusive society which upholds human dignity and where the rights 
of all Ni-Vanuatu, including women, youth, the elderly and 
vulnerable groups are supported, protected and promoted in our 
legislation and institutions.” The pillar on society includes 
commitments to 1) implement gender-responsive planning and 
budgeting processes; 2) prevent and eliminate all forms of violence 
and discrimination against women, children and vulnerable groups; 
 
30 United Nations CEDAW (2016). Concluding Observations – shared on 09 March 2016. Available at: 
https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N16/064/87/PDF/N1606487.pdf?OpenElement

=== PAGE 138 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
18 
and 3) ensure all people, including people with disabilities, have 
access to governmental services (Government of Vanuatu, 2016). 
National Gender 
Equality Policy 
(NGEP)  
 
2020 – 2030  
The NGEP 2020 - 2030, prepared by the Department of Women’s 
Affairs of the Ministry of Justice and Community Services directs the 
government to implement gender mainstreaming nation-wide 
through all governmental departments. The NGEP prioritizes five 
strategic areas: 1) eliminating discrimination and violence against 
women and girls; 2) enhancing women’s empowerment and skills 
development; 3) advancing women’s leadership and political 
participation; 4) strengthening the foundation for gender 
mainstreaming; and, 5) fostering gender-responsive and community-
driven solutions to climate and disaster resilience.  
6 Gender Action 
Plans at 
provincial level 
 
2020 - 2024 
The purpose of this Gender Equality Action Plan is to provide a clear 
plan of action for government, civil society, private sector and 
development partners to coordinate actions to advance gender 
equality and the well-being of women and girls in all 6 Provinces in 
line with the National Gender Equality Policy (NGEP) 2020-2030.  
WASH policies 
 
The Water Resources Management (Amendment) Act No. 32 of 2016 
and the Water Supply (Amendment) Act No. 31 of 2016, the Vanuatu 
National Drinking Water Quality Standards 2016, and the Vanuatu 
National Water Policy 2017–2030 all require community water 
supplies to have a Drinking Water Safety and Security Plan (DWSSP), 
an internationally-recognised approach for achieving safe drinking 
water. Both the current Vanuatu National Water Strategy 2008–2018 
and the draft Vanuatu National Water Strategy 2018–2030 (NWS) 
include strategic directions and targets for introducing  DWSSP i.e. 
the Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning process to rural 
community water supply schemes (i.e. departments, private, 
communities, schools, health facilities and households). The National 
Environmental Health Policy and Strategy 2012–2016 (NEHPS) also 
sets DWSSP targets.  
Drinking Water Safety and Security Planning (DWSSP) is a process of 
community engagement in identifying and discussing threats to safe 
and secure drinking water, and making plans to manage these 
threats. The resulting community DWSSP guides day-to-day water 
supply operation and maintenance, as well as improvements.  
Once the necessary community development training has been 
provided, the registration can be completed (Section 20F of the 
Water Resources (Amendment) Act No. 32 of 2016). The Act also 
requires at least 40% of the members of a RWC must be women – 
which has been added as a co-benefit to the project’s Logical 
Framework (Section E – Funding Proposal).

=== PAGE 139 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
19 
4. 
Socioeconomic and gender baseline 
in Vanuatu 
4.1 Methodology for the baseline 
The contents of this assessment are derived from a combination of primary research (through 
national- and local-level stakeholder consultations) and secondary research (literature review, 
policy analysis and collation of secondary data). Site-specific, localised data has not been 
collected as the project will select sites during the implementation phase through the National 
Implementation Plan (NIP) process and mobilise those funds through the Capital Assistance 
Programme (CAP). In lieu, this GA-GAP uses available national aggregate statistics and composite 
indices. These data points have been chosen to nuance the primary and secondary research on 
climate resilience and the WASH baseline in the country. Drawn from primarily VNSO, and 
different UN entities, these speak to the issues identified by the GCF in its Mainstreaming Gender 
toolkit 31 as crucial socioeconomic indicators that can impact upon the performance of the 
project and therefore, are being mapped and mainstreamed in the project design stage. 
 
4.2 National aggregate statistics with SDG indicators 
The national-level data points are divided into four categories (poverty and hardship, education, 
labour and health), and presented alongside their corresponding Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG). These indicators cover: SDG 1; SDG 3; SDG 4 and SDG 8. 
 
SDG 1 
CHOSEN INDICATORS 
VALUES 
 
 
 
 
• % of population below international poverty line 
• % of population below national poverty line  
• % of population below lower middle income poverty l
• % of population in severe multidimensional poverty32 
• % of population vulnerable to multidimensional pover
• % of male-headed households (HHs) 
• % of female-headed households 
• 13.2% (2010) 
• 12.7% (2010) 
• 39.4% (2010) 
• n/a 
• n/a 
• 76%    (2009) 
• 24%    (2009) 
 
 
31 GCF (2017). Mainstreaming Gender in GCF projects. Publication Guide. Available at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/mainstreaming-gender-green-climate-fund-projects 
32 Multidimensional poverty: In the post-2015 SDG and Agenda 2030 Framework, SDG 1 targets poverty elimination – 
in all forms and dimensions. This mandate requires tools to enumerate (quantitatively) and assess (qualitatively) 
poverty levels in different countries. The Multidimensional Poverty Index, calculated by UNDP and Oxford Poverty 
and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), is an important tool as it complements the international poverty line 
statistics by showing the nature and extent of overlapping deprivations for each person. Currently, due to a paucity 
of data, the MPI is not calculated for Vanuatu.

=== PAGE 140 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
20 
Vanuatu’s relatively high per-capita incomes combine with reasonably widespread land access for 
subsistence agriculture and informal, community-based social safety nets to keep the incidence of 
extreme poverty low. However, these high per-capita incomes overshadow the fact that Vanuatu 
(along with the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati and Marshall Islands) has higher than 10% 
extreme poverty (the regional average for the Pacific is around 3%). Vanuatu (along with the FSM, 
Kiribati and Marshall Islands) collectively hosts over 90% of people in poverty in the southern 
Pacific. Poverty is generally viewed as hardship culturally in this region.  
 
 
National and International Poverty Line:33 National poverty lines are defined according to 
each country’s specific economic and social circumstances, and the International Poverty 
Line is pegged at US$ 1.90 or 210 VATU. Since Vanuatu is a lower middle-income country, 
it is also important to measure poverty using the Lower Middle Income Class Poverty Line 
(US$ 3.20 or 354 VATU) – 39.4% of the population is below this line, according to the latest 
available statistics. With recent TCs Pam and Harold (strongest and second-strongest to 
ever affect Vanuatu), many households dropped back into hardship, reversing earlier gains. 
  
 
Multidimensional poverty: Currently, due to a paucity of data, the MPI is not calculated 
for Vanuatu. Like peer Melanesian economies, with large proportions of the population 
living semi-subsistence lifestyles in rural areas, consumption poverty is difficult to 
measure, however vulnerabilities are widespread – which are exacerbated by multivariable 
risks, including compounding climate hazards.34 
 
 
Gender-disaggregation of households:
35  In Vanuatu, due to the presence of 
multigenerational households, it is difficult to assess how household heads are designated 
and such roles adhered to. However, gender-disaggregation of private households, is 
available from a monograph published by the VNSO on the 2009 National Population and 
Housing Census – revealing that MHHs are the norm (76% compared to 24% of FHHs). The 
overriding factor influencing WASH in Vanuatu is rural versus urban location, according to 
the VNSO monograph. However, analysing the data by the sex of the household – lone MHHs 
have slightly better access to improved sanitation facilities compared to FHHs. FHHs also 
tend to have shared toilet facilities, possibly reflecting a lower standard of housing for 
women in particular cases and areas.36 
 
 
 
 
 
33World Bank (2019). Poverty and Equity Brief (Vanuatu), available at:  
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-4AE2-ABC7-AA2972D68AFE/Archives-
2019/Global_POVEQ_VUT.pdf 
34 Feeny, S. & McDonald, L. (2014). Vulnerability to Multidimensional Poverty: Findings from Households in 
Melanesia. Available at:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00220388.2015.1075974 
35 Micro data analyses, with consideration for macro, population and demographic factors, reveals the importance of 
introducing heterogeneity in household poverty figures as well as contextualizing how FHHS and MHHs function, 
conditional upon location, age, number of members, marital status, economic access, and other indicators. It is an 
imperfect metric but is currently one of the only viable option for exploring how gender impacts on household 
characteristics. See more: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.HOU.FEMA.ZS?locations=Z4-VU 
36 VNSO (2009). National Population and Housing Census. Gender Monograph: Women and Men in Vanuatu. See: 
https://mjcs.gov.vu/images/research_database/2009_Vanuatu_Census_Gender_Monograph.pdf

=== PAGE 141 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
21 
SDG 3 
CHOSEN INDICATORS 
VALUES 
 
 
 
 
• % exposure to gender-based violence  
(lifetime probability) 
• # adolescent fertility rate, 
 (modeled estimate, births per 1000 women) 
• # maternal mortality ratio  
(modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)  
• # infant mortality rate  
(modeled estimate, per 1000 live births) 
• # children under five mortality  
(modeled estimate, per 1000 births) 
 
• 60% (2011) 
 
• 48 births (2019) 
 
• 72 deaths (2019) 
 
• 22 deaths (2019) 
 
• 26 deaths (2019) 
Despite producing insignificant greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change, SIDS 
populations (including the ni-Vanuatu peoples) are on the frontline of climate change impacts, 
including having a high burden of climate-sensitive diseases. Furthermore, the government 
highlights the threats climate change poses to human health in its Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC), which also recognizes the vulnerability of the country to climate change and 
the need to improve access to basic health services.37 The importance of SDG 3 is underwritten by 
the scope of this project: investment in climate resilience and water security of communities can 
have diffuse and direct impacts on health outcomes of the population (particularly, in light of the 
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic). 
 
 
Maternal mortality ratio (MMR), infant mortality rate (IMR) and under-five mortality rate:38 
MMR, IMR and under-five mortality statistics are collected through the census to 
demonstrate the access and efficacy of health services and family planning in Vanuatu. 
Child mortality, for example, has fallen in Vanuatu, but remains high compared to other 
Pacific countries. Poor water security and WASH infrastructure is one of the leading 
contributors to enteric and other infectious disease burdens, which remains high in 
Vanuatu. 
 
 
Additionally, Vanuatu – like peer economies and SIDS, is vulnerable to tropical disease 
outbreaks. Climate change could affect the seasonality of such outbreaks, as well as the 
transmission of vector-borne diseases, underwriting the importance of robust WASH in the 
country. 39 For example, the seasonality and prevalence of dengue transmission may 
change in future climate change scenarios, and is modelled for different RCPs in Figure 1: 
 
 
37 https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/climate-change/who-unfccc-cch-country-profile-
vanuatu.pdf?sfvrsn=451e1b3b_2&download=true 
38 The World Health Organisation (WHO) identifies MMR or complications during pregnancy and childbirth as a 
leading cause of death and disability among women of reproductive age in developing countries. This was an MDG 
and is now an SDG 3 indicator. Similarly, the IMR under-five mortality rates take stock of preventable child deaths at 
birth and below the age of 5.  
https://data.unicef.org/country/vut 
39 https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/climate-change/who-unfccc-cch-country-profile-
vanuatu.pdf?sfvrsn=451e1b3b_2&download=true

=== PAGE 142 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
22 
 
Figure 1: Dengue projections based on different RCPs in Vanuatu (WHO, 2020) 
 
SDG 4 
CHOSEN INDICATORS 
VALUES 
 
 
 
 
• % literacy rate, adult female 
• % literacy rate, adult male 
• % literacy rate, youth female 
• % literacy rate, youth male 
• #  children out of school, primary, female 
• #  children out of school, male 
• % progression to secondary, female 
• % progression to secondary, male 
 
• 86.7% (2018) 
• 88.3% (2018) 
• 96.5% (2014) 
• 95.0% (2014) 
• 1503   (2015) 
• 1797   (2015) 
• 45.6% (2000) 
• 44.2% (2000) 
The education system of Vanuatu is atypical in that it represents an amalgamation of two disparate 
systems, the British and the French, that co-existed within the country prior to independence. 
Additionally, the church is an important education authority for primary and secondary schools. 
Government expenditure on education (as a percentage of total government expenditure) is 12.6% 
and the sector is the largest government service deliverer and employer.  
Overall, there is no statistically significant difference between the performance of boys and girls, 
from available data. However, the Vanuatu Education and Training Sector Strategic Plan 2020 – 
2030 identifies the importance of developing the capacities to identify further gender inequalities 
and address them through the Ministry of Education and Training (MoET). Particularly, a module on 
GbV has been developed by the Vanuatu Education Sector Program (VESP) in collaboration with the 
MoET as an awareness-raising exercise and for broader use in the education sector. 
 
 
WASH performance in Vanuatu’s schools (per the UNICEF/WHO Joint Monitoring Project 
indicators) has been found to be limited. A baseline study of Penama province’s 78 schools 
found that 63% had access to basic water, 26% had basic sanitation, and 27% with basic 
hygiene facilities.  
 
 
A Wash in Schools (WinS) program funded by the Australian Government (Western Pacific 
Sanitation Marketing and Innovation Program) in the broader region found that maximising 
girl children attendance can be achieve through the creation of ‘girls’ space’ with

=== PAGE 143 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
23 
dedicated bathrooms and reliable water supply.40 Dignity kits are important to access in 
schools – with sensitization training for WASH in the national curriculum as well as for 
teachers’ training syllabus. In Port Vila, through the said project, this is being encouraged 
through School Improvement Officers (SIO), who are now monitoring WASH as one of the 
fifteen school quality indicators.  
 
SDG 8 
CHOSEN INDICATORS 
VALUES 
 
 
 
 
• % labor force participation rate, female 
• #  labor force, total  
• % vulnerable employment, female 
• % vulnerable employment, male 
• % wage and salaried workers, female 
• % wage and salaried workers, male 
• % employment in agriculture, female 
• % employment in agriculture, male 
• % of time, unpaid care work, female 
• % of time, unpaid care work, male 
• 43% (2019) 
• 129,602 (2020) 
• 70.6% (2019) 
• 65.6% (2019) 
• 29.7% (2019) 
• 33.8% (2019) 
• 56.7% (2019) 
• 56.7% (2019) 
• n/a 
• n/a 
 
Vanuatu’s economy is still primarily based on subsistence or small-scale agriculture, which provides 
a living for more than 70% of the population.41 Since the early 2000s, tourism, land sales and high 
commodity prices for copra and coffee, and donor funding have driven the economy. 42  
Major impediments to the economy include: undiversified economic base, constraints from poor 
transport infrastructure and a small domestic market.  
 
 
Although the gender differences are minor, it is telling that, according to World Bank 
statistics, about 70.6% of the active female labour force and 65.6% of the active male 
labour force are engaged in vulnerable employment. Roughly 20% of the workforce in 
Vanuatu is engaged in formal sector employment, and the formal economy only offers 
some hundreds of jobs each year. Consequently, the social protection system in Vanuatu 
is limited to formal sector employees – a miniscule minority of workers in the country. 
 
 
Given trends of low growth and limited employment opportunities, migration (including 
temporary migration for seasonal work in New Zealand and Australia) and remittances 
have been a critical driver of increased living standards in Vanuatu (and other Pacific 
Island Countries). However, although out-migration has significantly increased household 
incomes, such processes are affected by external shocks (such as climate change). Due to 
COVID-19, seasonal worker schemes have been affected in Australia and New Zealand, and 
the broader Pacific region, causing broad-based and significant reductions in employment 
and earnings. 43  About 8.1% of the ni-Vanuatu workforce rely on such programmes 
 
40 See: https://www.unicef.org/pacificislands/media/2186/file 
41 See: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---ilo-
suva/documents/publication/wcms_366547.pdf 
42 Ibid.  
43 See: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/430961606712129708/pdf/Pacific-Labor-Mobility-Migration-
and-Remittances-in-Times-of-COVID-19-Interim-Report.pdf

=== PAGE 144 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
24 
(Australia’s Seasonal Worker Program – SWP and the Pacific Labour Scheme - PLS; New 
Zealands’s Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme – RSE), which indicates the 
precariousness of employment opportunities in the country. Both schemes actively 
promote the inclusion of women workers.  
 
4.3 Composite indices (HDI, GDI, GII, GGI) 
Designing a climate resilience-based WASH service delivery system requires situating the 
project’s results framework on a thorough and context-driven baseline, which this feasibility 
study collates through various data sources. A collation exercise of scores and rankings from 
composite indices, especially due to paucity of updated, decentralized, nationally available 
data, has been included in this assessment to reflect Vanuatu’s overall performance on different 
indicators. These indices have differing methodologies, and are being employed as indicative 
(and not conclusive) measures of current levels of development, gender equality, poverty, and 
labour force participation.44   
This baseline, at the outset, uses scores of three different UNDP composite indices: Human 
Development Index (HDI), Gender Inequality Index (GII) and Gender Development Index (GDI) as 
points of departure. The latter two are currently unavailable for Vanuatu, but has been included 
to display the paucity of data characteristic of Pacific island contexts. Secondly, the baseline 
collates scores from the World Economic Forum (WEF)’s Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI), where 
Vanuatu was recently included.  
 
INDEX (SCALE, ORGANIZATION) 
RANK / SCORE 
Human Development Index, out of 189 countries (UNDP) 
141 
Gender Inequality Index, out of 162 countries (UNDP) 
 n/a 
Gender Development Index clustered with group (UNDP) 
 n/a 
Global Gender Gap Index out of 153 countries (WEF) 
126 
 
 
Vanuatu’s HDI value is 0.609 – which puts the country in the medium human development category 
– positioning it at 141 out of 189 countries and territories in the 2018 index.45 This can primarily 
be linked to the SID-specific challenges that the World Bank identifies for the Vanuatuan economy: 
 
44 As Booysen’s research shows, composite indices present both challenges and advantages. For example, numerous 
fallacies have been identified in the methodologies employed in composite indexing. These indices are mainly 
quantitative, and present empirical and aggregate measures of complex development phenomena, making values 
apparently objective, at the cost of subjective nuances. Yet, these also remain invaluable as useful supplements to 
income-based development indicators, understanding relative degrees of development, simplifying complex 
measurement constructs as well as providing access to non-technical audiences. See more in Booysen, F. (2002). “An 
Overview and Evaluation of Composite Indices of Development” in Social Indicators Research, (Vol. 59 No. 2). 
Journal Article.  
45 UNDP (2019). ‘Briefing note for countries on the 2019 Human Development Report: Vanuatu’ in the Human 
Development Report 2019. Research brief. Accessed online: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/VUT.pdf

=== PAGE 145 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
25 
small size, remoteness from major markets and internal dispersion.46 The country’s geographical 
location, undiversified economic structure, and high import dependence makes it vulnerable to 
external shocks, especially climate change-induced disasters and natural hazards.47 Such shocks 
greatly impact hard-earned development gains and threaten food, water and energy security – this 
project will address particularly water security issues. 
 
Currently, the GII and GDI remain unavailable for Vanuatu due to the paucity of relevant and 
quality data.48 The 2020 GGGI (WEF) includes four new countries, including Vanuatu for the first 
time. It is ranked 126 out of 153 countries and territories, on an aggregate score that combines 
performance in Economic Participation, Educational Attainment, Health and Survival and Political 
Empowerment.49 Female representation in political spheres in Vanuatu displays a vast gender gap, 
there has never been a female head of state in the past 50 years, and there is currently no women 
in parliament or in ministerial positions, as evinced by the findings of the Beijing +25 report. 
Women’s hardship trends, despite scant data, can be inferred from their dependence on lower 
skilled and remunerative activities such as subsistence agriculture as well as natural resource-
based livelihoods.50 On trend with the Pacific region, Vanuatu experiences a high incidence of 
gender-based violence and intimate partner violence.51  
 
These indices are important to consider in the context of WASH and climate change, as they signal 
potential hurdles towards inclusive application of proposed alternatives towards resilience and 
water security in the country. However, this project attempts to mitigate these expected hurdles 
by locating the change paradigm on extensive stakeholder consultations presented in the 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7), Gender Action Plan (Section 8 of this Annex) as well as 
an Environment and Social Impact Assessment and Management Plan (Annex 6).  
 
 
 
46 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic: Republic of Kiribati, Republic of Marshall Islands, Federated 
States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau, Independent State of Samoa, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, Republic of 
Vanuatu (PIC8 – 8 Pacific Island Countries). Multi-country report. Accessed online: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/313021467995103008/pdf/102803-REPLACEMENT-SecM2016-0025.pdf 
 
47 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic: PIC8. Ibid.  
48 UNDP (2019). ‘Briefing note for countries on the 2019 Human Development Report: Vanuatu’ in the Human 
Development Report 2019. Ibid.  
49 WEF (2020). The Global Gender Gap Report. Ibid. 
50 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic: PIC8. Ibid.  
51 The World Bank reports that based on the best-available data, women in the PIC8 suffer from either partner or 
non-partner violence at higher extents than any other part of the world. See API-GBV website for more.

=== PAGE 146 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
26 
5. 
Gender at the Green Climate Fund & 
the Pacific Community  
The analytical prerogatives of this Gender Assessment and Action Plan are informed by both 
GCF’s and SPC’s respective gender and protection as well as social and environmental 
responsibility 
policies.  
 
The GCF adopted a revised version of its 2014 Gender Policy and Action Plan on June 2018 in 
Korea. The revised Policy addresses pertinent issues on gender and climate change: the 
expansion of gender mainstreaming beyond the preserve of ‘women’s issues’; and the 
identification of synergies with the in-house Indigenous People (IP) Policy as well as the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)’s Gender Action Plan (GAP), 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). 
Overall, the Policy and Action Plan reinforce the responsiveness of GCF to the multiple, 
heterogeneous, culturally diverse context of gender inequality to better address and account for 
the links between gender issues and climate change – a perspective that has been mainstreamed 
in the development of this full funding proposal for CR-WASH in Vanuatu. 
 
The SPC adopted a set of general policies towards social and environmental responsibility in 
August 2020. The key objectives of this policy are to promote and drive continuous improvement 
of SPC’s social and environmental performance, to embed a people-centred approach across its 
programmes, projects and activities, as well as to align with international recognized best 
practices for development.  
The policy provisions for considerations of gender equality and social inclusion in SPC’s mandate 
by coordination between key divisions within SPC that are responsible for mainstreaming human 
rights, gender, cultural heritage and socio-environmental issues. Through the adoption of this 
policy, the SPC will minimise social, cultural and environmental impact; contribute towards the 
economic empowerment of women, youth, persons with disabilities, and marginalised groups in 
all their diversities; promote local participation and ownership of development; and, contribute 
to the elimination of all forms of gender-based violence. These goals have informed the 
development of this full funding proposal for CR-WASH in Vanuatu.  
 
The GCF and SPC are currently collaborating on shoring up gender-transformative adaptation 
solutions in the Pacific, through support at devolved levels: in the recently approved FP16952, 
SPC developed a robust gender assessment53 and gender action plan54 to inform the disbursement 
of sub-grants to local authorities in the Federated States of Micronesia. 
 
 
 
 
52 See: https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp169 
53 See: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/fp169-gender-assessment.pdf 
54 See: greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/fp169-gender-action-plan.pdf

=== PAGE 147 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
27 
6. 
Gender mainstreaming for CR-WASH 
in Vanuatu 
6.1 Problem statement: WASH baseline in Vanuatu 
Combined coverage of basic water and sanitation is lower in the Pacific than any other region of 
the world, with progress in the region described by the Joint Monitoring Programme (of UNICEF 
and WHO) as having stagnated between 2000 and 2015.55 In Vanuatu, it is estimated that 44% of 
people have access to safely managed drinking water, 34% to basic sanitation, and 25% have a 
basic handwashing facility at home.56 Climate change impacts such as sea-level rise, changing 
rainfall patterns and increasingly frequent extreme weather events makes Vanuatu particularly 
vulnerable to inadequate potable water, and insufficient water and infrastructure for hygiene 
and sanitation.57  
Within Vanuatu, the report finds, the province of Sanma is reported to have the greatest burden 
of WASH-related diseases per 1,000 persons in the country.58 Surveys completed by World Vision 
Vanuatu also show that WASH statistics in Sanma are significantly lower than national averages: 
30% lower for access to clean water, and 21% lower for improved sanitation facilities.59 Torba is 
the most geographically remote province in the country, with the highest number of islands – 
and despite having similar levels of cash and subsistence expenditure to all other provinces, 
Torba has a significantly lower monthly income. In both of these provinces and indeed throughout 
the nation, people with disabilities and women face many inequities in accessing safely managed 
WASH facilities, services and practices. These were reiterated in the stakeholder consultations 
conducted by national consultants during the project preparation stage.  
In Vanuatu, the report further finds, there still is a stigma or ‘tabu’ around ‘sikmun’ or 
menstruation, which is believed to often lead to the isolation of menstruating women due to 
social and physical barriers, and to prevent girls from attending school. Preliminary research 
undertaken by World Vision Vanuatu and Care International in 2018 suggests that women and 
girls in Vanuatu access information on menstruation from parents, teachers, grandmothers, 
aunties, school and clinics. However, the report noted that mothers and family members did not 
 
55 World Vision (2020). Water, Women and Disability Study. Available at: 
https://www.wvi.org/publications/development-guide/vanuatu/water-women-and-disability-study-report 
This is a recent study conducted by World Vision Australia in collaboration with the VNSO, Ministry of Justice and 
Community Services, Vanuatu Disability Promotion and Advocacy Association and Vanuatu Society for People with 
Disability. This study will be very relevant in the implementation stage for the delivery of Outcome 2. 
56 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) & World Health Organization (WHO). (2019) Progress on household 
drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2017: Special focus on inequalities.   
57 World Vision (2020). Ibid. 
58 System, V. H. I. (2015) The burden of WASH-related diseases on health in Vanuatu.  
59 World Vision Vanuatu (2016). National Impact Assessment.

=== PAGE 148 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
28 
always have the confidence or information to discuss menstruation, and that consistent and 
specific information regarding menstrual hygiene management is lacking.60 
In Vanuatu, current infrastructure is limited in serving gendered needs: women and girls often 
require increased water during lactation, pregnancy and for the management of menstrual 
hygiene, which is often not provisioned for. Additionally, the elderly (for whom women are the 
primary caregivers) have increased need for water due to physiological requirements. WASH 
infrastructure, current and new, also requires system improvements that increase safety for 
women: in terms of lighting, improved locks and doors as well as gated/protected areas, to 
ensure instances of gender-based violence are reduced. To ensure service delivery a climate-
resilient, but also gender-transformative, for effective WASH, water security and accessibility in 
Vanuatu, therefore, will require the mainstreaming of these factors.  
 
6.2 Rationale: gender and climate-resilient WASH 
The UN Sustainable Development Goals have three dedicated goals for Gender Equality (SDG 5), 
Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6), and Climate Action (SDG 13). Integrated water management 
and improved WASH praxis connects these goals – although issues relating to gender-responsive 
climate adaptation and water governance are yet to be mainstreamed in programming and 
funding cycles of governments, donors and other stakeholders. Despite the centrality of WASH 
to climate resilience and adaptation, the links are not widely recognized – nor extensively 
explored – in policy, technical studies and programme development. Global climate finance flows 
are yet to mainstream CR-WASH extensively, particularly the nexus of gender inequality and its 
interlinkages with water insecurity and high levels of climate risk exposure. Water and sanitation 
sectors are systems of interconnected functions and continue to be seen as central to 
development aid (as opposed to being mainstreamed through climate aid). 
 
The proposed GCF project deviates from this gender-blind approach and will lay the groundwork 
for gender-responsive and climate-resilient WASH service delivery (with greater water security 
for both female and male beneficiaries) in Vanuatu. Access to WASH, the project recognizes, is 
fundamental to development but it can be mobilised as a critical climate adaptation strategy for 
poor and vulnerable communities (as well as marginalized groups within those communities), 
including women and girls in Vanuatu. Therefore, this project will deliver on gender 
mainstreaming targets through the design and delivery of climate-resilient WASH infrastructure 
(Outcome 2), alongside improved technical capacity and water governance (Outcomes 1 and 3) 
 
60 The preliminary research, done by World Vision Vanuatu, also suggested that women from urban areas used a 
variety of options to manage menstrual bleeding including sanitary pads, double cloth, tampons, washable calico 
pads and in some cases silicone cups (although these have not been available for purchase in country until recently). 
Whereas women and girls in rural areas relied more on cloth and in some cases used natural materials like dry 
banana leaves. However, in both settings, products such as sanitary pads were not reported to be widely used due to 
lack of income, accessibility and availability. In some cases, there were reports that women would stay in an 
isolation hut for the duration of menstruation and used leaves. Additionally, it was noted that some women were not 
allowed to handle food our use shared plates and cups during menstruation as it is considered ‘unhygienic’ and 
sexual activities were postponed due to kastom (traditional) beliefs.  
The report is available at: https://www.wvi.org/publications/development-guide/vanuatu/water-women-and-
disability-study-report.

=== PAGE 149 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
29 
as well as the mobilization of government-owned programming (such as the DWSSP process) at 
the national, provincial and devolved levels.  
 
Gender-transformative CR-WASH will aim to bridge the gap of practical, gendered WASH needs 
(of women and girls) as well as strategic gender interests (increased representation in water and 
climate-related decision-making bodies).  
 
6.3 Barrier analysis: gender, water insecurity and 
climate-induced risks 
Different gender groups, particularly women and girls, have gendered water needs, which 
remain underserved by existing WASH infrastructure and are impacted by humanitarian 
emergencies: 
This is an infrastructure barrier, which combines with limited technical capacity. The absence 
of safe and secure water supplies, and decent sanitation facilities has disproportionate negative 
effects on the lives of marginalized and vulnerable groups. For women and girls, apart from daily 
water needs, specific hygiene needs (during menstruation, pregnancy, lactation, childbirth and 
child rearing), specific care roles (such as care work for the elderly and children) as well as age 
and different abilities (disability) increase daily water and sanitation requirements. 61  In 
underserved areas, such needs may not be mainstreamed, due to lack of safe and secure water 
supplies and infrastructure, discriminatory social norms as well as cultural taboos. 62 Exact 
estimates of water needs of various groups cannot be determined given the paucity of data, 
however, that gendered needs are not addressed, remains the status quo in Vanuatu – where 
investments in climate-resilient WASH infrastructure is currently limited.  
Lack of hygienic conditions, a primary determinant of which is access to safe and potable water, 
also negatively impacts women’s, girl’s and newborn’s lives and wellbeing by increasing their 
exposure to water- and vector-borne diseases. Diarrheal disease – which is the second leading 
cause of death in children under five years old, is directly linked to unsafe water and sanitation. 
According to WHO data, diarrheal diseases in Vanuatu reached 3.83% of total deaths in 2018.63  
Being underserved by WASH infrastructure, whether it is due to lack of access and/or because of 
poor design, can also increase vulnerability to gender-based violence. WaterAid has observed 
that women and girls, often, adjust for insufficient WASH infrastructure by using available 
services primarily during evening hours or at night.64 This increases their exposure risk to gender-
based violence, particularly sexual assault and attacks, due to limited lighting and remoteness 
of these locations. Boys and men may also encounter violence in accessing water and sanitation, 
with local norms around masculinity inhibiting their ability to avoid or report on experiences of 
violence.65 
 
61 Winqvist, E. (ed.) Ibid. 
62 See: https://www.unicef.org/wash/menstrual-hygiene 
63 See: https://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/laninf/PIIS1473-3099(19)30401-3.pdf 
64 Winqvist, E. (ed.) Ibid. 
65 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0956247814564528

=== PAGE 150 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
30 
During humanitarian emergencies – which remains a cyclical and pervasive issue in Vanuatu due 
to repeated exposure to natural- and climate-induced hazards – accessibility is further reduced 
and exposure to WASH risks are exacerbated. As observed in the wake of Tropical Cyclone Pam – 
which caused widespread destruction across the eastern and south-eastern islands of the country 
– damage to water and sanitation assets were extensive. 66 This had immediate effects by 
producing spikes in WASH-related diseases, and by reducing services (and utilities) available to 
different population groups, and further to vulnerable groups within them, in Vanuatu. Women 
and girls are also exposed to post-disaster spikes in gender-based violence, while lacking access 
to essential services, and experiencing hindrances posed by emergency shelter design (with 
limited WASH services), and inadequate coordination on gender-specific issues by responders.  
 
Women continue to be underrepresented in water security and climate adaptation-related 
decision-making bodies, despite registering better performance when represented: 
This is a political barrier, which combines with limited policy capacity. Women in Vanuatu are 
underrepresented in decision-making and policy-formulating bodies, as evinced through figures 
of low (often no) representation in Parliament, as well as at the provincial, municipal and area 
council levels. According to the VNSO, women only represented 21% of senior officials, legislators 
and managers.67 As stated previously, socio-anthropological research in Kurumambe and Purau 
villages in Tongoa, for example, highlighted how women must navigate strict rules governing 
their presence and speech in the nakamal (chief’s meeting place) – effectively excluding them 
from holding titles or wielding decision-making power even at localised levels of governance.68 
 
Consequently, women continue to be underrepresented in water user committees (WUCs), or 
community-based management bodies. This is despite women’s leading role in household 
management of WASH needs, particularly through domestic water provision, which is importantly 
determined by access, affordability and reliability of water resources.  
 
A national census of water points in Vanuatu was conducted between 2014 – 2016, which revealed 
around 8,000 water points in six provinces.69 Most of these were not governed by communities – 
and among the 1,175 community-owned water systems, the majority (69% - 810) did not have a 
 
66 According to the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment for Tropical Cyclone Pam, conducted by the International Labour 
Organization (ILO), damage to water and sanitation assets in the health sector have been estimated at 
approximately VT 113 million (Chapter 3.2.2). Damage to water and sanitation assets in the education sector have 
been estimated at VT 270 million (Chapter 3.2.3). See: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_397678.pdf 
67 Bowman, Chakriya; Cutura, Jozefina; Ellis, Amanda; Manuel, Clare. (2009). Women in Vanuatu : Analyzing 
Challenges to Economic Participation. Directions in Development ; private sector development. World Bank. © World 
Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2624  
68 Granderson, A. (2017) “The role of traditional knowledge in building adaptive capacity for climate change in 
Vanuatu” in Weather, Climate and Society. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317071599_The_Role_of_Traditional_Knowledge_in_Building_Adaptive_C
apacity_for_Climate_Change_Perspectives_from_Vanuatu 
69 Pilot data collection first took place in shefa province in 2014 and, based on the pilot findings, modifications were 
made in the questionnaire. Further data collection was done by dGMWr staff in Torba and sanma province, nGO staff 
in Tafea and Malampa and by students in penama province. all enumerators were trained by the dGMWr and UniceF 
with theoretical instruction on the tools and the definitions, followed by a practical data collection exercise in shefa 
province. The training was concluded with a review of the data collected during the field exercise, which provided a 
feedback loop. a verification of all collected data took place by displaying the data on a geographical map with 
habitations.  
Mommen, B., Humphries-Waa, K., Gwavuya, S. (2017). “Does women’s participation in water committees affect 
management and water system performance in rural Vanuatu?” in Waterlines, v. 2017.

=== PAGE 151 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
31 
committee in place, while the remaining (31% - 365) did. For these community-owned water 
systems with a committee, data was collected to understand community composition and the 
positions occupied by women.  
For the 365 community water points with a WUC, there was an average of six members per 
committee and a total of 2,237 members across the six provinces. Of these WUC members, 16% 
(365) were female. Just over half of the WUcCs (51% - 186) reported having at least one key post 
held by a woman. Of these, approximately half the posts were as secretary (53%), 40% as 
treasurer, and only 7% as chair.  
 
Despite overall low representation of women in WUCs, trends of improved water management 
were noted when women were better represented: WUCs with women in key posts met more 
regularly, where meetings were defined as meeting more than once per year. Regular user fee 
collection takes place more often when there is a female treasurer (73%), compared with a 
female chair (54%) and secretary (52%). Of the 186 WUCs with women in key positions, 43% of 
the systems were in good condition, 35% in fair condition, and about 22% in poor condition or not 
working at all. Similarly, of the 179 with only men in key posts, 35% were in good condition, 29% 
in fair condition, and 36% in poor condition or not working at all. Further analysis shows that 
WUCs with no women in key posts were also significantly more likely to function poorly or not at 
all 
compared 
to 
those 
that 
included 
women: 
36% 
compared 
to 
22%.  
 
Insufficient, non-resilient WASH infrastructure continue to be compromised by climate risks, 
increasing time poverty among certain gender groups: 
This is an infrastructure barrier, which is being compounded by climate impacts. WASH baseline 
in Vanuatu, as explored in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study – remains riddled with the lack of water 
safety (quality) and security (quantity), including: limited year-round service for most water 
points, inadequate output to cover daily water requirements. During the dry season and in 
drought conditions, including those associated with El Nino, some communities are forced to 
declare ‘water emergencies.’ Communities are also experiencing growing tensions over water 
access rights, necessitating the need to address climate threats as well as institutional (and 
infrastructure barriers). 
 
In Vanuatu, women and girls (and often boys as well) usually bear the responsibility for collecting 
water, which is time-consuming and arduous. Lack of access to water supply systems has a 
significant impact on time spent transporting water, which can take up to five hours per day, 
according to UNICEF data. 70 This is reiterated in the government’s 2004 report on the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), which 
describes the key role played by ni-Vanuatu women in the rural subsistence economy:  
 
“Women play a critical role . . . devoting most of their working lives balancing their time between 
meeting family as well as community needs and cultural obligations. Women’s work includes an 
array of work from . . . caring for children, old people, people with disabilities and the infirm to 
domestic tasks such as fetching of water and firewood, cleaning the house, washing clothes, 
cooking food and gardening. Women are involved in food production including animal husbandry 
and production of handicrafts such as mats, baskets for the home as well as weaving of mats, 
baskets and grass skirts for sale as well as for cultural purposes.” 
 
 
70 UNICEF Pacific (2015) Gender equity and social inclusion in the wash sector in Vanuatu.

=== PAGE 152 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
32 
This inequitable gender-based allocation of unpaid domestic and care work, representing ‘a 
double workday’ for women who enter the workforce (whether formally or informally), often 
leaves women with little or no discretionary time. This is known as time poverty71: a predicament 
in which an individual is working long hours without choice because that individual’s house is 
poor  or would be at risk of falling into poverty if the individual reduced their working hours 
below a certain time-poverty line.  
 
Time poverty has important repercussions for women's economic opportunities and health, and 
can actually limit them from accessing and benefiting from project interventions, trainings and 
adaptation strategies for increased climate resilience and improved water security.  
 
Water insecurity indirectly and directly combines to exacerbate gender inequality in other 
sectors (such as limited land rights) and limit adoption of adaptation and resilience strategies: 
This is an institutional barrier. Climate change represents the most complex challenge of our 
time – it is a threat multiplier72 that has direct and indirect effects on existing sociocultural, 
economic, and political phenomena. This includes levels of gender equality and women and girls 
human rights, and how power, roles and responsibilities are organized among men, women, boys 
and girls within the household and in the economy.  
Due to the impacts of climate change, agriculturists globally face decline in land productivity, 
greater land degradation, limited access to water, increase in pests, deforestation, destruction 
of crops and so on. A major issue among this, related to the project paradigm is water 
availability, which is impacting food production.73 It is predicted that across the Pacific, island 
countries will face increasingly severe water shortages due to reduced precipitation. This 
anticipated intensification of water shortage will likely lead to land use change, possibly 
requiring farmers to move their crops away from drier areas and change to drought-resistant 
varieties and new propagation techniques.74 
 
As a result of gendered norms and patriarchal structures, women may be disadvantaged and lack 
both the technical capacity as well as opportunity to adopt adaptation strategies. Women are 
often allocated less fertile land than their male counterparts, and further often face additional 
burdens of trouble accessing water, or using and implementing energy-saving solutions, or 
accessing extension and/or financial services. In Vanuatu, land laws do not explicitly discriminate 
against women, but 97% of the land in the country is held under customary tenure which generally 
means that women have very limited rights to control and manage land. Rigid social norms in 
rural areas, however, reinforce the decision-making power of men in Vanuatu, including 
regarding natural resources, land and other productive resources. Women’s rights over land are 
increasingly threatened because the rights they do have—to use the land—cannot be registered. 
Further, women’s participation in decision making on land use is limited to informal discussions 
 
71 Time poverty can also be as the lack of enough time for rest and leisure after accounting for the time that has to 
be spent working, whether in the labor market, doing domestic work, or performing other activities such as fetching 
water and wood. See: Bardasi, E., Wodon, Q. (2010) “Working long hours and having no choice: time poverty in 
Guinea” in Feminist Economics.  
72 Risk to stability in contexts vulnerable to climate change involves multiple drivers, many of which are pre-existing 
social, economic and political stresses with which climate and environmental change may interact and amplify. This 
is why climate change is often articulated as a threat multiplier.  
73 Mael, S.H. (2013) Climate Change and Agriculture in Vanuatu: A study of crops. FAO. Port Vila. 
74 Mael, S.H. (2013) Ibid.

=== PAGE 153 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
33 
within the household and in community gatherings.75 Men control formal community decision 
making, and community chiefs are the final decision makers on the use of productive and natural 
resources.76  
The National Council of Chiefs, or Malvatumauri, must be consulted by the Parliament on any 
matters related to land. Since women cannot be high chiefs, they are not part of the 
Malvatumauri and do not have a say on decisions related to tenure of customary land.77 
 
Limited (and often lack of) land rights, despite being key stakeholders in land management and 
their responsibility for family food security, ensures that women have limited opportunities to 
expand their income, and their usufruct rights are directed towards (primarily) subsistence 
agriculture (as opposed to cash crops). These factors combine to directly and indirectly 
determine levels of food, energy and (importantly) water security, while impacting both 
readiness for and accessibility to climate resilience. Overall, land and water rights – in the 
context of mounting climatic and environmental change – function in tandem, and determine 
how vulnerable groups, and marginalized sections within them, are able to access opportunities 
as well as adopt adaptation strategies.  
 
6.4 Co-benefit of the project: increased 
representation of women in climate-resilient 
water governance  
The project has identified the following co-benefit as a part of its Section E – Logical 
Framework in the Funding Proposal.  
 
75 FAO. (2020). Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu. 
Available at: https://www.fao.org/3/ca7427en/ca7427en.pdf 
76 FAO. 2020. Ibid. 
77 Ibid. 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
 
Co-benefit # 
 
 
Indicator 
 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions/ 
Notes 
Mid-term 
Final 
Co-benefit 1 
Improved 
gender parity 
in 
representation 
of women in 
Rural Water 
Committees 
(RWCs) 
-disagregated 
by women in 
executive level 
positions  
Registration 
of RWCs with 
members 
(indicating a 
minimum of 
40% of 
women) 
Women are 
not well-
represented 
across water 
governance 
or devolved 
utility 
authorities 
across 
Vanuatu – 
exact figures 
are currently 
unavailable. 
40% of 
RWCs 
registered, 
with 40% of 
women in 
each. 
Remaining 
60% of RWCs 
registered, 
with 40% 
women in 
each.  
40% RWCs 
registered by mid-
term and 100% 
expected by 
project conclusion.  
There is political 
will in involving 
women in different 
sub-national 
contexts and in 
water governance 
institutions.  
Women may not be, 
however, able to 
participate 
meaningfully

=== PAGE 154 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
34 
 
This co-benefit will act on the finding 78 that women are underrepresented in water user 
committees in Vanuatu, and establish Rural Water Committees (RWCs) through the DWSSP 
processes that provision for a minimum of 40% representation.79 This is also a legal pre-requisite 
for the registration of RWCs in Vanuatu, under the Water Resources (Amendment) Act No. 32 of 
2016. This will be measured as an independent indicator, and will be delivered in tandem with 
(primarily) Outcome 1, which will establish 600 new DWSSPs in Vanuatu, alongside providing 
policy and climate training.  
Further, the project will also ensure that infrastructure delivery (through Outcome 2), and 
trainings (as well as policy strengthening) provided through Outcome 1 and 3, incorporate 
findings from the gender consultations. 80 Participants, at the community-level stakeholder 
consultations, identified key gender groups and articulated their different needs. These gender 
groups and their specific gender needs were summarized well by a breakout group (which 
reflected other stakeholder groups in the Sanma and Tafea provinces) in Penama province below:   
 
Gender Group 
Needs 
Elderly (60+) 
 
Easy access/tap stands to be in close proximity 
 
Taps fitted at a lower level for accessibility 
 
Ball taps for ease of use 
 
Solar lighting in the tap use area 
Disability/Disabled 
 
Easy access 
 
Ramp for wheelchair/hand rail 
 
Solar lighting in the tap use area 
Women (menstruating/lactating)  
 
Separate shower facilities with dignity facilities 
 
Safe house for menstrual hygiene 
 
Separate individual tank with RWCs for menstrual hygiene / child-
related water use 
 
Solar lighting for security / privacy 
LGBTQI 
 
Separate shower facilities 
 
78 Mommen, B., Humphries-Waa, K., Gwavuya, S. (2017). “Does women’s participation in water committees affect 
management and water system performance in rural Vanuatu?” in Waterlines, v. 2017. 
79 The Rural Water Committee usually takes overall responsibility for developing their supply-specific DWSSP. 
However, technical and facilitation support will be needed to develop a DWSSP. A community DWSSP team needs to 
be established, usually comprising members of the Rural Water Committee, women’s, men’s, youth and church 
group representation, local plumbers and carpenters, and the head person. This brings together a variety of 
perspectives from the people who know the water supply and how it is used. Further detail can be found here: 
Vanuatu’s National Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Community Plan, available at - 
https://mol.gov.vu/images/News-Photo/water/DoWR_File/Management_Plans/Vanuatu-NIP-Guide-annual-CAP-
210818.pdf 
80 During implementation, these designs will be further defined and specified through further consultations and 
workshops at the community level. These will be dispensed through the process of developing 600 DWSSPs through 
Outcome 1.  
participate due to 
sociocultural 
barriers, and 
demands on their 
time due to unpaid 
care work within 
the household.

=== PAGE 155 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
35 
 
Solar lighting for security / privacy 
6-18 years (school students) 
 
Separate water storage for: 
bathroom use and kitchen use (to reduce collection burdens)  
0-5 years 
 
Safety valves to be fixed before taps are installed 
NB. There is an urgent need to install gender-responsive signs to specifically assigned facilities at the community 
level. Alongside, working groups indicated the need for the inclusion of well-lit, demarcated WASH areas, with 
the provision of secure doors and locks – to ensure such facilities can be used by women safely. 
 
The proposed solution recognizes that bridging practical gender needs (e.g. access to water) with 
strategic gender interests (e.g. changes in power and roles) is critical to achieving 
transformational changes in gender equality in Vanuatu, where underrepresentation of diverse 
gender groups limits the efficacy of existing infrastructure and the potential of new investments. 
Through the planned trainings (where 50:50 gender balanced beneficiary distribution is 
targeted), alongside this co-benefit to ensure increased, meaningful participation of women in 
RWCs, the project will also be able to explore five WASH- and climate change-relevant elements 
of empowerment: participation, decision-making, information, capacity building and leadership.  
 
The risk to this approach is that traditional gender roles in Vanuatu often prevent women from 
participating in such decision-making bodies.81 Some communities are supportive of women’s 
participation, whereas others refuse to let female members participate because of concerns over 
the erosion of community structures and traditional understandings about women’s rolesThrough 
the trainings envisioned under Outcome 1, the AE will also ensure there is sufficient advocacy 
and sensitization preceding the increased participation of women in RWCs. .82 The Gender and 
Protection Cluster of Vanuatu 83  as well as the Gender Officer hired during project 
implementation will demonstrate the expertise and capacity to address this issue of 
representation. They will be active as facilitating agents during the DWSSP development process, 
and provide sensitization and advocacy support during the trainings to ensure that women’s 
participation in RWCs are meaningful. 
 
6.5 Overall impact of the project: decreased time 
poverty for women and youth 
Clean water is an essential resource for which there is no substitute. Each family needs a certain 
amount of water each day to survive, and the lack of access to improved water supply places a 
disproportionate burden on women and girls who tend to be the primary collectors of water for 
the family in many countries. The impact is felt the most by the poor who are more likely to lack 
access to improved water supply. Where there is no adequate water supply close by, people—
mostly women and girls—have to travel, sometimes long distances, to fetch water. 
This assessment has discussed that in Vanuatu, women and girls – as well as youth – are often 
responsible for domestic water provision. This has been corroborated by qualitative studies, as 
well as UNICEF experience. Further, during the stakeholder consultations held during the 
preparation stage – breakout groups confirmed this phenomenon.  
 
81 Bowman, Chakriya; et al. Women in Vanuatu  - Ibid.  
82 Ibid. 
83 See: https://ndmo.gov.vu/resources/clusters/91-gender-protection

=== PAGE 156 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
36 
Recent research by ADB84 has shown that: access to clean water supply closer to home could, 
therefore, have a significant impact on women’s time poverty, especially for poor women and 
girls who otherwise tend to have the least access to clean water. Overwhelmingly, the evidence 
confirms time savings for women and girls when there is improved access to water supply. Time 
savings can have several spillover effects: significant and important impacts on girls’ attendance 
at school, for example, although overall data on participation on market work is limited.  
 
The quote below comes from a qualitative study looking at the relationship between access to 
water, sanitation, and hygiene, and gender equality in the Pacific, specifically Vanuatu.85 This 
quote from a woman beneficiary of a water supply project in Vanuatu illustrates the choices that 
women make to manage time reallocation efficiently. The necessity of collecting water, and 
time poverty, can force women to make trade-offs in how they use their time, so that time saved 
gets reallocated to previously neglected household and care work rather than market work:  
 
“Before there was so much difficulty to fetch water so I used to shut my baby in the 
sleeping house so I could take the clothes down to wash and carry back the water. It used 
to be such hard and heavy work. When I came back the baby would be crying. Now there 
is less walking and work to get the water. I have more time at home to care properly for 
my children. I’m now teaching good hygiene practices and I am a good mother. Before I 
used to go to the hospital with my children all the time. But now they are healthy.” 
 
The Vanuatu study found that, in general, reduced labor in collecting water as a result of 
improved supply was highly valued especially by women, and also by men. Thus, the overall 
project paradigm – to deliver climate-resilient WASH infrastructure to enhance community 
resilience – will have a direct gender-transformative impact: it has the potential to reduce the 
time poverty that women and girls (primarily) face, by increasing access to water sources and 
improving overall water security.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 Asian Development Bank – ADB. (2015). Bala,cing the Burden – Desk Review of Women’s Time Poverty and 
Infrastructure in Asia and the Pacific. Available at: https://www.adb.org/publications/balancing-burden-womens-
time-poverty-and-infrastructure  
85 J. Willetts et al. (201). Addressing Two Critical MDGs together: Gender in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
Initiatives. Pacific Economic Bulletin. 25 (1).

=== PAGE 157 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
37 
7. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism, in the 
case of SEAH and GbV 
In 1993, the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women (A/RES/48/104) defines 
violence against women as “any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result 
in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, 
coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.”  
 
More recently, as both theoretical and practical work on GbV evolved and became enshrined in 
numerous conventions and declarations, article 3 of the Council of Europe’s Convention on 
Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) 
offered the following definition: “gender-based violence against women shall mean violence that 
is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately.” 
A critical issue identified in this assessment is Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Sexual Harassment 
(SEAH)86 – as part of the overall incidence of gender-based violence (GbV) – that is prevalent in 
Vanuatu.  
Indeed, GbV statistics in Vanuatu are telling: Vanuatu has one of the highest prevalence rates 
of violence against women and girls globally. Research conducted by the Vanuatu Women’s 
Centre (in 2011) established that ~60% of women with an intimate partner had experienced 
physical violence, ~68% experienced emotional violence, and ~69% coercive behavioural 
control by men.87 According to the World Bank’s 2012 World Development Report on Gender 
Equality and Development, between 60 – 70% of women in Vanuatu (alongside Kiribati and 
Solomon Islands) experience some form of domestic violence.88 See Figure 2 below: 
 
 
86 Definition based on:  https://safeguardingsupporthub.org/sites/default/files/2021-
06/RSH_BiteSize_Understanding%20SEAH%20and%20GBV_final.pdf  
87 World Vision (2018). Evaluation Report: Reducing GbV Project (Vanuatu Counselling Approach). Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Counselling%20Evaluation%202018%20.pdf 
88 See: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2012/11/25/raising-awareness-of-violence-against-women-in-
thepacific

=== PAGE 158 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
38 
Therefore, SPC has designed a grievance redressal mechanism to ensure these issues are 
taken into consideration during project implementation. A grievance is a concern or 
complaint raised by beneficiaries of affected communities and stakeholders related to the 
perceived or actual impacts of the project activities. The objectives of setting up an 
appropriate grievance redress mechanism (GRM) are to: 
 
provide stakeholders with a clear process for providing comment and raising grievances 
and concerns in an anonymous manner; 
 
structure and manage the handling of comments, responses, and grievances in a timely 
manner; and, 
 
ensure that comments, responses, and grievances are handled in a fair and transparent 
manner and in line with local and national policies. 
 
The GRM can serve as an effective tool for early identification, assessment and resolution of 
grievances and therefore for strengthening accountability to beneficiaries. The GRM is an 
important feedback mechanism that can improve project impact and respond to concerns and 
grievances of project-affected parties (e.g. related to the environmental and social performance 
of the project) in a timely manner. With restrictions on movement, it is important that, where 
possible, staff managing grievances can access systems remotely to enable GCFM processes to be 
conducted effectively. The SEP will keep the local communities and other stakeholders informed 
about the project’s activities, to specifically address gender-based violence (GbV) and other 
cross-cutting issues.  
 
All grievances will be closely monitored by the Accredited Entity to assess the number and type 
of grievances and evaluate any trends over time. This will be conducted by the relevant 
responsible parties as highlighted under SPC’s policies for accountability89. All monitoring and 
reporting will be carried out conforming to confidentially and consent from aggrieved parties or 
survivors. This applied to all reporting obligations to the GCF as imposed through the 
Accreditation Master Agreement and Funded Activity Agreement.  
 
7.1 GCF Grievance Redress Mechanism  
Paragraph 69 of the Governing Instrument of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) requires the Board 
to establish an Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) that will report to the Board. The Board 
established the IRM through the adoption of the Terms of Reference (TOR) of the IRM which sets 
out various matters, including the role and functions, governance and administrative 
arrangements of the IRM. In accordance with its TOR, the IRM is mandated to carry out the 
following functions: 
(a) Review requests for reconsideration of a project or programme that has been denied funding 
by the Board and, as appropriate, make recommendations to the Board; 
(b) Address grievances or complaints by a person, group of persons or community who/which 
have been or may be adversely impacted by a GCF funded project or programme through problem 
solving and/or compliance review, as appropriate; 
 
89 https://www.spc.int/accountability

=== PAGE 159 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
39 
(c) Initiate proceedings on its own to investigate grievances of a person, group of persons or 
community who/which have been or may be adversely impacted by a GCF funded project or 
programme; 
(d) Monitor whether decisions taken by the Board based on recommendations made by the IRM, 
or agreements reached in connection with grievances or complaints through problem solving, 
have been implemented, and report on that monitoring to the Board; 
(e) Recommend to the Board the reconsideration of existing policies, procedures, guidelines and 
systems of the GCF based on lessons learned or good international practices; 
(f) Share best practices and give general guidance that can be helpful for the GCF’s readiness 
activities and accreditation process and for supporting the strengthening of the capacities of 
accountability/redress mechanisms of the DAEs; and 
(g) Provide education and outreach to GCF staff, relevant stakeholders and the public. 
A request may be submitted to the IRM, by sending it to the mailing address or email address of 
the IRM as published on its website (https://irm.greenclimate.fund/case-register/file-
complaint). A request may be submitted in any of the six official languages of the United Nations 
(UN), provided that where a request is in a language other than English, it must be accompanied 
by an English translation. The English version will prevail in the event of a conflict. 
 
7.2 Grievance related to Sexual Exploitation, Abuse 
and/or harassment  
In all situations involving complaints related to gender-based violence (GBV), sexual exploitation, 
abuse or harassment (SEAH), violence against children (VAC) and human trafficking (HT), the 
relevant grievance redress mechanism (8.3.3-3) will take on a “survivor-centred approach”. This 
will apply to all grievance address mechanisms controlled by SPC or the PMU. In line with this 
approach, the following principles will be systemically applied through all steps and actions: 
• 
The rights, needs, and wishes of the survivor (or victim) is the foremost priority of 
everyone involved with the project. 
• 
The survivor has a right to: 
o be treated with dignity and respect instead of being exposed to victim-blaming 
attitudes. 
o choose the course of action in dealing with the violence instead of feeling 
powerless. 
o privacy and confidentiality instead of exposure. 
o non-discrimination instead of discrimination based on gender, age, race/ethnicity, 
ability, sexual orientation, HIV status or any other characteristic. 
o receive comprehensive information to help her or him make their own decision 
instead of being told what to do. 
• 
The safety of the survivor shall always be ensured. Potential risks to the survivor will be 
identified and action take to ensure the survivor’s safety and to prevent further harm 
including ensuring that the alleged perpetrator does not have contact with the survivor.

=== PAGE 160 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
40 
If the survivor is an employee of the Project, reasonable adjustments may be made to 
the survivor’s work schedule and work environment to ensure their safety. 
• 
All actions should reflect the choices of the survivor. 
• 
All information related to the case must be kept confidential and identities protected. 
Only those who have a role in the response to an allegation should receive case-level 
information, and then only for a clearly stated purpose and with the survivor’s consent. 
This applies to any documentation or reports related to the case. Identities will not be 
revealed unless explicit written consent is provided by the survivor.  
• 
The survivor must provide informed consent to progress with each stage of the complaints 
process. Survivors may withdraw their consent at any time during the process. 
• 
In the case that a case of SEAH or GBV is submitted. SPC as the Accredited Entity will 
carry out the duty of care to the survivor in line with its policies. This includes where 
relevant, support for the provision of medical services (including psychosocial support), 
legal counsel, community driven protection measures, and reintegration of the survivor. 
This will be conducted in a timely manner to ensure maximum safety and support is 
provided to the survivor. 
 
7.3 SPC’s Grievance Redress Mechanism 
SPC has a Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) in place to ensure that complaints are being 
promptly reviewed and addressed by the responsible units. 90 This process aims to address 
complaints from affected stakeholders, including communities, about the social and/or 
environmental performance of the project, and to take measures to redress the situation, where 
necessary.  For the process to be efficient, project stakeholders have to be properly informed 
that SPC has such a mechanism established, and how they can access to it to settle their 
grievance.  
The SPC GRM is operated through a web-hosted page on SPC site for the expression of concerns 
or complaints, which can be posted by email with the information in using the complaints’ 
template.91 Concerns expressed shall be received by the legal team who will reach out internally, 
primarily to the division in charge of the project or to relevant division. Grievances will be sorted 
out through a conflict resolution process. In case this process is not functional, other process will 
be used, such as a compliance system, the overall objective being to address and redress project 
stakeholders’ grievances in a simple and efficient manner. 
 
 
90 https://www.spc.int/accountability 
91 (Please see Annex IV of SPC’s GRM see SPC website: 
https://www.spc.int/sites/default/files/documents/Application%20SPC%20Social%20and%20Environmental%20Rresponsibility%20Gri
evance%20Mechanism.pdf).

=== PAGE 161 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
41 
7.4 Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Through a project-level GRM, SPC will receive concerns or grievances from an affected 
community about the environmental and social plans or performance of the project. In that 
direction, communities and stakeholders will be sensitized about the existing grievance process 
and form.  Both national level and provincial level government agencies will be responsible for 
supporting the communities with the information they need to properly submit a grievance 
letter. The national level and provincial level government agencies are taking part into the 
grievance and redress mechanism through documenting grievances and coordinating with SPC 
the process to settle the grievances. There are several processes to submit project related 
grievances:  
1. 
Bring up the complaint during the meetings of the PWRAC or community awareness 
meetings. The complaint then must be directed to the project GCF focal point who will 
then forward to the SPC legal team.  
2. 
Contact by email the Project Management Unit. 
3. 
Contact by email the key project institution (DoWR), which will then forward to SPC. 
4. 
Email SPC through the online process: https://www.spc.int/accountability.  
Email address complaint@spc.org 
The Project Management Unit will receive and register grievances and will contact SPC legal 
team. He/she will provide an initial response within two business days to the person who 
submitted the grievance to acknowledge the grievance and explain that the grievance will be 
logged onto the SPC GRM. As a first timeframe, a response will be provided to the complainant 
within a two-month period, with indication of appropriate process to address the grievance. This 
duration should be sufficient to screen the complaint, outline how the grievance will be 
processed, screen for eligibility as well as assign organizational responsibility for proposing a 
response. This process will possibly involve engaging with other project stakeholders to resolve 
the issue. 
SPC GRM is responsible to inform the complainant that he/she has the right to pursue other 
options to resolve the complaint if unsatisfied after the SPC GRM process, noting that the GRM 
may respond to questions from the complainant, but does not constitute an advisor or attorney 
for the complainant. All grievances will be recorded, and these records will be kept at a secure 
place for up to three years after the life of the project. 
 
7.5 Community-level Grievance Redress Mechanism 
At the community level in Vanuatu, concerns or grievances can be addressed through the 
traditional governance structures and processes managed by the chiefly systems of individual 
islands. The community-level GRM will mainly address issues related to utility access, conflicts 
among villagers, complaints from marginalized gender or vulnerable groups, issues related to 
water access points and gender-based violence. This level of the GRM will ensure that 
communities are able to resolve issues and conflicts with consensus, as a first level, and then 
escalate to the project-level GRM only if deemed appropriate. This will also ensure that, within 
the indigenous communities being targeted, the project benefits from active, traditional 
mechanisms of conflict resolution and decision-making structures.

=== PAGE 162 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
42 
The nakamal or Village Council is made up of chiefs and community leaders of a particular village. 
This authority is convened by the paramount chief or a designated customary leader and it 
deliberates and resolves matters at the specific village level which could include family matters, 
disputes/disagreements as well as land disputes. 
The Ward Council of Chiefs sits above the Nakamal or Village Council and comprises chiefs and 
customary leaders from a number of different villages who all fall within a designated Ward 
Council. The Ward Council deals mostly with land ownership disputes.  
Matters unresolved at the Ward Council are elevated to the Area Council of Chiefs or even higher 
to the Island Council of Chiefs if they are not resolved by the council below. In the event an 
individual or a group of individuals are aggrieved, their grievance can be raised for redress at 
the Nakamal or Village Council. If matters are not able to be resolved at this level, the paramount 
chief or head of the council may decide as follows: 
1. 
elevate the grievance for redress at the Ward Council or with the Chief; or, 
2. 
register the grievance directly with the representatives of the provincial authority for 
redress through the provincial institutional arrangements. 
Matters raised with the representatives of the provincial authority are usually done through Area 
Administrators or Area Secretaries. These provincial officers then have the option to raise the 
issues for redress as follow; 
 
table the grievance for redress at the Provincial Area Council level through the Area-
Technical Advisory Committee (Area-TAC); 
 
table the grievance for redress directly through the Provincial Technical Advisory 
Commission (PTAC); and,  
 
raise the grievance directly with the relevant national government representative present 
at the provincial level. 
If and when the grievance is raised through the provincial institutional arrangements, the matter 
can then be elevated to the national government level for redress by the relevant government 
agency or ministry.

=== PAGE 163 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
43 
8. 
Key recommendations 
Despite protracted gender issues, as identified in the gender assessment above, Vanuatu has 
made important gains in ensuring gender mainstreaming in climate change adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction. This is registered in the Government’s communications on the 
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action covering 2014 – 2019.92  
Additionally, the DoWA reviewed national policies (such as draft climate change/disaster risk 
reduction policies, the National Sustainable Development Plan 2016 – 2030) to find that 
programme directives are progressively reflecting gender issues. This also includes a 2017 Council 
of Ministers’ Paper (decision 94/2017) advocating for robust gender-responsive planning and 
budgeting in five key ministries (Agriculture, Climate Change, Education, Internal Affairs, Lands) 
in the country – which is currently underway, being led by the DoWA93. 
 
Micro-studies focused on community research has also registered a positive trend of increased 
climate change and gender awareness.94 Among the Nakanamanga-speaking peoples of Tongoa 
Island – indigenous concerns about self-reliance and livelihoods, cultural continuity and climate 
impacts, transition towards cash economy are oriented towards preservation of identity and 
autonomy rather than continuation of patrilineal customary laws. This includes safeguarding and 
reviving of traditional knowledge, while allowing for greater collective governance by including 
marginalized groups such as women and youth. 
 
Gender equality, therefore, has gained progressive priority in the Government of Vanuatu’s. This 
has also been the case with GCF’s, SPC’s, and other Pacific-focused agencies’ portfolios – where 
gender is mainstreamed in an effort towards implementing a holistic social development 
mandate with inclusive engagement. With that policy background, this project partakes in the 
international conversation on gender mainstreaming in climate change adaptation efforts. If 
implemented effectively, this project has the potential to become a best practice gender 
mainstreaming guide for future interventions on climate-resilient WASH in Vanuatu, in the Pacific 
islands regionally as well as in SIDS and LDC/ex-LDC contexts globally.  
 
Given mounting evidence that dynamic, long-term planning for climate change impacts and 
external shocks yield better results when inclusive, gender-responsive and stakeholder-friendly, 
this CR-WASH project has taken proactive steps to mainstream gender, where possible, in the 
project preparation stage. Key recommendations of the Gender Assessment are as follows (the 
Gender Action Plan in Section 8 reifies these into the project’s Logical Framework – available as 
Section E in the Funding Proposal):      
 
See next page.  
 
 
92 Department of Women’s Affairs (2020). Beijing +25 – ibid. 
93 KII conducted with Department of Women’s Affairs (DoWA). 
94 Granderson, A. (2017) – ibid.

=== PAGE 164 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
44 
 
Ensure system improvements or installation of new infrastructure includes and reflects 
the needs of women, particularly in terms of safety and security (lights, secure locks, 
etc.); 
 
Include women and other marginalized groups in regular meetings, interactions and 
maintenance protocols of new and improved WASH infrastructure; 
 
Ensure mandatory representation of 40% women in Rural Water Committees for the 
registered DWSSPs; 
 
Conduct awareness-raising, gender advocacy and sensitization workshops among 
institution strengthening processes as and when required; 
 
Involve national-level (and where possible, province-level or local) gender officers and 
mechanisms to ensure gender mainstreaming is pursued through government-owned 
processes;  
 
Consult the Department of Women’s Affairs as well as the Gender and Protection Cluster 
on cross-cutting issues of gender, WASH and water security; 
 
Consult CSOs, with a track record of promoting gender interests and gender 
mainstreaming, when relevant, in the process of delivering system improvements and 
new infrastructure; and,  
 
Document and record success stories, best practices and lessons learnt to ensure there is 
feedback loop from gender-transformative activities, as well as to ensure a community 
of practice around gender and climate-resilient WASH is established.

=== PAGE 165 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
45
9. 
Gender Action Plan 
OUTCOME 1: Communities are empowered to plan and manage climate-resilient water resources 
IMPACT 
STATEMENT 
Through Outcome 1, the project will address barriers of capacity and policy access at community levels in Vanuatu – particularly, the limited financial 
and technical capacity that restricts communities from scaling up existing technology as well as shift towards new technology and system improvements. 
This will result in Improved water governance and climate-resilient water management at community level, with all 600 DWSSPs registered.  
 
By project conclusion, Vanuatu will have 600 new DWSSPs which will focus on delivering climate-resilient WASH infrastructure to the communities, and 
improving water access and security through improved methodologies of needs assessment, prioritization and delivery.  
GENDER 
IMPACT 
STATEMENT 
By ensuring improved water security, enhanced climate resilience and increased women’s representation in water governance through the proposed 
intervention (Section E of the Funding Proposal presents the blueprint) – the project will reduce vulnerability and exposure to climate change, reduce 
water insecurity and climate-related WASH issues, and overall aid in reducing women’s drudgery within the household as providers and managers of 
domestic water utilities, particularly in rural and remote settings.  
 
OUTPUTS 
• Output 1.1: New and existing DWSSPs incorporate incremental improvements to mainstream adaptation solutions  
• Output 1.2: Awareness, capacities and skills of communities and area administrators on climate-resilient water management improved  
• Output 1.3: Vulnerable communities are supported to develop and implement their DWSSPs (600 by the end of the project cycle) 
ACTIVITY 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
GENDER ENTRY POINT 
GENDER-
RESPONSIVE 
INDICATORS 
BASELINE 
TARGET 
M&E TIMELINE 
RESPONSIBLE  
PARTIES AND  
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
GENDER 
TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND 
BUDGET 
1.1.1  
Implement 
DWSSPs that 
incorporate 
incremental 
improvements 
to mainstream 
adaptation 
solutions and 
update 
1.1.1.1: Review 
uptake and 
delivery of 
updated 
methodologies, 
making 
incremental 
improvements 
annually  
 
 
The DWSSP methodology 
has been updated 
recently with significant 
overhaul towards 
climate and gender 
 
It is expected that the 
methodology will be 
further updated - with 
annual improvements.  
 
Number of review 
reports of current 
DWSSP process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual  
 
 
 
 
SPC 
DoWR 
 
Annual review and 
stocktake of DWSSP 
process per 
implementation 
year, tabulating 
new and updated 
DWSSPs in specific 
USD 1,200 (10% of 
A2 international 
consultant to 
update the 
DWSSP 
methodology to 
mainstream 
gender issues 
more strongly)  
USD 3,250 (10% of 
the national

=== PAGE 166 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
46
existing 
DWSSPs 
 
1.1.1.2: 
Integrate 
updated 
methodology 
into DWSSP 
processes 
triggered during 
the project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1.1.3: Update 
existing 
DWSSPs, when 
appropriate 
 
Gender needs 
assessments (and 
templates for how to 
assess gender barriers, 
alongside socioeconomic 
baseline) will also be 
added to the DWSSP, 
where appropriate. 
In the new DWSSPs 
developed with 
communities, the 
updated methodology 
will be used to ensure 
climate risks are 
mainstreamed. 
 
For 100 existing DWSSPs 
– workshops and 
technical assistance will 
be provided to ensure 
these plans are 
retrofitted to better 
reflect climate risks, 
gender  and adaptation 
solutions. 
 
Number of DWSSP 
methodologies 
updated with 
project findings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of DWSSPs 
updated with 
gender 
considerations.  
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
Annual 
communities 
achieved per year  
 
project engineers 
time in training 
will provide 
support for 
integration of the 
new DWSSP 
methodology that 
has been 
enhanced to be 
more gender 
transformative) 
1.2.2 
Organize 
knowledge 
sharing events 
1.2.2.1: 
Organize 
community 
level knowledge 
sharing events 
to ensure 
widespread 
dissemination 
among 
communities 
 
For Activity 1.2.2, 
interactive culturally 
appropriate training 
material and learning 
notes will be 
developed. This could 
be done in partnership 
with UNICEF which 
already has tried and 
tested community-led 
efforts in Vanuatu. 
 
Similar to Activity 1.2.1, 
Number of 
community 
knowledge sharing 
events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
 
SPC  
DoWR 
 
Annual event report 
including 
participant lists 
aggregated 
annually.  
USD 27,477 (ESS 
and GES Officer 
time A1)  
USD 29,070 (10% 
of A3 knowledge 
sharing events 
have a gender 
focus)

=== PAGE 167 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
47
It will be important to 
include gender modules 
/ sensitization modules 
(where relevant) to 
ensure that groundwork 
for increased women’s 
participation is 
accepted and driven 
forward by 
communities.  
Further, the Gender and 
Protection Cluster will 
help in ensuring GbV 
issues are discussed in a 
culturally-sensitive 
manner in these 
trainings, as well as the 
need to introduce 
adequate safety 
measures, such as locks 
and lights, for the WASH 
infrastructure 
delivered.  
 
1.3.1 
Identify 
vulnerable 
communities 
through the 
NIP process to 
prioritize 
delivery of 
DWSSPs 
1.3.1.1: Recruit 
and train DWSSP 
facilitators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3.1.3: 
Development of 
600 DWSSPs 
informed by 
best-available 
Through this output, the 
project will deliver 
DWSSPs to  600 
communities, through 
the NIP process. Activity 
1.3.1 will involve 
PWRAC identifying 
vulnerable communities 
who request DWSSPs 
through the NIP process.  
 
For the new DWSSP 
facilitators – and 
existing staff – training 
will be provided on the 
DWSSP methodology. 
Number of DWSSP 
facilitators trained 
on the new DWSSP 
processes gender 
considerations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of DWSSPs 
with new gender 
mainstreamed 
DWSSPs 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
600 
 
 
 
 
Annual 
SPC 
DoWR 
 
Training reports and 
participant lists.  
Annual review and 
stocktake of DWSSP 
process, tabulating 
new and updated 
DWSSPs in specific 
communities 
achieved per year  
 
USD 84,545 (A1 
ESS and GESI 
officer)  
 
USD 6,000 (A2 
local consultant 
for ESS and GESI)

=== PAGE 168 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
48
climate science, 
local 
information and 
traditional 
knowledge  
 
 
 
 
This will focus on 
climate risks and how 
these can be adapted to 
through the DWSSPs. 
Rural Water Committees 
(RWCs) will be 
established through the 
DWSSPs – with a 
mandatory quota of 40% 
women. Climate 
vulnerability 
assessments and 
community engagement 
are undertaken to 
ensure 600 DWSSPs 
developed during the 
project cycle are 
informed by the 
observed climate 
impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OUTCOME 2: Communities have enhanced climate-resilient rural water infrastructure 
IMPACT 
STATEMENT 
Through Outcome 2, the current total of DWSSPs delivered (277, according to latest DoWR data) will be scaled up by almost 100% (270 more – 220 new 
identified through Outcome 1 and 50 existing) by dispensing investments through the government-owned DWSSP and NIP processes. Communities will, 
therefore, receive climate-resilient system improvements along with training to maintain new WASH infrastructure. 
 
GENDER 
IMPACT 
STATEMENT 
Improved climate-resilient WASH infrastructure delivered to 270 communities through the DWSSP process is expected to have gender-transformative 
impact: DWSSPs will conduct gender assessments as part of the risk and need identification process which will directly address gendered needs; 
trainings imparted to community members will include 50:50 male and female participation to ensure both gender groups can operate and maintain 
infrastructure effectively and equitably; overall spill over effect of improved water supply and WASH infrastructure will address water insecurity 
among communities – and vulnerable sub-groups within them.  
OUTPUTS 
• Output 2.1: 270 vulnerable communities supported to construct, operate and maintain climate-resilient water infrastructure

=== PAGE 169 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
49
ACTIVITY 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
GENDER MAINSTREAMING 
ENTRY POINT 
GENDER-
RESPONSIVE 
INDICATORS 
BASELINE 
TARGET 
M&E TIMELINE 
RESPONSIBLE 
PARTIES AND 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
GENDER 
TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE 
2.1.1 
Improve CAP 
request 
prioritization, 
with gender 
and ESIA 
screening for 
chosen sites  
 
2.1.1.1: update 
multi-criteria 
risk screening to 
prioritize CAP 
requests to 
identify sites for 
infrastructure 
planning 
including 
gender 
components 
 
2.1.1.2: 
Conduct 
gender, 
environment 
and social 
safeguards 
screening and 
impact 
assessments in 
chosen sites 
 
These activities will 
establish climate-resilient 
drinking water 
infrastructure and build 
capacity among 
vulnerable communities 
to maintain and operate 
these, thus ensuring a 
paradigm shift from 
build-neglect-rebuild 
approach.  
 
Activity 2.1.1 will focus 
on improving the CAP risk 
matrix to ensure that 
vulnerable, remote 
communities are 
prioritized through the 
project. Consultation 
processes will inform the 
design of the 
infrastructure delivered, 
with particular attention 
to gender groups, persons 
with disability and needs 
of elderly as well.  
This can include (this is 
not an exhaustive list but 
a suggestive list of action 
to address needs, when 
identified through the 
CAP risk matrix):  
- 
Improved security 
features such as 
adequate lighting, 
Updated multi-
criteria risk 
screening tool.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of gender 
and ESS impacts 
conducted  
 
0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270 
Year 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annually  
 
SPC  
 
DoWR  
 
Reports on 
communities 
supported and 
infrastructure 
delivered 
[merged with 
deliverable for 3.1] 
 
Consolidated, 
training report on 
operation and 
maintenance 
capacity in 
communities 
 
USD 238,841 (B1 
ESS and GESI 
costs)

=== PAGE 170 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
50
secure locks, dignity 
areas with 
curtains/covers 
- 
Ramps, different tap 
heights and other 
inclusive design 
features for persons 
with disability 
2.1.2 
Upgrade CR 
WASH 
infrastructure 
with adequate 
O&M training 
2.1.2.1: 
Construct and 
upgrade 
infrastructure 
for climate 
resilient water 
sources, 
distribution and 
storage, made 
more accessible 
and safer for 
use by both 
genders. 
 
2.1.2.2: Train 
RWCs on 
operation and 
maintenance for 
the CR-WASH 
infrastructure 
inclusive of 
gender 
considerations 
 
Activity 2.1.2 will deliver 
CR-WASH infrastructure 
to communities with 
selected DWSSPs. These 
infrastructures will 
ensure gender needs are 
met thanks to robust 
consultation processes 
that will happen before 
the disbursement of 
funds, using updated 
DWSSP methodology 
(Output 1.1).  
 
RWCs and other 
stakeholders in the rural 
water governance 
architecture will receive 
training to ensure 
gender-transformative 
change is generated 
through a government-
owned and community-
facing process. Gender 
equity will be ensured in 
training to ensure equal 
opportunity of skills 
development and 
Number of Focus 
groups and key 
informant 
interviews 
identify positive 
change in 
accessibility and 
safety 
consideration of 
water access 
points at each 
CAP site  
 
 
 
Number of 
community level 
plumbers and 
management 
trainings, 
provided with a 
50% female and 
50% male 
participations95 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
270  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270 
Annually 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annually 
 
SPC  
DoWR  
 
Focus group and 
key informant 
interview reports  
 
Training reports 
and participant 
lists aggregated 
annually.  
USD 466,860 (10% 
of costs in B6 
focused on 
gender aspects) 
 
95 Number of trainings will be based on the number of CAP requests.

=== PAGE 171 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
51
capacity building 
(plumbers training and 
management training) is 
provided instilling a 
paradigm shift towards 
upskilling women at 
community level.  
 
OUTCOME 3: Provincial and national institutions are strengthened to address climate risks associated with water security 
IMPACT STATEMENT 
Through Outcome 3, institutional capacities and processes toward climate-resilient water security for rural communities, particularly at the national and provincial 
level will be enhanced. In the long-term activities and sub-activities under this Outcome will result in greater technology deployment, dissemination and innovation 
transfer benefiting the whole rural population. 
 
GENDER 
IMPACT 
STATEMENT 
Institutional and regulatory barriers in Vanuatu will be addressed – particularly, the limited financial and technical capacity that restricts the DoWR 
and provincial institutions from scaling up existing technology as well as shift towards new, climate-resilient technology. This will ensure both women 
and men benefit from improved water security and safety, but also that national and provincial staff are sensitized to gender barriers, while MEL and 
KM outputs document important gender experience on the field for improving project delivery, and scale-up planning. 
 
OUTPUTS 
• Output 3.1: National- and provincial-level staff and WASH sector partners trained on climate-resilient water management 
• Output 3.2: Knowledge management through data sharing mechanism established for climate-resilient water management 
• Output 3.3: Monitoring, learning and evaluation framework established for improved learning for climate-resilient water management 
ACTIVITY 
SUB-ACTIVITIES 
GENDER 
MAINSTREAMING ENTRY 
POINT 
GENDER-
RESPONSIVE 
INDICATORS 
BASELINE 
TARGET 
M&E TIMELINE 
RESPONSIBLE 
PARTIES AND 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION 
GENDER 
TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE 
3.1.1 
Deliver 
enhanced 
administrative 
and technical 
capacity 
training for 
water 
management 
3.1.1.1: Train 
PWRAC and DoWR 
staff on updated 
DWSSP 
methodology 
including on 
gender 
mainstreaming 
consideration and 
This activity will focus 
on enhancing the 
capacities of national 
and provincial level 
staff on climate-
resilient water 
management and water 
governance. Activity 
3.1.1. will attempt to 
Number of PWRAC 
and DoWR training 
sessions conducted 
with a 50% female 
and 50% male 
participation 
 
 
 
0 
 
35 
 
Annually  
SPC 
DoWR 
 
Training 
reports on 
PWRAC & 
DoWR 
trainings 
USD 8,940 (10% 
of training in C1 
will have a 
focus on gender 
mainstreaming)

=== PAGE 172 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
52
importance of 
accessibility and 
gender 
consideration to 
reduce time 
poverty and 
safety/security 
when locating and 
installing 
infrastructure. 
 
expand the skill set 
available to the DoWR 
through external 
technical support. 
This will also include 
training on gender 
mainstreaming, which 
will be linked to the 
efforts made by the 
DoWA and the Gender 
and Protection Cluster.  
‘ 
Alongside the DoWR, 
the: 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock, Forestry, 
Fisheries and 
Biosecurity;  
Ministry of Climate 
Change; 
Ministry of Education 
and Training, and the 
Ministry of Health  
will benefit from these 
trainings.  
aggregated 
annually. 
 
3.1.2 
Update 
engineering 
and conduct 
workshops for 
WASH sector 
partners 
3.1.2.1: Update 
engineering 
standards to 
reflect gender 
concerns and 
deploy in 
provinces for new 
infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 3.1.2 will 
provide the necessary 
impetus to engage 
coordination between 
different WASH sector 
partners, as well as 
ensuring engineering 
standards are updated, 
approved with 
consensus to minimize 
or remove risk to 
women and girls, are 
analysed through a 
robust safeguarding 
Number of update 
engineering 
standards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPC  
DoWR 
 
Annual written 
report on 
progress of 
updated 
engineering 
standards and 
how they have 
been rolled 
out presented 
at mid-term. 
Workshop 
reports on 
USD 38,045 (C3 
ESS officer)

=== PAGE 173 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
53
 
 
 
 
3.1.2.2: 
Workshops with 
WASH sector 
partners (incl. 
MoH, Med., and 
CSOs) on updated 
DWSSP, 
methodology with 
specific focus 
presented on 
gender 
considerations 
process and then, 
deployed. 
 
 
Workshops with WASH 
sector partners will use 
gender modules 
developed for previous 
activities to ensure 
resilience approaches 
provide fair 
consideration to 
gendered needs, needs 
of persons with 
disabilities, needs of 
different age groups.  
 
 
 
 
Number of 
workshops 
conducted with 50% 
male and 50% 
female 
participation. 
 
 
 
 
0 
  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Annual 
WASH sector 
partner 
events. 
 
3.2.1 
Improve 
knowledge 
management 
processes 
3.2.1.1: Review 
existing 
knowledge 
management 
systems and 
identify gaps to 
strengthen 
mainstreaming  
 
 
 
3.2.1.2: Establish 
knowledge 
management 
protocol through 
consultative 
process that 
accounts for 
gender 
considerations to 
ensure that 
gender is 
mainstreamed in 
operations and 
This activity will ensure 
that a gap analysis is 
undertaken that 
accounts for gender 
gaps and ensures that 
current KM systems are 
updated, and Gender 
mainstreaming issues 
are accounted for in the 
system  
 
Further to this, the 
activity will specifically 
update KM protocols so 
that gender 
mainstreaming issues 
are factored into all 
knowledge products in 
an accessible and easy 
manner.  
Gap analysis report 
completed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Updated protocol 
completed and 
operational 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
Year 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year 2 
 
SPC 
 
DoWR 
 
Finalised 
reports and 
documentatio
n.  
 
This will be 
incorporated 
into M&E 
activities as 
described and 
budgeted under 
Annex 11.

=== PAGE 174 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
54
standards are 
maintained. 
 
3.2.2 
Operationalize 
data sharing 
platform 
3.2.2.1: Integrate 
data collected 
through DWSSPs 
into government 
knowledge 
management 
platforms, such as 
DoWR data portal 
 
3.2.1.2: Engage 
relevant 
stakeholders to 
support effective 
utilization of data 
for decision-
making by WASH 
sector partners 
 
The new DWSSP 
methodology will factor 
into to DWSSPs gender 
considerations. The 
activity will ensure that 
DoWR platforms and 
systems account for 
gender indicators  
 
Gender data and 
findings (collated from 
the project activities) 
will be shared on an 
annual basis 
Number of updated 
DoWR KM and data 
platforms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of gender 
focused report, on 
lived experiences, 
stories from the 
projects, 
qualitative 
improvements will 
be produced to 
document the 
gender-
transformative 
impact of the 
project, best 
practices and 
lessons-learned for 
later phases and 
further 
interventions.  
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Year 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annually 
 
 
 
 
SPC 
 
DoWR 
 
Finalised 
reports and 
documentatio
n.  
 
3.3.1 
Collate 
existing MEL 
practices 
within water 
governance 
structures in 
Vanuatu, and 
establish a 
3.3.1.1: 
Stocktake 
existing MEL 
processes, and 
collate lessons 
learnt, case 
studies, and best 
practices 
available  
 
This activity will take 
stock of existing MEL 
practices within 
government-owned 
process, and upgrade 
this system by 
introducing robust 
protocol using a 
consultative process, as 
well as through SPC’s 
Number of 
stocktake reports 
generated 
 
 
0 
1 
Year 1  
SPC 
DoWR 
Consolidated 
annual report 
on MEL system 
established 
incorporating 
gender 
indicators and

=== PAGE 175 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
55
robust MEL 
protocol 
existing processes 
through the PEARL 
policy and rebbilib. The 
DoWA will be 
potentially consulted to 
ensure gender MEL 
processes are 
mainstreamed into 
water governance and 
climate resilience MEL.   
See Section E.7 – 
Funding Proposal for 
details. 
reported to 
the EE’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total  
USD 869,158 
TABULATION OF BENEFICIARIES  
Outcome 
Targeted Communities 
Indirect / direct beneficiaries  
1 
600 
68,520 direct beneficiaries (including 34,260 women), which is 22.5% of the total population 
of Vanuatu.  
2 
270 (including 220 already targeted by 
Outcome 1, and 50 additional ones) 
30,834 direct beneficiaries, with 50% of women (including 25,124 from Outcome 1 and 5,710 
additional ones); which is 8% of the total population in Vanuatu. 
3 
2,000 
Indirect beneficiaries: the entire rural population in Vanuatu (around 228,400 individuals, 
which is 75% of the total population, including around 114,200 women)

=== PAGE 176 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
56
Annex A: Implementing roles and responsibilities for gender 
mainstreaming 
Gender Officer in the Project Management Unit: An international Gender Officer will be hired on a part-time basis to increase the capacity of the PMU and provide technical 
assistance to deliver the planned activities of the Gender Action Plan. They will take the lead in supporting the DWSSP and CAP design processes (including ESS related 
topics), supporting training of extension agents and service providers and RWC proponents on Gender (including ESS) integration into DWSSPs in alignment with the project 
GAAP. They will support the development of gender and WASH training modules and protocols (including ESS) through Outcome 1 and 3, and ensure rapid gender assessments 
precede the system improvements and new infrastructure delivered through Outcome 2. For the latter, local gender experts may be hired on a need-by-need basis. They 
will also support the MEL Officer in conducting relevant monitoring and evaluation of project implementation against the ESMP and GAAP. The Gender Officer will review 
and assess all project activity implementation against the GAP and incorporate findings into relevant reports as obligated under the project Funded Activity Agreement. In 
the case that any issues are identified, the Gender Officer will draft technical recommendations to address these issues in implementation. These will be reviewed by the 
EE and where needed supported by technical assistance through supervision costs. If technical enhancements are required to address gender related issues through 
implementation, these will be incorporated into the AWPBs for approval by the NPSC.  
 
Department of Water Resources: The DoWR will be the co-Executing Entity of the project. The Department will oversee the registration of DWSSPs – and ensure that 40% 
representation of women is ensured in that process. Since the DoWR owns the DWSSP process, it will take the lead role in delivering the co-benefit identified for the 
project.  
 
Department of Women’s Affairs: The DoWA, of the Vanuatu Ministry of Justice and Community Services, will play a facilitating role, as required, particularly in the 
awareness-raising, advocacy and trainings to ensure meaningful participation of women in community-based water management bodies as well as to ensure community 
well-being and acceptance of such planned activities of the project. 
 
Gender and Protection Cluster: The formation of the Gender & Protection Cluster in Vanuatu on 13 March 2014 coincided with the Tropical Cyclone (TC) Lusi hitting Vanuatu. 
The response was the first time that gender and protection considered as part of post-disaster assessment and response phases. In the light of the experience gained during 
that emergency, and the frequency and severe impact of natural disasters in Vanuatu, it was decided that the work of the cluster should be ongoing. Thus, as part of the 
NDMO's coordination structure, the Gender & Protection Cluster contributes to improving preparedness for responding to natural disasters in a gender-and protection-
sensitive manner, and ensuring that timly, effective and coordinated assistance is provided to persons affected by natural disasters in Vanuatu during emergency operations. 
The Gender & Protection Cluster comprises of representatives of National Ministries, UN Agencies, International and National NGO's, National Women's Organization, the 
International Federation of the Red Cross, the Vanuatu Red Cross Society, and other Organizations with a focus on protection. The  DoWA is the designated Lead Agency of 
the Vanuatu Gender & Protection Cluster.

=== PAGE 177 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
57
 
SPC: SPC is the Accredited Entity and will be the Executing Entity in the implementation phase. It will have overall responsibility to ensure the project co-benefit (increased 
participation of women in Rural Water Committees) is delivered during the lifespan of the project.  
 
UNICEF: UNICEF is the lead among the different WASH sector partners that the project will consult during implementation. Due to its significant work on gender and WASH 
in the Pacific, the organization will provide crucial technical assistance as well as facilitation of gender-responsive actions of the project.

=== PAGE 178 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
58
Annex B: Gender questionnaire for field missions 
Introduction and background 
The Green Climate Fund (GCF) has enlisted E Co. under the project preparation framework agreement to support the Pacific Community (SPC) to assist with the 
development of the full Funding Proposal (FP) package for the project titled: Enhancing Adaptation and Community Resilience by Improving Water Security in Vanuatu. 
The GCF result areas impacts are: increased resilience of – (i) most vulnerable people and communities; (ii) health and well-being, food and water security; and, (iii) 
infrastructure and built environment.  
Your help is sought to inform the Gender Assessment and Action Plan of this project, and insights into Vanuatu’s water sector and climate change adaptation actions. The 
delivery of the FP is expected by the end of this year, post which iterative interaction is expected from the GCF to finalise the project for the GCF approval process. The 
project is envisioned through three Outcomes (this framework is subject to updates during the preparation phase, and will be communicated to relevant stakeholders):  
●
Outcome 1: Evidence-based planning and decision-making for climate-resilient water management at the community level
o
Output 1.1: DWSSPs methodology improved to better address climate vulnerabilities and incorporate adaptation solutions
o
Output 1.2: Awareness, capacities, and skills of communities & area councils on climate-resilient water management increased
o
Output 1.3: Vulnerable communities have developed their DWSSPs
o
Output 1.4: Vulnerable communities have implemented no and low costs activities identified in their DWSSPs
●
Outcome 2: Climate-resilient rural water infrastructure
o
Output 2.1: Climate change considerations incorporated into engineering standards and trainings
o
Output 2.2: Vulnerable communities supported to establish, operate and maintain climate-resilient drinking water infrastructure
●
Outcome 3: Institutional strengthening at provincial and national level to better address climate risks associated with water security
o
Output 3.1: Improved DWSSPs prioritization process and CAP risk-ranking process at provincial level based on climate vulnerability indicators
o
Output 3.2: Increased capacities of PWRAC, DoWR staff, and WASH sector partners on integrated climate-resilient water management
o
Output 3.3: Robust knowledge management and data sharing mechanisms in place for climate-resilient water management
o
Output 3.4: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning integrated in the National Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Water to ensure continued climate
resilience
We need your valuable insight to gauge how the project can be designed to be of relevance at the community and national levels; how to better improve the project’s 
effectiveness; and create pathway for potential sustainability. Therefore, suggestions for improvements or other comments will be sought and may be incorporated into 
future work undertaken by this project, as well. If you have any additional comments or questions, please contact Debasmita (debasmita@ecoltdgroup.com). 
Questions 
1. Can you provide us an overview of gender mainstreaming for WASH at the policy level?
a) Has gender analysis been regularly undertaken to inform national policy responses to gender issues in the WASH sector at the national and provincial level?
b) Has an institutional audit been done to identify gaps in lead ministry capacity and practice (DoWR and other relevant institutions), in responding to gender issues?

=== PAGE 179 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
59
b.i) When was the latest audit?  
b.ii) How was the Department of Women’s Affairs involved? 
b.iii) In your opinion, what can be done more to address gender through these national institutions? 
c) Do the lead water and sanitation sector ministries and its appointed agencies allocate resources for gender mainstreaming activities? 
d) Are specific gender objectives articulated well within national water and sanitation policies and strategies?  
e) What other gender and protection policies can be relevant for this project? 
 
2. How familiar are you with this SPC- and DoWR-led GCF project? 
a) This project is focused on delivering climate-resilient WASH infrastructure as well as introduce changes to the NIP processes. What are relevant gender issues that 
should be considered for this project? 
b) The project is going to focus on northern and northwestern island groups – Torba, Sanma and Penama. What are your views on the selection of these specific sites? 
c) How can the Department of Women’s Affairs contribute to shaping the activities of the project under the project results framework? What are the synergies and what 
capacity can be demonstrated by the Department of Women’s Affairs to potentially partner on this project? 
 
3. Overall gender baseline and gender-based violence in Vanuatu 
a) For similar projects, is there equal participation of men and women at all stages: initiation, design, site location, implementation, price setting, O&M and 
management? 
b.i) What are the main gender issues of Vanuatu? (income inequality, access to decision-making institutions, high levels of gender-based violence?) 
b.ii) Can you highlight and share documentation of ongoing and past interventions that have mainstreamed gender and/or chosen a gender-transformative project design? 
c.i) In terms of gender-based violence, can you elaborate more on what happens during and in the immediate aftermath of a disaster? 
c.ii) Can you provide studies / analyses conducted by your department of GbV levels in the post-disaster context? 
c.iii) What are current and recently closed projects on GbV that have been successful, and in what areas of Vanuatu?  
 
4. Gender-specific issues for WASH? 
a) Is menstrual hygiene mainstreamed in WASH projects and interventions? 
b) Can you provide examples of best practices / successful projects targeting menstrual hygiene in Vanuatu? 
c) What can be interlinkages between climate impacted water infrastructure and menstrual hygiene? Are girls regularly limited from attending schools, for example, if 
toilets are not quickly reconstructed after cyclone damage?

=== PAGE 180 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
60
5. Additional questions during provincial field missions  
(please note interviewee name, with consent, location, date, time and their gender). 
a) Are sector meetings at community level organized to overcome cultural barriers to women’s participation, (cultural norms, seating arrangements, language and 
meeting times)?  
b) Do operational agencies provide information for decision making on policies, strategies, plans and investments, in a format that is user-friendly and accessible to 
women, marginalized groups and the organizations that represent them?  
c) Do policy makers and regulatory bodies make use of feedback mechanisms for complaints and challenges faced by citizens from their providers, including those on 
lower levels of service, such as for those relying on standpipes and kiosks?  
d) Do service providers demonstrate commitment to the citizen voice by utilizing tools like citizens’ charters, ICT, satisfaction surveys, toll free lines and effective 
complaint desks? Do you have access to grievance mechanisms? 
e) Can you give examples of projects / groups that have, in your knowledge, intervened successfully and improved water infrastructure? How best can this be replicated 
in your commune?

=== PAGE 181 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
61
Annex C: Bibliography 
AusAID & IFC (2010). Gender and Investment Climate Reform Assessment – Vanuatu.  
Acey, C. (2010) ‘Gender and Community Mobilisation for Urban Water Infrastructure Investment in Southern Nigeria’, Gender & Development.  
Aladuwaka, S. and Momsen, J. (2010) ‘Sustainable Development, Water Resources Management and Women’s Empowerment: The Wanaraniya Water Project in Sri Lanka’, 
Gender & Development. 
Arku, F.S. (2010) ‘Time Savings from Easy Access to Clean Water: implications for rural men’s and women’s well-being’, Progress in Development Studies 10(3) 
Asian Development Bank (2013) Toolkit on gender equality results and indicators.  
Brocklehurst, C. and Bartram, J. (2010) ‘Swimming Upstream: Why Sanitation, Hygiene And Water Are So Important To Mothers and Their Daughters’, Bulletin Of The 
World Health Organization. 
CARE (2012) Good Practices Framework: Gender Analysis. Australia: CARE.   
Carrard, N., Crawford, J., Halcrow, G. and Willetts, J. (2013) ‘A Framework for Exploring Gender Equality Outcomes from WASH Programmes’, Waterlines. 
Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL, Gutmann ML, Hanson WE. Advances in mixed methods research designs. In: Tashakkori A, Teddlie C, editors. Handbook of mixed methods in 
social and behavioral research.  
Department of Women’s Affairs (2020). Beijing +25 – National Review Report. 
Devasia, L. (1998) ‘Safe Drinking Water and its Acquisition: rural women’s participation in water management in Maharashtra, India’, International Journal Of Water 
Resources Development. 
Enabor, B. (1998) ‘Integrated Water Management by Urban Poor Women: A Nigerian Slum Experience’, International Journal Of Water Resources Development.  
Fagan, G.H., Linnane, S., Mcguigan, K.G. And Rugumayo, A.I. (2015) Water Is Life: Progress To Secure Safe Water Provision In Rural Uganda [Online], Rugby, UK: Practical 
Action. 
FAO. (2020). Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu. 
Feeny, S. & McDonald, L. (2014). Vulnerability to Multidimensional Poverty: Findings from Households in Melanesia.  
Fisher, J. (2006) For Her It’s The Big Issue: Putting Women At The Centre Of Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene, Water, Sanitation And Hygiene Evidence Report. 
Geneva: Water Supply And Sanitation Collaborative Council.

=== PAGE 182 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
 
62
Fisher, J. (2008) ‘Women In Water Supply, Sanitation And Hygiene Programmes’, Proceedings Of The Institution Of Civil Engineers - Municipal Engineer. 
Foster, T. (2013) ‘Predictors Of Sustainability For Community-Managed Handpumps In Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence From Liberia, Sierra Leone, And Uganda’, 
Environmental Science & Technology. 
Government of Vanuatu, Department of Geology, Mines & Water Resources (2008) Vanuatu National Water Strategy 2008–2018. 
Government of Vanuatu, Department of Water Sources (202-) Vanuatu National Water Strategy 2020 - 2030. 
Granderson, A. (2017) “The role of traditional knowledge in building adaptive capacity for climate change in Vanuatu” in Weather, Climate and Society. 
Green Climate Fund (2017). Mainstreaming Gender in GCF projects. Publication Guide.  
Institute For Sustainable Futures (2010) Working Effectively With Women And Men In Water, Sanitation And Hygiene Programs: Learnings From Research On Gender 
Outcomes From Rural Water, Sanitation And Hygiene Projects In Vanuatu And Fiji. Sydney, Australia: University Of Technology. 
International Development Support Services (2012) East Timor Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Programm (2007–2012) (Bee, Saneamentu No Ljene Iha Komunidade 
[BESIK].  
Kilsby, D. (2012) ‘Now We Feel Like Respected Adults’: Positive Change in Gender Roles and Relations In A Timor Leste WASH Program. 
Mael, S.H. (2013) Climate Change and Agriculture in Vanuatu: A study of crops. 
Michael, B.P. (1998) ‘The Role Of Women In Water Resources Management: The Tanzania Case’, International Journal Of Water Resources Development. 
Mjoli, N., Nenzhelele, R. And Njiro, E. (2009) Assessment Of Gender Equity in Water User Associations [Pdf], Gezina: Water Research Commission. 
Mommen, B., Humphries-Waa, K., Gwavuya, S. (2017). “Does women’s participation in water committees affect management and water system performance in rural 
Vanuatu?” in Waterlines, v. 2017. 
Peacock, C. (2015) Gender Equity And Social Inclusion In The WASH Sector In Vanuatu: Assessment Of Gender Mainstreaming By WASH Policy-Makers And Service Providers 
And Recommendations To Strengthen Programming By Sector Stakeholders, Port Vila: Unicef Pacific.  
Plan International (2014) Gender And WASH Monitoring Tool. Australia: Plan International 
Ray, I. (2007) ‘Women, Water, And Development’, Annual Review Of Environment And Resources.  
Remigios, M.V. (2011) ‘Women – Water – Sanitation: The Case Of Rimuka High-Density Suburb In Kadoma, Zimbabwe’, Agenda 25(2).  
Rurh Universität Bochum (2019). World Risk Report (focus on water supply).  
Schweitzer, R. (2013) Community And Household Management Strategies For Water Supply And Treatment In Rural And Peri-Urban Areas In The Developing World [Online], 
Phd Dissertation, University Of South Florida.  
Sommer, M., Suzanne, F., Caville, S. “Violence, gender and WASH : spurring action on a complex, under-documented, and sensitive topic”.

=== PAGE 183 ===
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
E Co. 
63
United Nations CEDAW (2016). Concluding Observations – shared on 09 March 2016. Available at: 
https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N16/064/87/PDF/N1606487.pdf?OpenElement 
United Nations Children’s Fund Pacific (2015) Gender equity and social inclusion in the wash sector in Vanuatu. 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) & World Health Organization (WHO). (2019) Progress on household drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2017: Special 
focus on inequalities.   
United Nations Department Of Economic And Social Affairs (2005) Women And Water. 
UN-OHRLLS – Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries, and Small Island Developing States (2015). Small 
Island Developing States in Numbers: Climate Change Edition 2015. Report. Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2189SIDS-IN-
NUMBERS- CLIMATE-CHANGE-EDITION_2015.pdf 
Vanuatu Ministry Of Health (2007) Monitoring The Situation Of Children And Women: Vanuatu Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey [Pdf], Port Vila: Government Of The 
Republic Of Vanuatu <Www. Unicef.Org/Pacificislands/Mics_Reportsmla.Pdf> [Accessed 20 May 2017].  
Van Wijk-Sijbesma, C. (2001) The Best Of Two Worlds? Methodology For Participatory Assessment Of Community Water Services, The Hague, Netherlands: International 
Water And Sanitation Centre  
Vanuatu National Statistics Office (2013) Vanuatu Demographic and Health Survey 2013. Port Vila: Secretariat Of The Pacific Community (SPC). 
VNSO (2009). National Population and Housing Census. Gender Monograph: Women and Men in Vanuatu. See: 
https://mjcs.gov.vu/images/research_database/2009_Vanuatu_Census_Gender_Monograph.pdf 
Water And Sanitation Program (2010) Mainstreaming Gender In Water And Sanitation, Working Paper, Washington, Dc: World Bank.  
Watts, S. (2004) ‘Women, Water Management, And Health’, Emerging Infectious Diseases 10(11). 
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme For Water Supply And Sanitation (2010) Progress On Sanitation And Drinking Water 2010 Update.   
WHO (2012) GLAAS 2012 Report: The Challenge Of Extending And Sustaining Services.  
Willetts, J., Halcrow, G. And Arrard, N. (2009) How Do We Better Address Gender In Pacific Water And Sanitation Initiatives? Vanuatu Case Study. 
Winqvist, E. (ed.) (2020). Feminist Policies for Climate Justice. Stockholm: Concord. ]. 
World Bank (2019). Poverty and Equity Brief (Vanuatu).  
World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic: Republic of Kiribati, Republic of Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of Palau, Independent State 
of Samoa, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, Republic of Vanuatu (PIC8 – 8 Pacific Island Countries). Multi-country report.  
World Vision (2020). Water, Women and Disability Study. See: https://www.wvi.org/publications/development-guide/vanuatu/water-women-and-disability-study-report 
__________
