=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20142
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20142
creationDate: D:20220624201510+09'00'
modDate: D:20220712161544+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum IV 
Funding proposal package for FP190 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
24 June 2022 
Meeting of the Board 
17 - 20 July 2022 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional Agenda Item 9 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following fix parts: 
a)
A funding proposal summary titled “Climate Investor Two” submitted by the Nederlandse
Financierings-Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO);
b)
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c)
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d)
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “Climate Investor Two” by the Nederlandse 
Financierings-Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO) is being circulated on a limited 
distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of 
certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page b 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                           1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s)                 64 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure                                                                                      95 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           98 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s               107 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                   109

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Climate Investor Two 
Country(ies): 
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia, Côte 
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Kenya, 
Madagascar, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, 
Philippines, Sierra Leonne, South Africa, and Uganda 
Accredited Entity: 
FMO – Dutch Development Bank  
Date of first submission: 
2022/03/01 
Date of current submission  
2022/06/21 
Version number 
[V.05

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 1 OF 63  
 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and Programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 2 OF 63 
 
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
Programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/Programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Energy generation and access 
42,5% % 
42,5  % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries, and appliances 
5 % 
5 % 
☒  Forestry and land use 
2,5% % 
2,5% % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
23,75 % 
23,75% % 
☒   Infrastructure and built environment 
23,75 % 
23,75 %2 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
2,5% 
2,5%3 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered)A 
~44.65 million tons CO2e 
over the lifetime of the 20-
year Programme 4 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
 
~ 11.18 million 
people 
provided with 
more climate-
resilient water 
security and 
improved 
ecosystems 
over the 
lifetime of the 
20 – year 
Programme 
 
Indirect 
beneficiaries for 
ARA2, 3 and 4 
are currently 
estimated at 
zero.5 
0.42% 
Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance6)  
880,000,0007 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
145,000,000 USD

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 3 OF 63 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
Programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 ARA2 and ARA 3 are both selected as water infrastructure, which constitutes 47.5% of the expected results area, benefit 
both results area (an equal split was therefore chosen).  
3 Forestry and land use was selected as some of the targeted ecosystems will have a significant impact on sequestration 
and avoidance of GHG emissions The expected allocation to ecosystems (10%) is therefore split between ARA4 (50%) and 
MRA4 (50%) 
4 The total lifespan of the project/Programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be effective. This is different from the project/Programme implementation period. 
5 The AE and EE commit to working with the Secretariat on developing a KPI for indirect beneficiaries, where relevant. 
6 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF. 
7 The total target size of CI2 at Final Close is 1,100,000,000. 80% of this is estimated to be deployed within GCF NOL 
countries. Therefore, USD 880,000,000 represents total co-financing + GCF for the funded activity.The impact numbers are 
therefore calculated as 80% of the total CI2 impact.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 4 OF 63 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding8 
 
☒ Reimbursable grant     145,000,000 
☐  Grant 
Enter number 
 
☐  Loan                Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period9 
20 years (after the first 
close) 
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years (after the first close) 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
TBD 
 
A.14. ESS category  I-1 
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
Programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
Programme? 
Yes☐    No ☒     
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
1. Climate Fund Managers B.V (hereafter: ‘Climate Fund Managers’ or ‘CFM’ or ‘the 
Manager’) 
Korte Vijverberg 4, 2513 AB The Hague, Netherlands 
 
2. Stichting I Development Fund. (hereafter: ‘the Development Fund’ or ‘the DF2’) 
Korte Vijverberg 4, 2513 AB The Hague, Netherlands 
 
3. Coöperatief Construction Equity Fund 2 U.A. (hereafter: ‘the Construction Equity 
Fund’ or ‘the CEF2’) 
Korte Vijverberg 4, 2513 AB The Hague, Netherlands 
 
4. Financierings-Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V (hereafter: ‘the AE’ or 
‘FMO’) 
Anna van Saksenlaan 71 2593 HW The Hague, Netherlands

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 5 OF 63 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
The water cycle is one of the most important and often overlooked, parts of the global climate crisis. The 
feedback loop is complicated, as water can become a substantial carbon emitter when managed 
improperly, with methane emissions from untreated waste and wastewater accounting for 7% of global 
greenhouse gas emissions, while riverine, marine, and coastal ecosystems have the potential to act as a 
powerful ‘carbon sinks’ that sequester and avoid carbon emissions. The imbalance between the water 
cycle and the climate is threatening many livelihoods, as growing economies and populations are 
reducing freshwater availability, putting over USD 6 trillion of developing nations’ GDP at riski. The World 
Health Organization estimates that there already are 750 million people with no access to clean water, 
and 2.5 billion people lacking access to proper sanitation. Even the oceans, which cover 71% of the 
earth’s surface and hold 96.5% of all earth’s water, are under threat with unprecedented pollution rates, 
decreasing biodiversity, and rising sea levels. At current rates, by 2050 there will be a great greater 
volume of plastic in the oceans than all marine life combined.  
There’s a clear need for climate-resilient infrastructure to mitigate the risks described above. This 
necessity is even further amplified in developing countries. Inadequate water and sanitation infrastructure 
are estimated to be related to 80% of all illnesses in the developing worldii. In total, the World Bank 
estimates that by 2050, water shortages caused by climate change could reduce the GDP of developing 
countries in Asia by USD 4.4 trillion and developing countries in Africa by USD 1.6 trillioniii. Climate 
finance is responding; however, investment requirements far exceed the current level of financingiv. 
Climate Investor Two (“CI2”) has the mission to develop and construct infrastructure projects in 
developing countries in the water, sanitation, and ocean sectors that reduce the effects and 
consequences of climate change by ameliorating GHG emissions and by increasing resilience. To do so, 
CI2 will deploy an innovative whole-of-life financing approach utilizing two independent but operationally 
inter-linked funds. The two funds focus on different stages of the project lifecycle; the Development Fund 
(“DF2”) provides development loans to early-stage projects and their ecosystems, whereas the 
Construction Equity Fund (“CEF2”) provides equity during the construction phase. With a Green Climate 
Fund (“GCF”) participation of USD 145 million, the prospective fund sizes are estimated at a USD 100 
million DF2 and a USD 1 billion CEF210 (out which 80% would be eligible for GCF proceeds – a USD 80 
mln. DF2 and a USD 800 mln. CEF2). GCF participation would enable CI2 to scale significantly and 
provide scarce, highly additional donor capital to the structure which is required to crowd in further private 
sector participation. 
CI2 will realize climate adaptation benefits in the water sector by building infrastructure that sources, 
transports, and treats the water necessary for both municipal and industrial users to be shielded from the 
consequences of climate change. In the sanitation sector, CI2 will realize mitigation and adaptation 
benefits through waste and wastewater treatment, reducing methane emissions and contributing to water 
re-use. Finally, in the ocean sector, CI2 will invest in physical infrastructures, such as environmental 
services for ports or green shipping initiatives that ameliorate GHG emissions. Additionally, CI2 will 
pursue investments in nature-based solutions to protect, preserve and restore riverine, wetland, 
coastland, and marine ecosystems (hereafter: “ecosystems”). Ecosystems are an important part of 
nature’s defenses against climate change and an important part of people’s livelihoods. They are currently 
 
8 The USD 145 mln. will be subscribed to the Development Fund as a reimbursamble grant. USD 100 mln. will then be 
subscribed to the Construction Equity Fund as equity (same structure as FP099). However, do note that the GCF FAA will 
therefore be for a reimbursamble grant. 
9 Investment period of the CEF is 15 years  
10 The CEF includes three different tiers: (i) USD 200 mln. in junior-equity provided by Donors, (ii) USD 400 mln. of 
mezzanine provided by impact investors and DFIs and (iii) USD 400 mln. senior equity provided by commercial and 
institutional investors.

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 6 OF 63 
 
under stark threat facing ecological degradation at a rate ten to hundreds of times higher than the average 
over the past 10 million years, and with more than 50% of natural ecosystems at risk of being lostv. 
Through investments in nature-based solutions, CI2 targets cross-cutting climate change mitigation and 
adaptation outcomes that take advantage of the natural ability of restored ecosystems to sequester 
carbon and foster ecosystem-based adaptation. 
By developing and constructing additional water supply, treatment, distribution, and waste-water 
treatment facilities, as well as physical and nature-based oceans infrastructure, CI2 will have a 
quantifiable and measurable social and environmental impact in developing countries. CI2 aims to 
construct up to USD 2.96 billion in infrastructure projects in developing countries (core indicator 3). The 
projects financed, developed, and constructed by CI2 will provide ~11.18 million people with year-round 
access to reliable and safe water supply despite climate shocks and stresses and protected and 
strengthened ecosystems (core indicator 2). In addition, the coverage of ecosystems protected and 
strengthened in response to climate variability and change will be ~1.7 million Ha (supplementary 
indicator 4.1). With regards to mitigation benefits, CI2 will reduce or avoid ~4.96 million tCO2e per year 
for a total of ~44.65 million tCO2e over the implementation period (core indicator 1). CI2 will create 
additional opportunities for scalability and replicability beyond its projects, triggering the paradigm shift 
described in more detail in section D2. The specific climate vulnerabilities within the countries eligible for 
GCF funding through CI2 are described in Annex 7. 
 
FMO, the Dutch Development Bank, will act as Accredited Entity for this proposal and as an Executing 
Entity in respect of specific activities which will be elaborated in the FAA. Climate Fund Managers, a joint 
venture between FMO and Sanlam, will act as the Fund Manager of Climate Investor Two, and is the first 
Executing Entity. The DF2 and the CEF2, the two Funds within Climate Investor Two, will act as the 
second and third Executing Entities.

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 7 OF 63 
 
 
B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
The climate crisis 
Globally, the seven hottest years in recorded history have been the six years from 2014 to 2020vi, driven 
by increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Simultaneously atmospheric 
carbon reached a corresponding record high in 2020, driven primarily by anthropogenic use of fossil 
fuelsvii. As of 2020, global average temperatures are 1.14°C higher than pre-industrial temperatures, the 
effects of this warming are already being felt, often disproportionately in developing nationsviii. For every 
1°C increase in temperature, a developing nation can expect a decrease in the gross domestic product 
of 1.3%, whilst developed nations are far less affected by temperature variationsix. The increase in global 
temperatures, combined with the vulnerability of developing nations to these temperatures highlights the 
critical need for climate finance to be invested in projects and programs which both decrease greenhouse 
gas emissions and increase the resilience of host nations to adapt to these changes. To date, climate 
finance has primarily invested in climate mitigation projects, receiving an average of USD 537 billion in 
2017-18, compared to only USD 30 billion invested in climate adaptation projectsx.  
The importance of the water cycle in the climate crisis  
Water is an often-overlooked part of the global efforts to mitigate and respond to the climate crisis. Water 
is paramount to all life on earth, and any imbalance in its cycle or supply chain can quickly become 
detrimental to the global climate and the many livelihoods that depend upon it. Imbalances are created 
by a combination of growing economies and populations, changing weather patterns due to climate 
change, and a growing lack of resilient infrastructure. An example of how these imbalances have serious 
consequences for many is shown by the grim observation that more than 80% of illnesses in the 
developing world are linked to inadequate water and sanitation infrastructure.  
CI2 aims to develop and construct the infrastructure that’s required to future-proof parts of the water 
cycle. The investment thesis differentiates between three different sectors: (i) ‘the water sector’, (ii) ‘the 
sanitation sector, and the (iii) ‘the oceans and ecosystems sector’. The water sector is defined by projects 
that source, transport, and treat water to and from municipalities and sectors. The sanitation sector looks 
at treating waste and wastewater to avoid and sequester methane emissions while providing clean 
sanitation. The oceans and ecosystems sector aims to: (1) improve the ocean’s healthy by providing 
environmental services to ports and harbors and (2) protect, strengthen, and restore important 
ecosystems.  
The water sectors 
Water is fundamental to human life and economic development but is also the medium through which 
the effects of climate change will be felt on earth, with a warming climate causing increasingly variable 
and unpredictable rainfall. Changing climate patterns, together with growing economies and populations 
could reduce urban water availability in 2050 by two-thirds compared to 2015 levels, putting over USD 6 
trillion of developing nations’ GDP at riskxi. UNSESCO estimates that over 2 bn. people already live in 
areas subject to water stress. A study done by the WHO and UNICEF in 2017 shows that globally more 
than 785 mln people did not have access to at least basic water services and more than 884 mln. people 
do not have immediate access to safe water to drink. Women are often more negatively impacted as 
they are responsible for collecting the water within the household. These responsibilities reduce the 
likelihood of women receiving education. One of the objectives of CI2 in the water sector is to realize

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 8 OF 63 
 
 
climate change adaptation impacts in countries undergoing, or expected to undergo water stress, through 
building the infrastructure which sources, transports, and treats the water necessary for both municipal 
and industrial users to be resilient to the localized impacts of climate change. 
The sanitation sectors 
Sanitation, defined as the sustainable collection, treatment, and disposal of waste and wastewater, is a 
major source of greenhouse gasses, environmental damage, and health hazards in developing countries. 
In developing countries, over 80% of all wastewaters are discharged into water sources without any 
treatment, resulting in severe and worsening pathogen pollution in one-third of all rivers. Pathogen 
pollution, caused by for instance seepage from landfills into water aquifers, affects surface water 
resources which supply 60% of the world’s water consumption. As a result, water quality has significantly 
worsened in Asia, Africa, and Latin America since 1990xii. More than 3 billion people worldwide lack 
adequate facilities to safely wash their hands at home, with stark concentrations of them living in Sub-
Saharan Africa and Southern Asiaxiii. Similarly, over two billion people in developing countries have no 
access to solid waste collection, and with solid waste volumes projected to increase by 1 billion tons 
annually to reach 2.6 billion tons by 2050, serious environmental pollution will continue to occur without 
investment in sanitation (and waste) infrastructure. In improving groundwater quality and reducing 
pollution through its investments in sanitation infrastructure, CI2 increases the resilience of communities 
to climate change by improving the quality and availability of different water sources including rivers and 
groundwater. In turn, as in many cases livelihoods are dependent on these polluted water resources for 
sustenance or work, CI2 increases the resilience of communities to climate change through the 
preservation and restoration of existing and alternative sources. The lack of sanitation facilities is even 
more impactful for young women, as they are more likely to miss out on education due to insufficient 
sanitation at schoolsxiv. The primary objective of CI2 in the sanitation sector is to deliver significant climate 
change mitigation impacts, through building the infrastructure which sustainably treats and manages 
solid wastes and wastewater, including, wherever possible, using waste and wastewater as a source for 
bio-energy generation by constructing waste to energy projects. 
The oceans and their ecosystems  
The oceans provide half of the Earth’s oxygen, feed three billion people, and have absorbed an estimated 
93% of the added heat arising from human-driven changes to the atmospherexv. In economic terms, the 
annual economic value-added output derived from the oceans is estimated at USD 2.6 trillion, making 
the oceans the world’s seventh-largest economy, after the United Kingdomxvi, showcasing its importance 
for many livelihoods.  The climate crisis is imminent for the oceans, with climate change, causing warmer 
waters already being observed at depths of 1000m. Atmospheric warming is causing the melting of inland 
glaciers and ice, causing rising sea levels with significant impacts on shorelines (coastal erosion, 
saltwater intrusion, habitat destruction). The IPCC projects the global sea level to increase by 0.4 to 0.8 
meters by the end of the century, putting shorelines, but also local water and sanitation infrastructure 
projects, further at riskxvii. Oceans are under further serious pressure by uncontrolled pollution, often 
caused by the lack of infrastructure to properly treat (waste)water that’s being dumped in the world’s 
rivers and shores, and resource overexploitation.  
In addition to reducing ocean pollution through its investments in pollution control through the sanitation 
sector, CI2 also aims to invest in infrastructure for ports, ships, and harbors that contributes to improved 
ocean health (by reducing greenhouse gas emissions). In addition, it will pursue investments and 
ecosystem-based approaches to protect, preserve and/or restore riverine, coastland, marine, and 
wetland ecosystems. Financing ecosystems has traditionally been seen as net-cost projects by

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 9 OF 63 
 
 
governments and businesses because external costs associated with pollution of the environment and 
GHG emissions are often not accounted for correctly Through investments in ecosystem-based 
approaches, CI2 targets cross-cutting climate change mitigation outcomes through the natural ability of 
restored ecosystems to sequester carbon and adaptation outcomes, through ecosystem-based 
adaptation. CFM is a signatory to the United Nations Environment Program’s Sustainable Blue Economy 
Finance Initiative and the investments of CI2 in the oceans’ sector will be consistent with this framework.  
While climate change resilient water and sanitation infrastructure is a global challenge, CFM recognizes 
that Adaptation requires tailored and localized solutions to have a legacy that endures. As a result, CFM 
will develop and construct interventions that fit within the host’s country National Determined 
Contributions (“NDC’s”) and local context to maximize the impact they have on increasing resilience and 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Annex 7 of this Funding Proposal includes more detailed climate 
assessments about countries for which the AE has obtained, or is aiming to obtain, an NOL. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
Climate Investor Two aims to create a paradigm shift by making investments which result in the scaling 
and replication of water, sanitation, and oceans infrastructure that is aligned to the adaptation and 
mitigation needs of developing countries. If it succeeds in this, low-emission, climate-resilient sustainable 
development will be catalyzed in the programme’s host countries because successful climate 
investments in the target sectors, with a risk adjusted return, will be demonstrated to commercial

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 10 OF 63 
 
 
investors. In turn, this will foster significant contributions to blue and green climate finance in emerging 
markets, bringing countries closer to meeting their INDCs, and the global targets of the SDGs 
To derive the above, CI2’s theory of change relies on a number of reasonable assumptions.  First, it is 
assumed that there will be sufficient expertise provided by project co-developers and co-investors for 
project development and implementation. This is an assumption further underpinned by CFM’s inhouse 
technical, legal and ESG expertise, which is applied to projects accordingly in order to complement 
those specialties of co-developers or co-investors. Second, it is assumed that offtake and/or financial 
service contracts enable the financial sustainability of projects. This condition is considered and 
assessed prior to and during the development phase of a CI2 project. Third, it is assumed that targeted 
ecosystems are not further degraded by external variables. While this assumption is reliant on external 
factors, CFMs ESG and technical teams scrutinize different aspects of a potential project to evaluate 
and consider its long-term feasibility. Fourth, it is assumed that the projects will generate a material 
demonstration effect, leading to catalyzation of capital from external sources to similar projects. As in 
the case of assumption number one, this is supported by CFMs own in house expertise, which will 
drive knowledge transfer and skill sharing when working with local developers. Fifth, it is assumed that 
PPP regulation clearly defines a process for private sector participation. Sixth, it is assumed that 
wastewater quality standards are effectively enforced in the beneficiary countries. As the regulatory 
environments for water and sanitation in the emerging markets continue to improve in response to the 
threats posed by climate change, this assumption is likely to develop in CI2’s favor over the 20-year 
implementation period. Similarly, the increased need to address infrastructure deficits support 
assumption seven, that country regulatory frameworks permit and facilitate private sector participation. 
Eighth, it is assumed there will be a stable political environment in operating geographies. While this 
too is dependent on externalities, CFM’s regional offices employ the necessary expertise to take 
measures to minimize associated risks. This can include  project structuring approaches, political risk 
insurance, and also the support of the CI2 investor community which contains a number of influential 
regional financial institutes. Finally it is assumed that institutional structures support commercial 
investment in CI2’s target sectors. This assumption, like assumptions six and seven, is bolstered by the 
necessity for commercial investment to address the scale of the existing deficits within CI2’s target 
sectors. 
Furthermore, in order to generate a paradigm shift, CI2’s theory of change identifies and aims to 
address or mitigate the following risks and barriers. 
With respect to climate risk, the CI2 theory of change identifies that climate change, increasing 
population, and growing economies will reduce the availability of water if resilient infrastructure is not 
built. This will be exacerbated as untreated waste and wastewater will further increase GHG emissions 
while causing environmental pollution and health hazards. Simultaneously, the exploitation of the 
oceans will reduce biodiversity, increase environmental pollution, and negatively influence livelihoods 
for those most dependent on the oceans and their ecosystems. While this continues, the issue is 
compounded by increasing sea levels and water temperatures, which will jeopardize the health of the 
oceans and their ecosystems further. Finally, deterioration of the natural asset base of riverine, coastal, 
wetland, and marine ecosystems will reduce nature’s ability to act as a carbon sink, reduce their 
regulatory abilities, threaten food stock, reduce biodiversity, and negatively influence local 
communities’ livelihoods. When considered together, these five individual factors represent a network 
of related and interdependent drivers of climate risk. 
Given CI2’s planned interventions and the climate risks it intends to address, it is possible to identify a 
number of barriers and risks to the accomplishment of the paradigm shift it will trigger.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 11 OF 63 
 
 
Barrier 1, is that the potential long-term benefits of investing in target sector projects may not outweigh 
the high perceived risks. This can be linked to Risk 1, that low volumes of private investments are 
mobilized due to a lack of demonstrating the commercial viability of investing in target sector projects. 
The water, sanitation, and ocean sectors have primarily been within the public domain. Traditional 
private investors, therefore, perceive the sectors as high-risk. These (perceived) risks can be reduced 
by both (i) providing private sector investors with a blended finance solution that reduces their risks and 
(ii) by demonstrating the bankability of projects in the water, sanitation, and oceans sectors. A lack of 
long-term private sector buy-in will further jeopardize global temperatures and the resilience that 
developing countries have against it. 
Barrier 2, is the limited know-how and capacity for the development, construction, and management of 
target sector projects in host countries. 
There’s often limited capacity for the development and construction of complicated and technology-
abundant infrastructure projects. Adequately addressing this will require cooperation between all the 
developers and third parties. 
Barrier 3, is the Increasingly limited public sector budgets and commitment for target sector projects in 
host countries. 
The budgets that developing countries have available to invest in the water, sanitation, and ocean 
sectors are insufficient for the task at hand. Adequately addressing the lack of the water infrastructure 
that would be needed to stay within the 1.5-degree pathway while ensuring resilient water supply will 
require the mobilization of private sector finance. 
Climate Investor Two will aim to address these barriers and mitigate these risks by: (i) establishing and 
managing Climate Investor Two (including the Development – and the Construction Equity Fund) and 
(ii) development and implementation of mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries. 
The establishment and management of the two different funds, that together provide a whole-of-life 
solution to project financing, will help to showcase the commercial viability of water, sanitation, and 
oceans infrastructure projects by demonstrating the possibility of risk-adjusted returns to investors. This 
can help investors to see the long-term benefits of investing in such sectors and countries and mitigate 
some of the perceived high risks. Furthermore, it will showcase the effectiveness of blended finance 
vehicles such as Climate Investor Two in mobilizing (private sector) investors with different risk to 
return appetites. This will result in further mobilization of the private sector for the much-needed scaling 
and replication of water, sanitation, and ocean infrastructure projects in developing countries. 
Furthermore, showcasing the commercial viability of water, sanitation, and ocean infrastructure 
projects will contribute to providing know-how and capacity for the development and implementation of 
such projects in the host countries by providing a knowledge of transfer to local parties. CI2 aims to do 
this by including local partners and developers in both the development as well as the construction 
phases of its projects. Lastly, it will aim to include local financial intermediaries, including DAEs, to the 
refinancing of its projects. 
Climate Investor Two will develop mitigation and adaptation projects by providing development loans 
from its DF2 to do the required feasibility studies, ESIAs, gender assessments, stakeholder 
engagements, potential pilot projects and everything else that’s required before a project can go its 
construction phase. Once successfully developed, these projects graduate to the CEF2, which will 
implement (construct and operate) the projects by providing up to 100% of the equity (albeit it is

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 12 OF 63 
 
 
expected that most equity stakes would be below 75%). Successfully developing and implementing 
mitigation and adaptation projects for the water, sanitation, and ocean sectors in developing countries 
will: (i) improve wastewater treatment capacity, (ii) improve access to water, (iii) improve access to 
sanitation, (iv) improve renewable energy capacity and generation, (v) improve access to fuel efficient 
green ports and shipping, and (vi) restore and/or protect riverine, wetland, coastland, and marine 
ecosystems. Improving wastewater treatment and capacity, renewable energy capacity and generation, 
access to fuel-efficient green ports and shipping and restoration and/or protection of riverine wetland, 
coastal, and marine ecosystems will then result in ameliorating GHG emissions in the water sanitation 
and oceans sectors of the Programme’s host countries. Improved access to water will and restoration 
and/or protection of riverine, wetland, coastland and marine ecosystems will result in beneficiaries with 
more climate-resilient water security in the Programme’s host countries. As a co-benefit, improved 
access to sanitation, access to water and wastewater treatment capacity will result in improved health 
and sanitation by strengthening the water, sanitation, and oceans sectors in the Programme’s host 
countries. 
Altogether the above implies that if CI2’s investments result in the scaling and replication of water, 
sanitation, and oceans infrastructure projects aligned to the adaptation and mitigation needs of 
developing countries, then low-emission, climate-resilient sustainable development will be catalyzed in 
the programme’s host countries because successful climate investments in the target sectors, with an 
attractive risk-adjusted return, will be demonstrated to commercial investors fostering significant 
contributions to blue and green climate finance in emerging markets.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 13 OF 63 
 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results in areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosyst
ems and 
ecosyste
m 
services 
Outcome 1:   
Private sector 
finance 
mobilized for 
the scaling 
and 
replication of 
water, 
sanitation, 
and ocean 
infrastructure 
projects. 
X 
 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
Outcome 2:  
X 
 
x 
x

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 14 OF 63 
 
 
A,erliorated 
GHG 
emissiomsin 
the water, 
sanitation, 
and ocean 
sectors of the 
Programme’s 
host 
countries. 
Outcome 3: 
Beneficiaries
with more 
climate-
resilient water 
security by 
enhancement 
of the water, 
sanitation, 
and ocean 
sectors of the 
Programme 
host 
countries.  
 
 
 
 
 
X 
x 
X 
 
 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1:  
Improved 
health and 
sanitation by 
strengthening 
the water, 
sanitation, and 
oceans sectors 
of the 
Programme’s 
host countries. 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
.3. Project/Programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Introduction to Climate Investor Two 
Climate Investor Two is a blended finance facility mandated to develop and construct projects in the 
water, sanitation, and oceans sectors in developing countries to contribute to climate mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. CI2 duplicates the structure of the CI1 fund that launched in 2017 and received a 
GCF commitment in 2019 (FP099). CI2, like its predecessor CI1, was designed to address the lack of 
private financing options in developing countries by providing a whole-of-life project financing solution

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 15 OF 63 
 
 
that caters to investors with different risk to return profiles (ranging from Donors to commercial 
investors). CI2 constitutes two independent but interlinked funds, being two different legal entities, that 
operate at an arms’ length: the Development Fund and the Construction Equity Fund.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development Fund: The Development Fund (“DF” or “DF2”) has been set up to provide development 
loans, accompanied by development support/assistance provided by CFM and 3rd parties, to project 
companies. The purpose of this is to fast-track qualifying development projects to financial close by 
reducing the development timeline and improving the ultimate bankability of infrastructure projects. The 
DF2 will increase the implementation rate of projects – while demonstrating the commercial viability of 
industries that have traditionally been part of a public mandate. The DF2’s investor base mainly consists 
of Donors that want to get involved in the high-impact development phase. Once projects successfully 
complete their development phase by passing the assessments (including but not limited to gender 
assessment, ESIA’s, and stakeholder engagements) they ‘graduate’ to the CEF2. The CEF2 then 
reimburses the grant to the DF2 and the project moves on to the construction phase. CFM ensures the 
DF2 remains ‘revolvable’ by recycling its capital. As it is expected that not all projects successfully 
complete the development phase (CFM expects 2/3rd of the projects to graduate), the CEF2 reimburses 
the grant with a premium that compensates for losses made on unsuccessful projects. The premium paid 
remains subject to the default rate within the DF2 (but would equal 50% if the default rate does end up 
Equity 
Development 
funding 
Construction 
Equity Fund 
US$ 1 bn 
Development Fund 
US$ 100 mn 
Development and construction of infrastructure projects in the water, 
sanitation, and oceans sectors  
Tier 3 commercial investors US$ 400mn  
Tier 2 commercial investors US$ 400mn  
Tier 1 concessional capital US$ 200mn

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 16 OF 63 
 
 
at 1/3rd.)  This recycling character of the DF2 enables CI2 to complete multiple project cycles within its 
20-year implementation period. CFM expects CI2 to complete two full project cycles (see D.6). 
Construction Equity Fund: The CEF2 has been set up to provide to kick-start projects from their 
development phase, after the ‘proof of concept’, by providing up to 100 percent of the required equity 
(and repaying the development loan, including a premium, to replenish the DF2). The equity stake can 
include different sorts of equity (ordinary, preferred, shareholder loans) and will not always constitute a 
majority stake. It aims to further decrease the construction time and costs by: (i) reducing the complexity 
and costs at the project level through equity only funding strategy, (ii) reducing the construction timeline 
and thereby reducing the (costly) exposure period to investors, (iii) reducing costs by eliminating certain 
debt specific costs, (iv) recycling capital from completed projects to new project to reduce the time any 
funding ‘stands still’ (something that happens often in fundraising). The CEF2 uses a blended finance 
approach to mobilize three different tiers of investors: (i) Donors in the most junior tranche (representing 
20% of the CEF2), (ii) DFI’s, and commercial/impact investors in the mezzanine tranche (representing 
40% of the CEF2), and (iii) commercial and institutional investors in the senior tranche (representing 
40% of the CEF2). The CEF2, like the DF2, recycles its capital over the 20-year implementation period 
(with the final deployment cycle occurring by year 15). The 20:40:40 ratios between the three different 
tiers are set and will always be maintained. 
CFM, which will be responsible for the sourcing for and execution of, projects based within the 
following sectors:  
Water, including the following sub-sectors: 
• 
Bulk water supply and storage. 
• 
Ocean-water desalination. 
• 
Brackish groundwater desalination. 
• 
Groundwater abstraction.  
• 
Atmospheric water generation.  
• 
Water treatment facilities. 
• 
Water utilities and concessions. 
• 
Pumping.  
• 
Household water connections; and 
• 
Decentralized water treatment and distribution. 
 
Sanitation (waste and wastewater), including the following sub-sectors: 
• 
Wastewater collection and sewerage networks. 
• 
Wastewater treatment facilities, including wastewater to energy production and nutrient 
extraction and capture. 
• 
Wastewater recycling facilities. 
• 
Waste to value facilities, including waste sorting, recycling, composting, and waste to energy 
production; and 
• 
Methane capture and destruction for waste facilities. 
 
Oceans, including the following sub-sectors: 
• 
Sustainable management, protection, and/or restoration of wetland, riverine, coastal, and 
marine ecosystems. 
• 
Seaweed aquaculture. 
• 
Climate-resilient port infrastructure.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 17 OF 63 
 
 
• 
Sustainable solutions for ports, including onshore power, waste, and wastewater treatment. 
• 
Port infrastructure for off-shore wind farm assembly, load-out, and servicing. 
• 
De-carbonisation of port handling and rolling equipment; and 
• 
De-carbonisation of coastal and inland shipping. 
 
Other criteria   
• 
Not a part of the Exclusion List. 
• 
ESS Cat A, B, or C (or I-1, I-2, and I-3), with satisfactory safeguards as further detailed in the 
ESMS; and 
• 
Standard and customary compliance requirements to be fulfilled for each investee company. 
 
These projects will be assessed extensively on their contribution to either/or climate resilience and or 
GHG/reductions. Alongside that, the projects are screened on their commercial viability, ESG 
consideration, and governmental support. In addition, the partners (developers) are also screened on 
their ESG approach, reputation & local network, and track record. 
Other investment restrictions / criteria for CI2 include: 
Subject to the restrictions outlined below, the Fund will invest in the Mandate Countries listed below. 
The Fund will invest no more than:  
 
• 
15% of the Aggregate Fund Capital in any one Project Company / sub project, provided that 
such limit may be increased to a maximum of 20% of the Aggregate Fund Capital in a single 
Project Company / sub project  with the consent of the CI Two Funds Advisory Board, which 
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed;  
• 
25% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into one single country; 
• 
50% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into Africa; 
• 
50% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into Asia; 
• 
50% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into Latin America; 
• 
75% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into the water sector (as defined above); 
• 
75% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into the sanitation sector (as defined above), and; 
• 
25% of its Aggregate Fund Capital into the oceans sector (as defined above). 
Components, outcomes, and underlying (sub)activities Climate Investor Two. 
Component 1: Establishment and management of Climate Investor Two 
The first component aims at establishing and raising the funding for the two Funds that will form the 
basis for Climate Investor Two. Thereafter, it aims at managing the three legal entities (CFM, the 
‘Stichting’ CI2 Development Fund (or: DF2), and the CI2 Coöperatief Construction Equity Fund (or: 
CEF2)’. This includes putting in place and maintaining, all the legal and governance arrangements (as 
described in B.4).  
Activity 1.1: Fundraising, establishment, and management of the Development Fund. 
CFM will continue to raise Donor funding, in the form of reimbursable grants for the DF2. CFM aims to 
raise an amount of USD 100mln (USD 80 mln. for countries eligible for this proposal). It will do this by 
pro-actively reaching out to Donors, impact investors, and multilateral organizations that have a 
mandate that fits the Development Fund. Once the targeted amount has been reached, and the final

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 18 OF 63 
 
 
close achieved, CFM will oversee and manage all affairs of the legal entity for the entire 
implementation period of the DF2.   
Activity 1.2: Fundraising, establishment, and management of the Construction Equity Fund 
CFM will continue to raise funding for the three different tiers of the Construction Equity Fund (or: 
CEF2) up to the targeted amount of USD 1 bln (USD 800 mln. for countries eligible for this proposal). 
This will include funding from commercial investors (pension funds, asset managers, and other 
institutional investors, as well as impact-oriented investors (i.e. DFIs) and Donors (such as the 
European Commission, the Dutch government, and the GCF). The funding will be raised within the pre-
determined ratio of 20:40:40 between the three different tiers. Once the targeted amount has been 
reached, and the final close achieved, CFM will oversee and manage all the affairs of the legal entity 
for the entire implementation period of the CEF2.   
Outcome 1: Private sector finance mobilized for the scaling and replication of water, sanitation, and 
ocean infrastructure projects. 
By successfully setting up the two different funds and raising USD 100 mln. Of funding for the DF2 (out 
of which USD 80 mln. is destined for GCF eligible countries) and USD 1 bln. For the CEF2 (out of which 
USD 800 mln. is destined for GCF eligible countries), the Programme will successfully engage the private 
sector in climate change adaptation and mitigation projects. It does this in three different manners: (i) it 
mobilizes private financing directly into CI2 by providing a blended finance solution that makes the return 
to risk profile acceptable for private investors and (ii) it demonstrates the potential that blended finance 
and whole-of-life all equity financing has for mobilizing private capital and project finance and (iii) it 
demonstrates the commercial viability/bankability of climate mitigation and adaptation infrastructure 
projects (linked to Activity 2.1 and Outcome 2, 3 and 4). 
Component 2: Development and implementation of mitigation and adaptation projects for the water, 
sanitation, and oceans sectors in developing countries  
Activity 2.1:  Development of mitigation and adaptation projects for the water, sanitation, and ocean 
sectors in developing countries. 
Activity 2.1.1: Identifying potential investment opportunities and initial screening by CFM IC: 
The CFM deal teams will do the initial project sourcing. Once an opportunity has been found, and 
enough data have been gathered, an initial approval and guidance are requested by presenting the 
case to CFM’s internal IC (“CFM IC”). The IC then decides whether: (i) the project fits within the 
investment mandate and (ii) whether additional information, restructuring, or due diligence is required 
before presenting it to the external IC. The CFM IC should be seen as a first ‘quality control’. 
Activity 2.1.2: (Re)structuring after CFM IC and initial due diligence 
The CFM IC will provide the deal team with tasks to be completed before the actual Climate Investor 
Two Development Fund Investment Committee (DF2 IC). After that, the deal team will work to get all 
the information required to present the impact and business case of the project to the DF2 IC.  
 
During this phase, the deal teams will gather all the information required to present the impact and 
business case towards the DF2 IC. The deal team will do initial due diligence on the project and the 
third party (co)-developers and sponsors.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 19 OF 63 
 
 
Activity 2.1.3: Project approval by DF2 IC: 
The deal team presents the case to the DF2 IC after doing the initial due diligence and completing the 
data information requested by the CFM IC. The DF2 IC will judge proposals, among other indicators, 
on the adaptation and mitigation impact they provide for the host countries. For adaptation, the deal 
teams will provide them with historic climate trends (trends (observed changes or variability in changes 
in the projects area), climate change projections in the area, and climate impact (an explanation on 
how these changes will hurt communities in the project area). Adaptation benefits will be further 
addressed by explaining how the project company’s products, services, or technology will help the 
community adapt to these climate impacts, an explanation of how the proposed intervention will not 
lead to maladaptation, an explanation of the Rio Marker score for climate adaptation (to be achieved by 
the company) and an overview of the impact indicators that will be monitored to validate the above 
(including an identification of the baseline and mid-term (year 10) and final (year 20) projections). To 
assess mitigation benefits, CFM deal teams will explain how the project companies’ products, services, 
or technologies will help reduce, avoid, or sequester GHG emissions, an explanation of the Rio Marker 
Score that’s to be achieved by the project company and a description of the GHG gas accounting 
methodology to be used to validate the climate mitigation impact realized by the company’s services, 
products, or technologies (including the baseline, mid-term, and final projections).   
 
During the first DF2 IC, the DF2 IC will also approve terms of reference for an independent detailed 
adaptation and/or mitigation assessment based on the criteria set out above. This detailed independent 
assessment will be carried out as part of the more detailed due diligence that’s conducted during the 
development phase (Activity 2.1.4.) put preceding the approval of the Construction Equity Fund 2 
Investment Committee (CEF2 IC) (Activity 2.2.1). This independent assessment will then form part of 
the materials that the CEF2 IC receives and bases its approval on. 
It is only after approval by the DF2 IC (including, for the avoidance of doubt, the satisfactory initial 
climate screening conducted by CFM) that a proposed investment would receive funding from the DF2 
IC to move into the next stage of detailed due diligence and project development.  GCF proceeds will 
only be used for projects in countries for which an NOL has been obtained and to projects which 
contribute to the envisioned climate impact. Likewise, the proceeds from divestments will run through 
the CEF2’s waterfall on per project basis, ensuring that the GCF proceeds are not comingled with 
those from projects in countries for which no NOL has been obtained.  
Activity 2.1.4: Project development and extensive due diligence (including but not limited to stakeholder 
engagement, gender assessment, and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.) 
The actual development phase starts after the approval of the DF2 IC. During this phase, CFM will 
conduct, supported by independent parties, extensive due diligence. This due diligence will include, but 
won’t be limited to, stakeholder engagements, gender assessments, and Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIA). The ESIA will then judge whether the projects have any resettlement risk 
(which is not expected to happen often) after which a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) would be 
drafted. It’s during this phase that all legal and regulatory permits are obtained and that the contractors 
are selected. This phase needs to be completed, on all important aspects, before the construction 
phase can start.  
Activity 2.2:  Implementation (construction and operation) of mitigation and adaptation projects for water, 
sanitation, and ocean sectors in developing countries.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 20 OF 63 
 
 
Activity 2.2.1: Project approval by CEF2 IC 
Upon successful completion of the development case, the deal team re-proposes the project to the 
CEF2 IC. This proposal will include all the findings off the due diligence and evaluations done in 
Activity 2.1.4. It is only after approval of the CEF2 IC (including, for the avoidance of doubt, the 
satisfactory independent screening conducted by a third party and satisfactory extensive due diligence) 
that a proposed investment would receive funding from the CEF2 IC. GCF proceeds will only be used 
for projects in countries for which an NOL has been obtained and to projects which contribute to the 
envisioned climate impact. Likewise, the proceeds from divestments will run through the CEF2’s 
waterfall on per project basis, ensuring that the GCF proceeds are not comingled with those from 
projects in countries for which no NOL has been obtained.  
Activity 2.2.2: Project construction: 
The CEF2 will then repay the development loan from the DF2 (including a premium to ensure full 
revolvability of the DF2) and commit equity to start a project’s construction phase after the successful 
approval of the CEF2 IC. During the construction phase, CFM will actively manage and oversee the 
project, in example by nominating directors or representatives on the boards or sub-committee of each 
investee company, to ensure optimal efficiency, (ESG) compliance, and maximum value creation.   
Activity 2.2.3: Project refinancing exit and exit: 
After successful construction, the project moves to the operational phase. Once a project is stable in 
terms of operations, impact, and cash flows, a process will commence procuring debt at the project 
level and, a few years later, the project’s exit will be arranged following approval from the CEF2 IC 
These two events will recapitalize CEF2 and enable it to commit funding to further projects. 
Outcome 2: Ameliorated GHG emissions in the water, sanitation, and ocean sectors of the Programme’s 
host countries (outputs 2, 5, 6, and 7).  
Output 2: The Programme will avoid up to ~16.7 million tCO2e in emissions by developing and 
constructing waste and wastewater treatment facilities,   
Output 5: The Programme will develop and construct waste-to-energy projects that will produce ~314.3 
GWh/yr in renewable energy (with a power capacity installed of (~111.5MW) providing up to ~ 314.3 
thousand people with power. In addition, the Programme will develop and construct wastewater 
treatment, both municipal and industrial, that will produce 1,510.3 GWh/yr (with a power capacity 
installed of 147.0MW) contributing to the reduction of ~592.1 thousand tCO2e annually and provide 
~1,5 million people with power.  
Output 6: The Programme will avoid up to ~955.8 thousand tCO2e in emissions annually by developing 
and constructing energy-efficient infrastructure for green ports and/or shipping. Examples would be 
climate-resilient port infrastructure, onshore power, waste and wastewater treatment in ports, port 
infrastructure for off-shore wind farm assembly, load out and servicing, and de-carbonization of coastal 
and inland shipping.  
Output 7: The Programme will restore and/or protect ~1.8 million hectares of riverine, marine, wetland, 
and coastal ecosystems, contributing up to ~2.2 million tCO2e emissions avoided or sequestered 
annually.  Furthermore, an estimate of ~2400 beneficiaries will benefit from restored and/or improved 
ecosystems.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 21 OF 63 
 
 
In total, the Programme is expected to reduce up to ~ 44.65 million tCO2e of emissions over its 
lifetime, with an annual impact of ~ 4.96 million tCO2e in year 20.  
The outcome will also contribute to outcome 1, further private sector involvement, by expanding the 
track record of private sector investments in a previously primarily public sector. Successful 
development and construction of waste-to-energy projects and protection and/or restoration of 
ecosystems will further enable private sector investments by reducing the (perceived) risks investors 
associate with the sector. 
Outcome 3:  Beneficiaries with climate-resilient water security by enhancement of the water, sanitation, 
and ocean sectors in host countries (outputs 3, 4 and 7).  
Output 3: The Programme will provide up to ~ 11.18 million people with access to climate-resilient 
water infrastructure by developing and constructing infrastructure for bulk water supply and storage, 
ocean-water desalination, brackish groundwater desalination, groundwater abstractions, atmospheric 
water generation, water treatment facilities, water utilities, and concessions, pumping household water 
connections and decentralized water treatment.  
Output 4: The Programme will provide up to ~1.97 million people with climate-resilient sanitation by 
developing and constructing infrastructure to collect wastewater, building sewerage networks, and 
treating and recycling waste.  
Output 7: The Programme will improve the livelihoods of communities by constructing green 
infrastructure investments that restore and/or protect marine, riverine, coastal, or wetland ecosystems. 
Examples would be wetland restoration to improve water retention, flood control, and restoration of 
mangrove forests to provide coastal protection. The combined efforts will restore and/or strengthen up 
to ~1.8 million hectares of vulnerable ecosystems 
Co-benefit 1: The Programme will contribute to health and sanitation. (output 2, 3, and 4) 
Combined, outcomes 1, 2, and 3 are aimed at contributing to CI2’s goal statement: 
If Climate Investor 2 investments result in the scaling and replication of water, sanitation, and oceans 
infrastructure projects aligned to the adaptation and mitigation needs of developing countries, then low-
emission, climate-resilient sustainable development will be catalyzed in the programme’s host 
countries because successful climate investments in the target sectors, with an attractive risk-adjusted 
return, will be demonstrated to commercial investors fostering significant contributions to blue and green 
climate finance in emerging markets.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Flow of funds 
Fund flows for investments 
• 
The GCF and FMO will contractually agree that the GCF will commit USD 145 mln. In 
reimbursable grants, from which USD 100 mln. Is subscribed to a junior equity position (being 
the Tier 1 tranche of the CEF2), on terms to be agreed in the Funding Activity Agreement. For 
the avoidance of doubt, all the GCF funds for the purpose of CI2 will be kept on a separate 
ledger on FMO’s GCF account. 
• 
FMO will then make a USD 145 mln capital commitment. In reimbursable grants to the 
Development Fund. Subsequently, the Development Fund will make a USD 100 mln capital

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 22 OF 63 
 
 
commitment to the Tier 1 tranche of the CEF2 (which is its most junior capital tranche). The 
remaining USD 45 mln. Will remain within the DF2. 
• 
FMO will request the GCF funds on a bi-(annual) basis based on CFM’s estimates on the 
liquidity needs for the pipeline and portfolio. 
• 
Based on estimates for capital requirements for approved DF2 or CEF2 investments as well as 
for costs and fees, the Manager will issue drawdowns to FMO. 
• 
Upon receipt and after analyzing the compliance to its internal policies and procedures, FMO 
will remit the funds to the DF2 from its fiduciary GCF account. The DF2 can then remit the funds 
to the Construction Equity Fund, to the extent required.  
Fund flows for distribution  
• 
Upon partial or full divestment of a portfolio investment, a refinancing of equity by debt, or any 
other interim income received by the CCEF2, the funds will be remitted to the DF2 as per the 
distribution waterfall. At the end of the DF2 fund term and upon its dissolution, to the extent that 
funding remains, the DF2 will distribute funding received in accordance with the applicable law 
for Dutch trusts (“Stichting”) to its contributors including to FMO in respect of any GCF funding 
(see section B.6 for more details).  
Legal arrangements  
FMO, in its capacity as Accredited Entity, will ensure that the following agreements are entered into for 
the implementation of the Funded Activity (each a “Subsidiary Agreement” and together the “Subsidiary 
Agreements”: 
• 
A side letter between the Accredited Entity, the Manager, CEF and DF, respectively, to pass 
down to the DF and CEF all relevant obligations in accordance with the AMA and FAA (a “Side 
Letter”); the Side Letter shall also set out the mechanism pursuant to which the Manager shall 
seek the Accredited Entity’s consent before presenting relevant matters (which may require 
GCF’s approval) for approval to the relevant DF and CEF governing and decision-making 
bodies, and the Accredited Entity shall not provide such consent to the Manager unless it has 
sought the prior written approval of the GCF;  
• 
The donors’ agreement between the Manager, DF and donors to the DF, which agreement 
governs the rights and obligations of donors, as well as the governance and commercial 
arrangements between the Manager and DF (“Donors’ Agreement”);  
• 
For the flow of the GCF Proceeds from FMO to the DF a subscription agreement entered into 
by FMO in relation to the DF, whereby FMO commits and the Manager accepts the relevant 
portion of the GCF Proceeds (“DF Subscription Agreement”);  
FMO, in its capacity as Accredited Entity of the Fund, will ensure that the following agreements are 
entered into for the implementation of the Funded Activity (each a “Key Fund Document” and together 
with the Subsidiary Agreements, the “Key Fund Documents”): 
• 
Separate management agreements between CFM and the DF and CEF respectively pursuant 
to which CFM will agree to act as the manager of the DF and CEF (each a “Management 
Agreement”);    
• 
The Members’ Agreement, between the Manager, CEF, investors to the CEF, which governs 
the rights and obligations of investors, as well as the governance and commercial arrangements 
between the Manager and CEF (“Members’ Agreement”);

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 23 OF 63 
 
 
• 
For the flow of the GCF Proceeds from the DF to Tier 1 of CEF a subscription agreement 
entered into by the DF in relation to the CEF, whereby the DF commits and CFM (as Manager 
of CEF) accepts the relevant portion of the GCF Proceeds (“CEF Subscription Agreement”);   
• 
A set of Articles of Association in respect of each of the DF and the CEF governing corporate 
legal matters (e.g. membership, representation, board composition, voluntary liquidation etc.) 
(“DF Articles of Association” and “CEF Articles of Association”, respectively). 
The terms of such Subsidiary agreements shall be consistent with the AMA and the Term Sheet (Annex 
14), in particular in respect to the provisions set out in Schedules 1 & 2 to the term sheet.   
Organizational structure & team experience  
CFM is organized along regional and functional lines which combines; (i) a strong investment and 
operational focus with industry and local expertise and (ii) solid middle and back-office skills in 
operations, finance, and strategy (iii) sound risk management, coordinated legal / tax structuring, and 
robust compliance functionalities.  
CFM will operate from its offices in the Hague, the Netherlands (head office), Cape Town, Singapore, 
and Bogota (regional offices) as follows: 
Head office  
CFM’s head office is located in The Hague, Netherlands, and was established in 2015. At present the 
office has 24 full-time employees, with Andrew Johnstone, acting as CEO. The responsibilities of the 
Hague Office include (i) strategy & central oversight, (ii) tax & valuations, (iii) fund management, (iv) 
investor relations & capital raising, and (v) central environmental, social & governance management. 
Regional Offices 
CFM’s regional offices are led by regional heads with strong networks and specific skills and experience 
in discrete geographies and sectors, thereby providing the regional teams with regional intelligence. 
Three regional offices have been established, in South Africa, Colombia, and Singapore.  
 
CFM’s regional office for Africa is located in Cape Town, South Africa. Established in 2017 the office has 
19 full-time employees, with Sebastian Surie, Head of African Investments, acting as office head. The 
responsibilities of the Cape Town office include all investment activity in Africa, CFM’s risk, compliance, 
and finance functions, as led by the CFO, and CFM’s operations & human resources led by Ms. Caron 
Aitken.  
 
CFM’s regional office for Asia is located in Singapore, where it operates as Climate Fund Advisers (CFA). 
Established in 2017 the office has 14 full-time employees, with Nathan Schmidt, Head of Asian 
Investments, acting as office head. The Singapore office is responsible for all CFM’s investment activity 
in Asia.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 24 OF 63 
 
 
CFM’s regional office for the LAC region was established towards the end of 2021 and is finalizing 
arrangements for its office in Bogota, Colombia. The team consists of 4 full-time employees and is led 
by Juan Paez, Head of Latin American Investments. The LAC office is responsible for all investment 
activity in the Latin American and Caribbean region.  
 
Governance Arrangements 
The Governance structure of CI2 has been designed to ensure 
appropriate supervision and investor representation to the 
Coöperatief CI2 Construction Equity Fund U.A. (“CEF2”) and 
Stitching CI2 Development Fund (“DF2”), to guarantee 
adequate expertise is procured into each forum, as well as to 
create alignment of interest and control. The full governance 
structure of CFM and its managed vehicles can be seen below. 
It should be noted that any seat the GCF would acquire as per 
their rights will be filled by a representative of the AE at the 
request of the GCF. 
 
 
 
Roles and responsibilities of AE and EE 
Accredited Entity 
The AE for the Programme is: 
• 
FMO 
FMO, in its role of AE, will oversee the Programme implementation and will ensure that relevant GCF 
policies are passed down to the Fund level and portfolio company-level. Specifically, it will dedicate full-
time team members to monitor EE’s compliance with FAA and AMA obligations, including retro-active 
policy compliance to the GCF’s policies, to analyze quarterly and annual performance reports, to 
disburse GCF (equity) proceeds, and represent the GCF on CI2’s Donors/Investors Meetings and CI2’s 
Advisory Board. It will assess achievement of Programme, targeted outcomes, and results as per the 
log-frame, while commissioning independent interim and final evaluation reports as per GCF’s 
requirements.  
Executing Entities 
The EEs for the programma are as follows: 
• 
Climate Fund Managers B.V. (CFM) 
• 
The Stichting CI2 Development Fund (DF2) 
• 
The Coöperatief CI2 Construction Equity Fund U.A (CEF2) 
• 
Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V (FMO) 
Roles and responsibilities of EEs

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 25 OF 63 
 
 
• 
Climate Fund Managers is the investment manager of Climate Investor Two and is 
responsible for investing the fund corpus and also managing the day-to-day activities of the 
Fund. The detailed role and responsibilities have been enumerated in the Fund documents. 
• 
Stichting Development Fund is a ‘foundation’ set up in the Netherlands with the sole purpose 
of financing the development stage of projects with grant funding and making the Tier 1 
Commitment of the Tier 1 tranche of the CEF2. 
• 
The CEF2 is a cooperative established in the Netherlands designed to finance and expedite 
the construction phase of a project its Lifecycle with equity financing.  
• 
FMO is the Accredited Entity for the Funding Proposal and will mainly focus on monitoring the 
EE’s (fiduciary) compliance on the Funded Activity, the FAA and the AMA, as well as 
discharging specific activities as an Executing Entity as will be further elaborated in the FAA.   
Conflict of interest: 
The AE, and the EE, are aware of potential conflicts of interest between FMO’s investments in CFM 
and the T2. The AE therefore always tests such constructs with its conflict-of-interest sounding board 
that sits in the compliance department. The AE, which has done many of such sub-delegation on 
behalf of Donors (e.g. the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the European Commission, and the Green 
Climate Fund), has, therefore, set up Chinese walls, where appropriate, between the departments that 
do the investments from its balance sheet (in this case the Private Equity department) and the 
department that manages the investment on behalf of the Donor (the “Partnerships for Impact” 
department). The AE commits to delegating any positions within the governance of CI2, belonging to 
the GCF investments, to independent individuals in FMO. Furthermore, the AE will appoint a separate 
deal team to negotiate the FAA and other potentially sensitive documents.  
Experience of the two parties: 
FMO is the Dutch development bank and has invested in the private sector in developing countries and 
developing markets for more than 50 years. FMO invests in sectors with the highest long-term impact: 
financial institutions, energy, agribusiness, and infrastructure. FMO is a financial institution owned 51% 
by the Dutch State, 42% by Dutch banks, and 7% by employers’ associations, trade unions, and 
individual investors. 
With an investment portfolio of ca. EUR 10 billion spanning over 85 countries, FMO is one of the larger 
bilateral private sector development banks in the world. FMO’s strategic goal is to be the preferred 
partner to invest in local prosperity. 
FMO currently has two projects under implementation with the Green Climate Fund: FP099 (or Climate 
Investor One) and FP164 (or: the Green Growth Equity Fund). Alongside GCF funding, FMO also 
manages funding on behalf of the UK government (BEIS), USAID, the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
and the European Commission. FMO has been accredited with the Green Climate Fund since 2016, 
has signed its AMA in 2018, and its first FAA in 2019.  
Climate Fund Managers is a B.V. incorporated under the laws of The Netherlands (hereafter “Climate 
Fund Managers” or “CFM”), incorporated on 30 October 2015, headquartered in the Hague, the 
Netherlands. CFM is a joint venture between the Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij voor 
Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (“FMO”) and Sanlam InfraWorks. Climate Fund Managers has successfully 
set up Climate Investor One (or: FP099) with a final close of nearly USD 1 bln. In 2019. Climate Investor

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 26 OF 63 
 
 
One focuses on renewable energy projects in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. CI1, in which the GCF is 
also invested, currently has over USD 400 mln. In commitments invested in over 7 different projects. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Worldwide 780 million people still do not have access to an improved water source. Demand shortages 
are more pronounced in Africa and Asia. Furthermore, in developing countries around 3.2 million children 
still die each year because of unsafe drinking water and poor sanitation. Waste is the fourth largest sector 
of all greenhouse gas emissions. Water and sanitation infrastructure are arguably the most important 
target sectors for climate adaptation interventions. However, adaptation finance faces a severe funding 
gap. The Economist estimates that USD 140bn to USD 300bn in climate adaptation finance is needed 
annually by 2030xxiii. It is therefore of great importance to design water and sanitation infrastructure in a 
way that it i’s: (i) robust in the face of climate-driven shocks – thereby delivering climate adaptation 
benefits and (ii) reducing GHG emissions by creating (bio)energy from the waste and wastewater that 
they treat.   
These projects, whether designed by the public or the private sector, need to be implemented in a way 
that delivers on the additional climate requirements while keeping the costs of the services affordable to 
all those in society. This means that there’s a need for both: (i) mobilizing the private sector to bridge the 
finance gap and (ii) making the services accessible and affordable for all.   
 
CI2 has been designed to do the above by blending concessional funding with private funding in two 
structured funds. The CEF2 structure mobilizes private finance by reducing the risk with a junior-equity 
tranche (the T1) and reduces construction time of the required infrastructure by providing a life-cycle 
funding approach in conjunction with the DF2. The CEF2 has been modeled in a way that accommodates 
multiple investors’ risk-return preferences while minimizing concessionality as much as possible. The 
three tranches are structured as follows:  
 
• 
Tier 1 (T1) makes up [20%] of CEF2 and is comprised of junior equity.  
• 
Tier 2 (T2) makes up [40%] of CEF2 and is comprised of ordinary equity.  
• 
Tier 3 (T3) makes up [40%] of CEF2 and is comprised of senior equity.   
 
The GCF funding will play a key role in enabling CI2 by providing a significant investment into Tier 1 for 
which funding is the scarcest. The GCF investment will therefore immediately mobilize the private sector 
in T2 and T3 by taking away some of the risks withholding commercial investors.). T1 ameliorates the 
risk associated with investing in climate-related infrastructure in developing countries to catalyze 
commercial investors. An important part of CI2’s investment mandate is LCY denominated revenues. 
LCY risk is expected to be more profound in a larger part of CI2’s portfolio than it was for CI1. Commercial 
investors are not keen on taking LCY risks in developing countries. The T1 tranche is therefore important 
to absorb and buffer any (perceptions) of LCY risks to mobilize commercial investors into T2.   
  
In addition to the investments made by the GCF funding in water and sanitation infrastructure, there is 
also an urgent need for innovative financing solutions for the emerging sector of ecosystem-based 
approaches, or green infrastructure. In this regard, the GCF funding to the DF2 will enable CI2 to develop 
and finance ecosystem projects for which there is currently a limited track record, and practically no 
interest of the private sector, creating a demonstration effect that could open this sector for future private 
sector investment.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 27 OF 63 
 
 
A GCF commitment to CI2 would unlock 31=4x total investment at the project level (see Investment 
Leverage Ratio below) for climate change adaptation and mitigation. CFM is applying for a total GCF 
contribution to CI2 of USD 145mn. An investment of this size provides GCF the opportunity to become 
the largest donor in the CI2 structure, potentially generating the highest additionality (and impact) of the 
CI2’s members.  Through the CI2 intervention, CFM has identified the following channels of GCF 
additionality through a CI2 intervention:  
 
• 
Investment by GCF will support CI2’s investment focus to a subset of countries, for which NOLs 
have been obtained, that have a greater need for intervention that fits within their NDCs  
  
• 
A GCF intervention in the DF2 will catalyze a facility that offers scarce early-stage funding for 
project development including high-impact ecosystem restoration projects co-located to 
commercial projects. Access to development capital is one of the main unique selling points of 
CI2. By providing scale to the DF2 facility, GCF will enable CI2 to facilitate the development of a 
greater number of projects, all of which offer CEF2 a preferential financing opportunity.   
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Sustainability of the paradigm shift   
Through organic development of developing countries’ financial markets and with a CI2 demonstration 
effect it is expected that other developers and equity funds will adopt a similar approach. Under these 
presuppositions, they are expected to fund a greater share of construction costs through an all-equity 
strategy where this is preferred over a traditional project finance approach. This may reduce costs across 
the market, both through lower equity risk premiums and by introducing lower-cost debt for projects. GCF 
funding would be instrumental to this market development through its catalytic impact in CI2 and the 
project companies in which CI2 invests.  
 
The projects and companies financed through CI2 will focus on commercially viable assets with 
inherently long-lived technology and characteristics, in the range of 20-25 years. The commercial focus 
of CI2’s investments ensures a long-term interest by owners and investors in the projects. In contrast to 
grant financed projects, satisfactory financial returns will only be realized if the projects continue to 
provide strong operational performance and goods and services that are valued by their users. By 
contrast, failure to ensure this – for example through poor maintenance – will have contractual or legal 
ramifications.  
 
The sustainability of the paradigm shift will be further imprinted by involving local banks, potentially 
including Direct Access Entities (“DAE’s), in the re-financing of the Programme’s sub-projects after they 
have become operational. 
  
Figure 2 – CI2 channels of long-term sustainability

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 28 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
  
Measurement and verification of the effectiveness of the projects in which CFM invests will be conducted 
in accordance with industry-standard protocols including the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Protocol, BS: 
EN 16247 (International Standard for Energy Auditing) and the International Performance Measurement 
and Verification Protocol (IMPVP). The performance will be reported to its various stakeholders, including 
investors, donors, the CI2 investment committees, and CFM’s shareholders. CFM requires all projects 
in receipt of Construction Equity Fund financing to report in accordance with defined key performance 
indicators. In addition, the performance measurement framework indicators aforementioned will be 
incorporated into fund-level and project-level monitoring and evaluation activities that will be managed 
by CFM.

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 29 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
 145 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
 
 
 
Enter% 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
145 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
735 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrume
nt 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Tier 3 investors 
Equity 
 
320 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
 
senior 
 
Tier 2 investors 
Equity 
 
320 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter 
senior 
 
Tier 1 investors 
(investments from 
Donors routed 
through and 
managed by FMO / 
the Accredited 
Entity) 
Equity 
 
60 
million USD 
($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
 
junior 
 
The Development 
Fund (investments 
from Donors routed 
through and 
managed by FMO / 
the Accredited 
Entity) 
Reimb
ursabl
e 
Grants 
 
35 
million USD 
($) 
Enter years 
Enter years 
 
junior 
 
©)  Total 
finance 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
880 
million USD ($)

=== PAGE 33 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 30 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
pages) 
The below refers to the entire Climate Investor Two program. The GCF Funding 
Proposal however only partakes in 80% and ‘GCF’s CI2’ will therefore add up to 
USD 800 mln. for the CEF2 and USD 80 mln. for the DF2. 
CFM aims to raise up to 1,100 mln in funding for CI2. This consists of USD 100 
mln. in reimbursable grants for the DF2 and USD 1,000 mln. in funding for the 
CEF2. 
CI2, being the DF2 and the CEF2, had its first close, for a total of USD 675 mln, in 
November 202111. This included investments from the European Commission, the 
Dutch Fund for Climate and Development (a climate adaptation fund from the 
Dutch government that’s managed by FMO on behalf of CFM, WNF and SNV), 
IMAS Foundation, BNG bank, Sanlam, FMO, Nordic Development Fund, and KLP. 
FMO, the AE for this proposal, has invested USD 40 mln. directly into the T2. The 
DFCD and the European Commission investments, which have both invested in 
the DF2 and the T1, are also managed by FMO on behalf of either Donor. For the 
avoidance of doubt, all onboarded investors have successfully passed the AE’s 
and EE’s KYC policies.  
As explained in sections B.1, B.3, and B.5, the CEF2 is a structured fund with 
three different tiers with different investors that have different risk/return profiles. 
The first tier, or ‘Tier 1’, constitutes as soft–equity that has been provided by 
Donors and arguably the most additional. The second tier, or ‘Tier 2’, constitutes of 
impact investors and DFI’s. The third most senior tier, or ‘’Tier 3’, constitutes of 
institutional and private investors. The ratio between the three tiers is set at 
20/40/40. Whenever one or two out of the three tiers exceed that ratio that capital 
remains ‘locked’. The total ‘unlocked’ commitments equal the value of the 
maximum value for which the 20/40/40 can be preserved.   
The initial close primarily consisted of T2 (USD 151 mln.) and T3 (USD 400 mln.) 
investments. This implicates that only USD 315 mln. of the CEF2’s capital is 
currently ‘unlocked’ (as the ‘unlocked’ value is the maximum value for which 
20/40/40 can be preserved). GCF participation in the T1 will therefore mobilize a 
large portion of private finance without requiring additional T3 investors coming in 
at later closes. 
C.2. Financing by component  
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Name of 
Institutions 
Establishment 
and 
management of 
Climate Investor 
Two 
Further private 
sector 
investment in 
climate change 
adaptation and 
0 
 
0 
 
Equity 
0 
Equity 
0 
 
11 The USD 675 mln. includes USD 19,2 mln. side pocket for ‘frontier investments’ that are specific to the 
investment of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs (via the Dutch Fund for Climate and Development). This 
USD 19.2 mln. is not counted in the above.

=== PAGE 34 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 31 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
mitigation 
projects 
Development 
and 
implementation 
of climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
projects 
Development of 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
projects and 
ecosystem 
building 
80 
45 
Reimbursa
ble grants 
35 
Reimburs
able 
grants 
 
Donors / T1 
investors - 
Implementation 
of mitigation and 
adaptation 
projects 
800 
100 
Reimbursa
ble grants 
700 
Equity 
Tier 1, tier 2, 
and tier 3 
investors 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 pages) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity-building 
activities? 
Yes  ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
In some cases, the CI2 Fund will invest in companies that operate and have developed technologies in 
developed (or developing) countries, and CI2’s investment proceeds will be used to deploy such 
technologies in the target countries. The technology and knowledge will be transferred by working 
together with local partners, developers, and third parties. Lastly, CFM will work together with local 
financial institutions, including DAEs, to refinance the projects after they have successfully graduated 
from the CEF2.  
In terms of capacity building, the GCF proceeds in the DF2 can be used for the likes of feasibility 
studies, gender assessments, ESIAPs and other important capacity-building activities.

=== PAGE 35 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 32 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/Programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
• 
GHG emissions avoided: The Programme will reduce or avoid ~4.96 million tCO2e per year, for a total 
of ~ 44.65 million tCO2e over the lifetime of CI2. This consists of avoiding GHG emissions by (i) 
utilizing waste and wastewater as a source of renewable energy and waste to energy (constructing up 
to 258.74MW in Power Capacity and producing ~1824.65 GWh/yr) in total, (ii) reducing GHG 
emissions with fuel-efficient infrastructure for ports and green shipping and by (iii) reducing and/or 
sequestering GHG emissions by protecting and/or restoring ecosystems. 
 
• 
Beneficiaries: The Programme will provide ~ 11.18 million people with year-round access to reliable 
and safe water supply despite climate shocks and stresses and restored and/or protected ecosystems. 
It will also provide ~1.97 million people with resilient infrastructure for sanitation. Lastly, it will provide 
~1.82 million people with power.  
 
• 
Hectares of ecosystems protected or restored: The Programme will protect and/or restore ~1.8 million 
Ha of ecosystems. This will improve the livelihoods of local communities and reduce GHG emissions 
by protecting or restoring nature’s ability to act as a carbon sink. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
A paradigm shift for climate change occurs when there is a fundamental change in the way one, or many, 
perceive and respond to a climate change issue. 
 
Climate Investor Two has the potential to cause such a paradigm shift at three levels: (i) the global 
development finance sector level, (ii) the investee country level, and (iii) at the sectoral level.  
The first shift arises from the innovation of CI2’s whole-of-life blended finance structure, further proving a 
new catalytic tool in the climate finance and sustainable development toolbox. Its application to a new 
thematic area sets a precedent for similar approaches to be implemented by other Development Finance 
Institutions, impact – and commercial investors. CI2’s whole-of-life financing approach also eliminates a 
range of barriers to low carbon and climate-resilient development by ensuring that projects can progress 
smoothly and expeditiously from a concept or pilot project to a scaled, sustainable, and replicable operation 
with a clear function beyond CI2’s exit. In addition, by demonstrating a replicable and adaptable approach 
to catalyzing private sector financing to climate-focused infrastructure, local project developers and 
international equity funds may adopt a similar approach building on CI2’s precedent. CI2’s potential to 
catalyze impact in this manner is amplified by the scarcity of infrastructure-themed climate adaptation funds, 
which despite the growing urgency for adaptation finance, can falter for a lack of established precedent. 
Bringing CI2 to market will provide recognition that climate adaptation-focused funds work in practice at 
scale, contributing to a re-balancing of the primarily mitigation themed funding available at present. 
Furthermore, as with CI1, the CI2 fund could further prove the scalability of blended finance.  
At the investee country level, in some cases, CI2 will introduce the private sector into a space dominated by 
public funding and frequently facing shortfalls – in particular water supply & distribution, and ecosystem & 
oceans assets are typically publicly financed and/or operated. By being amongst the first to catalyze private 
climate finance to these sectors, CI2 will set a replicable precedent for the private sector across its thematic 
focus. In the long-term CI2 will also create opportunities for scalability and replicability beyond its

=== PAGE 36 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 33 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
investments, through the transfer of knowledge and technical skills to local partners, and by contributing to 
improved regulatory and policy frameworks in the countries where it operates. Successfully demonstrating 
the commercial viability of ecosystems projects, that are traditionally public financed, will contribute to the 
development of proper accounting techniques for the actual economic value of ecosystems (i.e., by 
accounting for their ability to act as a ‘carbon sink’). The lack of such accounting methodologies has been 
identified as one of the biggest potential paradigm shifts for ecosystems by the GCFxviii.  
Finally, at a sectoral level, CI2’s projects will introduce innovative technologies and circular business models 
from source to sea, which will promote the preservation of water, and the climate-proofing of water 
infrastructure across the water cycle. CFM will work together with local partners, developers, and third parties 
to make sure CI2 contributes to technology and knowledge. Through the funding of sanitation projects, CI2 
will also target reductions in ground and surface water pollution, removing a fundamental barrier to water 
reuse, and encouraging value creation and greenhouse gas (CH4) capture from non-conventional waste and 
wastewater resources. Through the combination of these factors, CI2 targets long-term, systematic, and 
self-sustaining change in the sectors and regions where it is active.   
Concluding, CI2 will provide a paradigm shift by fundamentally changing the way financial markets see 
adaptation-focused blended finance funds, demonstrating the commercial viability of sectors that were 
traditionally dominated by public funding and by transferring sectoral technology and knowledge to local 
communities.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
CI2 has identified the following SDGs as primary goals: 
• Climate Action (SDG 13) 
• Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG 7) 
• Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6) 
• Partnerships for the Goals (SDG 17) 
By contributing to the above – CI2 sees potential co-benefits in the following SDGs: 
• Good health and well-being (SDG 3). 
• Gender Equality (SDG 5) 
• Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG 8) 
• Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure (SDG 9) 
• Life below water (SDG 14) 
Environmental co-benefits: 
• Decontaminating the earth’s water will increase biodiversity and improve the livelihoods and resilience 
of local communities.  
Social co-benefits including health co-benefit: 
• Safe access to water and sanitation will reduce the spread and severeness of diseases related to 
contaminated water and/or lack of sanitation. 
• Development, construction, and operation of the infrastructure projects will leverage existing local 
capabilities and knowledge. 
• Community Development programs planned and implemented alongside CI2 projects will tackle core 
issues identified by stakeholders in communities where CI2 is active.

=== PAGE 37 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 34 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
Economic co-benefits: 
• The construction and operation phases of all CI2’s projects, combined with the required ESG 
compliance, will create fair jobs for local communities.  
• Demonstration of the commercial viability of infrastructure projects will lead to a capital inflow/increase 
in GDP. 
• Investing in innovative technology will lead to technological advancements.  
Gender-sensitive development benefit: 
• Gender assessments will be done for every project to ensure active inclusion of women in the entire 
sphere of influence of the project 
• Access to water and sanitation will improve the livelihoods of women (as they are now often affected in 
an inequitable manner)  
• Commitments in the Gender Action Plan will increase formal employment possibilities, improve 
working conditions, and create greater gender parity for women. This will reduce dependence on 
individual livelihood activities and enhance financial resilience for women. 
D.4. Needs of the recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Programme targets 18 different countries, spread over Latin America, Asia, and Africa, that all have 
significantly different scales and intensities of climate vulnerability (including water-stressed areas) . The 
Programme will therefore assess the needs, and the intervention required, on a case-by-case and per 
country basis.. The 18 countries have been identified on their National Designated Contributions (NDC) and 
the fit these have with the product offered by CI2.  A detailed climate vulnerability assessment per country 
can be found in Annex 7. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
FMO and CFM acknowledge that the point of departure for selecting a target/focus country is whether 
Country Ownership is encapsulated, specifically through the following three elements:  
• Host nation climate plans, including Nationally Designated Contribution (NDC) commitments (and any 
subsequent updates) and the National Adaptation Plans, as well as sector plans from relevant 
ministries, including water, sanitation, energy, environment, and others as may be applicable. The 
countries selected by CFM recognize the importance of water, waste, and renewable energy, as 
highlighted in Annex 1. The initial short-listed countries cite specific targets to combat climate change 
(with a specific focus on adaptation) across various short, medium, and long-term periods. In addition, 
such short-listed countries align with CFM’s regional office’s investment opportunities, and therefore 
CI2 has identified potential projects that could qualify for funding. 
 
• Positive and ongoing stakeholder engagement: CFM to date has built a reputable relationship with 
many of the identified country NDAs and other relevant stakeholders on the back end of receiving 
NOLs from such countries for the Climate Investor One (CI1) Programme. CI2, therefore, allows the 
CFM team to continue such engagements, with the intent to align such countries’ climate change 
needs to the investment thesis of CI2.To further demonstrate Country Ownership at the project level, 
CFM is actively engaging with governments, local communities, and the private sector. This ongoing 
engagement process is fluid; hence it is conducted to attain broad continued support within these

=== PAGE 38 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 35 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
target jurisdictions of CI2’s investment activities. This process will be tailormade per country as per the 
requests of the relevant NDA. CFM already has such processes in place with respective NDAs for CI1.  
 
 
 
• No Objection Letter (NOL) support: In a similar mechanism to Climate Investor One, CFM and FMO 
will seek governmental support in the form of a No Objection Letters (NOL) and as per the Concept 
Note have approached twenty-five (25) countries to request NOLs. This process actively started in 
January 2021 and entails active engagement with the respective NDAs and other relevant 
stakeholders to ensure an alignment of interests. A summary overview of CI2 was shared with each 
NDA, along with the Concept Note. CFM has subsequently been in regular dialogue with NDAs and 
country representatives to address any clarifications that arise and will continue to do so in preparation 
for the GCF Board meeting, with the intent to try and secure all 25 NOLs. Should NOLs not be issued 
in time, additional countries might be added to the Programme after initial Board approval, provided 
that they submit an NOL and that such NOL is approved by the Board.  
 
It is also the Managers, and AE’s, ambition to include interested Directed Access Entities (“DAE’s”) to the 
pool of lenders that will constitute the Refinancing Fund after it has been set up. This will ensure further 
alignment of the Programme and the respective country ownership.  
The D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The GCF’s investment has an expected mobilization ratio of 1:4 at the fund level (as every USD of T1 will 
mobilize 4 USD in the more senior tranches). A mobilization ratio of 1:4 is on the higher end of the 
benchmark and equal to the CI1 proposalxix.   
 
The below assumes an average 66% ownership of CI2 in the construction phase and two project life cycles 
during the implementation period. 
 
GCF Leverage Ratios 
Investment leverage ratio = value of investment (total project cost) divided by the total amount of GCF 
support relating to this investment. 
 
The investment leverage ratio (referring to the total investments at project level catalyzed by the GCF 
contribution) = A / B which equals 10x whereby: 
A = the DF2 (USD 100 million) + the CEF2 (USD 1 billion) + Partner Contributions (USD 363 million) 
B = the GCF contribution (USD 145 million). 
 
Including the ‘recycled’ funding from the CEF2, this equates to 20 whereby: 
A = the DF2 (USD 180 million) + the CEF2 (USD 2 billion) + Partner Contributions (USD 727 million)  
B = the GCF contribution (USD 145 million). 
 
Private sector finance leverage ratio = amount of private sector financing in the investment project divided 
by the amount of GCF support. The private loans/equity leverage ratio (referring to the total investments 
made by the private sector catalyzed by the GCF contribution) = A / B which equals 16x whereby: 
 
A = Private sector investors in CEF2 recycled (USD 800 million + USD 800 million) + private sector partners 
at project level recycled (USD 727mn). 
B = the GCF contribution (USD 145mn). 
CI2’s primary efficiency and effectiveness benefits are derived from its whole of life financing approach:

=== PAGE 39 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 36 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
• Funding made available by CI2 at all stages of the project including early-stage development and for 
pilot schemes, generates a pipeline of projects whilst building the capacity of local developers.  
 
• The recycling character of CI2 enables more projects to get developed and constructed during the 
implementation period of the fund (the capital is expected to be recycled twice). 
 
• The whole of life approach reduces the time project developers usually lose at fundraising at the 
different phases of project development. 
 
• Flexibility to use all-equity financing during the construction phase of the project. This eliminates cash 
flow and financial distress from the project during construction, whilst also ensuring the long-term 
interest of the owners and investors in the project.  
 
• Leaner capital expenditure of CI2 projects through exclusive technology partnership agreements with 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), unlocking economies of scale for equipment sourcing, 
installation, and maintenance.

=== PAGE 40 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 37 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/Programme will contribute 
(Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale (size of 
projects)  
The water, sanitation, and ocean sectors 
have traditionally been primarily financed 
within the public domain. There’s therefore 
often insufficient private finance available 
as private investors still perceive the 
sectors as too risky (i.e., because of a lack 
of projects that demonstrated bankability). 
This makes it difficult for projects, 
especially larger-scale projects, in the 
water, sanitation, and oceans sectors to 
receive enough funding. This is reflected in 
the average transaction size in the water 
and sanitation sector (an average of USD 
76 mln. versus USD 301 mln. for all 
blended finance). 
Medium 
The potential target scenario would be a 
situation in which projects within the water, 
oceans, and sanitation infrastructure sectors 
in developing countries can reach enough 
scale as investors become more comfortable 
with the bankability and commercial viability 
of the (larger) projects. 
The Programme will contribute to the potential 
target scenario by (i) mobilizing private 
finance at scale by offering a blended finance 
solution that caters to investors with different 
risk to return profiles and (ii) by reducing the 
perceived risks of investing in the water, 
sanitation, and oceans sectors by successfully 
developing and constructing bankable large- 
scale projects (demonstration effect) 
 
Replicability (of CI2 / 
blended finance 
within the Sectors) 
The water and sanitation sector has strong 
potential to strategically adopt innovative 
finance approaches like blended finance 
beyond CI2. Access to safe drinking water 
and sanitation is a basic human right and 
critical to ensuring human welfare and 
Medium 
The potential target scenario would be a 
situation in which a precedent is set whereby 
CI2 demonstrates the application of blended 
finance as a strategic option for the water and 
sanitation sector. In doing so, this could be 
further replicated by other entities, triggering 
the application of innovative financing 
The Programme will aim to help achieve the 
potential target scenario by replicating the 
successful, and replicable, structure of 
Climate Investor One, in the Water, 
Sanitation, and Oceans Sectors. This could 
take form in different ways: (i) by establishing 
a precedent for blended finance at scale in the 
water, sanitation, and oceans sectors, (ii) by

=== PAGE 41 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 38 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
unlocking economic growth and 
productivity. 
Goal 6 (Clean Water & Sanitation) of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
aims to ensure access to safe water 
sources and sanitation for all; however, the 
World Bank estimates that 114 USD bln per 
year would be required to meet this target. 
Despite this financing shortfall, the water 
and sanitation sector has not been as quick 
as other sectors to adopt alternative 
financing sources, including blended 
finance approaches to mobilize commercial 
capital. 
solutions to address the 114 USD bln shortfall 
which currently exists. 
replicating the all-equity full lifecycle approach 
of the Construction Equity Fund and (iii) by 
creating opportunities for co-investing 
alongside CI2.  
 
Sustainability 
The water, sanitation, and oceans 
infrastructure in developing countries are 
currently insufficiently equipped to use their 
potential for avoiding GHG emissions while 
dealing with the consequences of climate 
change. 
 
Medium 
The target scenario is a situation in which the 
infrastructure developed and built remains 
operational and resilient even after the 
implementation period of the Programme. 
CI2 will focus on commercially viable assets 
with inherently long-lived technology and 
characteristics, in the range of 20-25 years. 
CI2 will ensure strong operational 
performance and goods and services that are 
valued and affordable by and for the users. 
Furthermore, the assets will cause a 
knowledge transfer and demonstration effect. 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)12 13 
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final14 
 
12The stated targets are the best preliminary estimates available at the FP design stage and are subject to change based on both the number of NOLs and sub-projects 
achieved in the target countries. 
13 The impact numbers are derived by taking 80% of the estimated impact of CI2 as a whole (as the GCF will only be an investor in 80% of the Projects due to the NOL 
requirement). 
14 The final target means the target at the end of project/Programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 42 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 39 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Portfolio data (as provided in 
Annual Reports) and an 
independent verification / 
assurance before the interim 
and final evaluations.  
0 
~ 3.05 million 
tc2Oe 
~ 16.7 million 
tCO2e 
Amount of GHG avoided by 
waste to energy and 
wastewater treatment projects 
This has been calculated by 
looking at existing projects 
(mainly from the GWI 
database). The implementation 
period of this Funding Proposal 
is equal to the lifespan and the 
outcome is therefore estimated 
at the end of the lifespan. 
Further calculations can be 
found in Annex 22. 
 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
 
Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable energy 
capacity 
Portfolio data (as provided in 
Annual Reports) and an 
independent verification / 
assurance before the interim 
and final evaluations. 
0 
~107MW 
~ 259MW 
Waste to energy and 
wastewater treatment projects 
installed. This has been 
calculated by looking at 
existing projects (mainly from 
the GWI database). The 
implementation period of this 
Funding Proposal is equal to 
the lifespan and the outcome is 
therefore estimated at the end 
of the lifespan. Further 
calculations can be found in 
Annex 22.. 
 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
 
Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated 
Portfolio data (as provided in 
Annual Reports) and an 
independent verification / 
assurance before the interim 
and final evaluations. 
0 
~751GWh/yr) 
~1,825 (GWh/yr) 
Waste to energy and 
wastewater treatment projects 
RE generated. This has been 
calculated by looking at 
existing projects (mainly from 
the GWI database). The 
implementation period of this 
Funding Proposal is equal to

=== PAGE 43 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 40 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
the lifespan and the outcome is 
therefore estimated at the end 
of the lifespan. Further 
calculations can be found in 
Annex 22.. 
 
 
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Portfolio data (as provided in 
Annual Reports) and an 
independent verification / 
assurance before the interim 
and final evaluations. 
0 
~1.6 million 
tCO2e 
~8.6 million 
tCO2e 
Amount of GHG avoided by 
green ports and shipping 
projects. This has been 
calculated by looking at 
existing projects (mainly from 
the GWI database). The 
implementation period of this 
Funding Proposal is equal to 
the lifespan and the outcome is 
therefore estimated at the end 
of the lifespan. Further 
calculations can be found in 
Annex 22.. 
 
 
MRA4 Forestry and land 
use 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Portfolio data (as provided in 
Annual Reports) and an 
independent verification / 
assurance before the interim 
and final evaluations. 
0 
~ 3.5 million 
tCO2e 
~19.4 million 
tCO2e 
Amount of GHG avoided or 
sequestered by restoration 
and/or protection of 
ecosystems. This has been 
calculated by looking at 
existing projects (mainly from 
the GWI database). The 
implementation period of this 
Funding Proposal is equal to 
the lifespan and the outcome is 
therefore estimated at the end 
of the lifespan. Further 
calculations can be found in 
Annex 22..

=== PAGE 44 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 41 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Portfolio data (as provided 
in Annual reports) 
combined with average 
water usage per person 
and an independent 
verification/assurance 
before the interim and final 
evaluations.. 
 
0 
~4.6 million 
(from which 2.3 
million females) 
~11.2 million 
(from which 5.6 
million females) 
People provided with climate-
resilient water. (These 
numbers relate to direct 
beneficiars. Indirect 
beneficiaries have not been 
defined.) 
ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with more climate-resilient 
water security 
Portfolio data (as provided 
in Annual Reports) 
combined with average 
water consumption per 
person and an independent 
verification/assurance 
before the interim and final 
evaluations. 
0 
~4.6 million 
(from which 2.3 
million females 
~11.2 million 
(from which 5.6 
million females 
The amount of water (m3/day) 
used per person has been 
estimated based on the data 
available by the Global Water 
Institute. The amount of water 
supplied by the project/per 
USD invested has been 
estimated with pipeline and 
reference projects.  (These 
numbers relate to direct 
beneficiars. Indirect 
beneficiaries have not been 
defined.) 
 
ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment

=== PAGE 45 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 42 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
_ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Will depend on the  sub-
project but at a minimum by 
independent verification.  
0 
~720 (from 
which 450 
females) 
~1,920 from 
which 1200 
females) 
A correct KPI for direct 
beneficiaries will be 
formulated on a per (sub)- 
project basis.The numbers 
mentioned here are 
conservative estimates for 
one of the current pipeline 
projects.  
Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low-emission 
and/or climate-resilient 
management practice  
Will depend on project but 
at a minimum by 
independent verification. 
0 
~586 thousand 
Ha of marine 
ecosystems 
and 
~ 147 thousand 
Ha of freshwater 
ecosystems 
~1.4 million Ha of 
marine 
ecosystems 
and 
~356 thousand 
Ha of freshwater 
ecosystems 
The amount of hectares 
brought under protection or 
restoration has been 
estimated by multiplying the 
expected portfolio allocation 
with the average amount of 
Ha put under protection 
and/or restoration per USD of 
investment in reference 
projects 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-forest, 
freshwater and coastal 
marine areas brought 
under resoration and/or 
improved ecosystems 
Will depend on project but 
at a minimum by 
independent verification 
0 
~586 thousand 
Ha of marine 
ecosystems 
and 
~ 147 thousand 
Ha of freshwater 
ecosystems 
~1.4 million Ha of 
marine 
ecosystems 
and 
~356 thousand 
Ha of freshwater 
ecosystems 
The ecosystems concern: 
coastal marine ecosystems 
(80%) and freshwater 
ecosystems (20%)

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 43 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
 
Core 3: Value of physical 
assets made more resilient 
to the effects of climate 
change and/or more able to 
reduce GHG emissions 
Investment manager report 
0 
~USD 628.8 
mln. 
~USD 1.258 bln. 
Sum of the expected project 
values at moment the CEF2 
divests. Assumes an average 
66% ownership of CI2 and 
two project life cycles. (total of 
~ USD 2.96 billion and ~USD 
1.48 bln.at the mid-term)15 
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
 
~USD 74 mln. 
~USD 148 mln. 
MRA4 Forestry and land 
use 
 
~USD 37 mln. 
~USD 74  mln. 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
~USD 351.5 
mln. 
~USD 702.8 mln. 
ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment 
 
~USD 351.5 
mln. 
~USD 702.8 mln. 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
~USD 37 mln. 
~USD 74 mln. 
 
15 USD values are estimates of project value as derived from the CI2 fund model

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 44 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for 
current state 
(baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Asset development and construction in 
the water, sanitation, and ocean 
infrastructure sectors require sufficient 
knowledge and technical skills to 
succeed. 
medium 
Sufficient knowledge and 
technical skills at local 
partners and developers  
The project will contribute to 
technology transfer by pro-
actively cooperating (as 
stakeholder and Director of the 
Board) with local partners, 
financiers, and developers 
during the development as well 
as the construction of the 
assets. 
 
Multiple sub-national 
areas within a country 
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and 
use of good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Projects in the water, sanitation, and 
oceans infrastructure sectors are 
currently often subject to shortcomings 
on Impact, Environmental, Social,, and 
Governance related issues. 
medium 
Better integration of IESG 
standards in the water, 
sanitation, and oceans 
sectors in the targeted 
countries. 
The project will contribute by 
ensuring CFM’s IESG 
standards, as reflected in the 
Responsible Investment Code 
(RIC) based on the IFC PS, and 
all other related policies, are 
complied with at a project and 
sub-project level. CFM will also 
screen all the partners, (co)-
developers, and other third 
parties on their ESG standards 
and willingness to comply with 
these.  
 
CFM will do a full-fledged due 
diligence, including assessment 
done by independent third 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 45 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
parties, during the development 
phase. None of the projects will 
receive construction funding if 
good practices, methodologies, 
and standards cannot be 
obtained (or maintained). 
 
 
16 The stated targets are the best preliminary estimates available at the FP design stage and are subject to change based on both the number of NOLs and sub-projects 
achieved in the target countries 
17 The impact numbers are derived by taking 80% of the estimated impact of CI2 as a whole (as the GCF will only be an investor in 80% of the Projects due to the NOL 
requirement). 
E.5. Project/Programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)1617 
Project/Programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/Programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Output 2: Improved 
wastewater capacity 
treatment 
Wastewater Safely 
Treated (m3/day) per day 
Portfolio data (as 
provided in Annual 
Reports)  and an 
independent verification 
/ assurance before the 
interim and final 
evaluations. 
0 
~256 thousand 
(m3/day) 
~623 thousand 
(m3/day) 
 
Estimated based on reference projects 
(mainly from the GWI). Further calculations 
and underlying assumptions can be found in 
Annex 22. 
Output 3: Improved 
access to water 
(m3/day) 
Water supplied (m3/day) 
Portfolio data (as 
provided in Annual 
Reports)  and an 
independent verification 
/ assurance before the 
interim and final 
evaluations. 
0 
~570 thousand 
(m3/day) 
~1,4 million 
(m3/day) 
Estimated based on reference projects 
(mainly from the GWI).  Further calculations 
and underlying assumptions can be found in 
Annex 22. 
Output 5: Improved 
renewable energy 
capacity and generation 
People provided with 
power (# of people) 
 
Portfolio data (as 
provided in Annual 
Reports)  and an 
independent verification 
/ assurance before the 
0 
~751 thousand 
~ 1.8 million 
Estimated based on reference projects 
(mainly from the GWI).  Further calculations 
and underlying assumptions can be found in 
Annex 22.

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 46 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
interim and final 
evaluations. 
Project/programme 
co-benefit 
indicators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-benefit 1: People 
Provided with Sanitation  
People provided with 
Sanitation (# of people) 
Portfolio data (as 
provided in Annual 
Reports)  and an 
independent verification 
/ assurance before the 
interim and final 
evaluations. 
0 
~800 million 
~ 2 million 
Wastewater safely treated per day divided 
by the average wastewater usage (as 
estimated by the GWI) 
 
E.6. Project/Programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1:  Fundraising, 
establishment and 
management of the 
Development Fund 
Fundraising for and management of the 
Development Fund 
 
USD 100,000,000 raised for the DF2 from different 
Donors (out of which USD 80 mln. would be eligible for 
the GCF proceeds). and successful management of all 
affairs related to the DF2 over the entire implementation 
period of CI2. 
Activity 1.2:  Fundraising, 
establishment and 
management of the 
Construction Equity Fund 
Fundraising for and management of the 
Construction Equity Fund 
 
USD 1,000,000,000 raised for the CEF2 at final close (out 
of which USD 800 mln. would be eligible for the GCF 
proceeds). The USD 1,000,000 shall for 20% consist of 
Donor (T1 funding), 40% of DFI’s and impact investors 
(T2), and 40% of commercial and institutional investors 
(T3) 
Successful management of all affairs related to the CEF2 
over the entire implementation period of CI2. 
Activity 2.1.:  Development of 
mitigation and adaptation 
projects for the water, 
Developing mitigation and adaptation 
projects for the water, oceans, and 
sanitation sectors in developing countries 
Sub-activity 2.1.1: Identifying potential 
investment opportunities and initial 
approval of CFM IC 
 
Identified opportunities and (successfully) presented to 
CFM’s IC

=== PAGE 50 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 47 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
sanitation, and ocean sectors 
in developing countries 
Sub-activity 2.1.2: Restructuring after 
CFM IC and initial due diligence 
 
Opportunities further screened after the guidance of 
CFM’s IC. 
Sub-activity 2.1.3: Project approval by 
DF2 IC 
Project approved by the DF2 IC to receive DF2 Funding. 
Sub-activity 2.1.4:  Project development 
and extensive due diligence (including 
but not limited to stakeholder 
engagement, gender assessment, and 
Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment.) 
 
Projects successfully developed (including positive 
assessment on the stakeholder engagement, gender 
assessment, and ESIA) 
Activity 2.2:  Implementation 
(construction and operation) 
of mitigation and adaptation 
projects for water, sanitation, 
and ocean sectors in 
developing countries 
 
Implementing (the construction and 
operation) of adaptation and mitigation 
projects for the water, sanitation, and 
ocean sectors in developing countries 
Sub-activity 2.2.1. Project approved by 
the EF2 IC 
Projects approved by the CEF2 ICto receive CEF2 
Funding (including repayment of the Development 
Finance provided by the DF2). 
Sub-activity 2.2.3: Project construction 
 
Construction of projects with climate adaptation and 
mitigation benefits in the water, sanitation, and ocean, 
sectors with CFM remaining an active investor to ensure 
efficiency, knowledge transfer, impact maximization, and 
(ESG) compliance. 
Sub-activity 2.2.3 Project refinancing and 
exit 
 
Projects with climate adaptation and mitigation benefits in 
the water, sanitation, and ocean sectors successfully 
constructed and exited by the Construction Equity Fund. 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting, and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Monitoring & Reporting 
CFM reports on the investments done and financial performance of CI2’s portfolio to all investors, including all Donors, on a quarterly basis. On an 
annual basis, a report will be provided that includes audited financial accounts and detailed information on investments, investment valuations, 
fees, and the impact indicators. In addition, the Accredited Entity, supported by CFM, will provide the GCF with an Annual Progress Report as 
mandated by the GCF.  
 
Financial reporting:

=== PAGE 51 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 48 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
Within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter ended 31 March, 30 June, and 30 September, CFM shall prepare and 
provide all Investors with a quarterly report consisting of, inter alia: 
• 
An unaudited profit and loss account, balance sheet, and cash flow statement of the Programme for the preceding quarter; 
• 
Explanatory notes; 
• 
An overview of the investment activity undertaken by the Programme within the reporting period; 
• 
An overview of each project company, including: 
1. 
A description of the Project Company's business; 
2. 
The economic interest of the Programme in the Project Company; 
3. 
The percentage of the Project Company owned by the Fund; 
4. 
A discussion of recent key events; 
5. 
Selected financial information; 
6. 
If the Investment has been repaid or realized, the realized liquidation or disposal proceeds; and, 
• 
Quarterly capital account statements.  
Within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days after the end of each financial year the Manager shall prepare and provide all Investors with 
an annual report (the "Annual Report") consisting of, inter alia: 
• 
The annual accounts of the Programme, comprising at least a balance sheet, a profit, and loss account and explanatory notes thereto, as 
audited by the Auditor; 
• 
A report of the Auditor on its findings resulting from its audit of the annual accounts;  
• 
An overview of each Project Company acquired sold, or otherwise disposed of during the reporting period; 
• 
A valuation of each Investment; 
• 
A report on KPIs; 
• 
A report on impact indicators 
• 
A breakdown of fees received by CFM during the reporting period; 
• 
A breakdown of the Programme's operating costs during the reporting period; 
• 
A schedule of Drawdowns and distributions effectuated during the reporting period; 
• 
The total amount of the Undrawn Commitments as per the end of the reporting period; and, 
• 
A report detailing the activities of the Programme during the reporting period.

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 49 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental & Social Reporting 
An important aspect of CFM’s risk management process is the ongoing monitoring and review of each investment. Depending on which Fund that 
investment is drawing from (Development or Construction Equity), different monitoring requirements will be applied. Monitoring is commensurate 
with the risk categorization, with physical visits to the location(s) of higher-risk projects during construction.  
All project companies drawing from the CEF2 are also required to monitor the performance of any contractors employed at the project site(s) and to 
participate in a Management Review held by CFM periodically during the lifecycle of the Fund to review overall E&S performance.  
In addition, CFM will also ensure that any legal requirements for monitoring, for example, that may be included in permits and licenses for 
development, construction, and operation, are incorporated into the project monitoring and evaluation plan. CFM requires all projects in receipt of 
CEF2 are to report in accordance with defined key performance indicators (presented below). In addition, the performance measurement framework 
indicators presented in H1.1 and H1.2 will be incorporated into fund-level and project-level monitoring and evaluation activities that will be managed 
by CFM.  
Evaluations 
The Accredited Entity, together with CFM, will arrange for an interim and final evaluation to be outsourced to an independent evaluator after 10 and 
20 years, respectively. The interim evaluation will focus on the extent to which CI2 is achieving its goals regarding the number of – mention GCF 
impact indicators -. The final evaluation will constitute an ex-post effectiveness study. The evaluation will focus on the DAC criteria, which focus on 
relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact, and sustainability and the GCF’s evaluation criteria.  
• 
Relevance: the extent to which the investments are suited to the priorities and policies of CI2 
• 
Effectiveness: the extent to which the objectives of CI2 were achieved  
• 
Efficiency: the extent to which activities were cost-efficient and timely  
• 
Impact: determining the positive and negative changes produced by CI2, directly or indirectly, intended or unintended.  
• 
Sustainability: the extent to which the investments of CI2 are likely to continue operating after CI2 has exited.

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 50 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 51 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Investment Risk 
The risk is that the assets in the CFM managed assets’ portfolio underperform investment expectations and decline in value. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Robust asset selection processes in accordance with defined investment criteria, including IC approval 
• 
Comprehensive due diligence procedures and assessment of risk management framework in place at the asset 
• 
Oversight by way of representation on project company board and Involvement in asset strategy decisions  
• 
Monitoring of asset performance and revenue-drivers  
• 
Regular site visits to assets to remain updated on management and operational activities and progress 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Regulatory Risk 
The risk is that changes in the regulatory environment or regulator’s attitude will have an adverse impact on CFM and the CFM 
managed assets’ operations and/or strategy. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Alignment with the needs of the recipient country, and NDA / NOL support 
• 
Continual dialogue with regulators/governments and continued evaluation, review of legislation 
• 
Strong contractual position in the project documents 
• 
Dedicated legal and compliance staff 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Operational Risk Including Offshore Operations 
The risk that financial loss may occur through errors, omissions, or inadequacy of processing, people, infrastructure, and systems 
of CFM or relevant CFM managed assets. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Adequate segregation of duties 
• 
Documented policies and procedures (updated as required) 
• 
Continuous training policy 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 52 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
Compliance Risk 
The risk is that CFM and CFM-managed vehicles’ compliance obligations (regulatory or internal) are not met, including reporting 
requirements. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Dedicated legal and compliance staff 
• 
Quarterly compliance reporting and testing 
• 
Continuous training policy 
• 
Formal staff induction training 
• 
Documented policies and procedures (periodically updated as required) 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Conflicts of Interest Risk 
The risk that a conflict of interest occurs in an area of CFM’s service provision to its Managed Vehicles, their investors, and its 
relationship with all of its stakeholders whereby CFM (or an investor or other stakeholder of CFM) may benefit whilst possible 
tangible loss may be caused to (another) investor to whom CFM provides a service. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
CFM has a comprehensive policy established to manage conflicts of interest  
• 
Following the identification of a potential conflict, the manager will implement measures to manage and mitigate the 
identified conflict will be implemented promptly through three basic mechanisms to manage a conflict, namely controlling, 
avoiding, and disclosing.  
• 
The appropriate mechanism to manage a conflict will depend on the circumstances and nature of any given conflict.  
• 
Documented policies and procedures (periodically updated as required) 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Interest Rate Risk 
The risk that the cost of borrowing increases (and CEF2 Tier 2 returns decrease) due to changes in interest rates post refinancing 
event. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Changes to debt facilities or hedging policy approved by the board.  
• 
Borrowing restrictions within the trust deed and prospectus or information memorandum, investment policy, regulatory 
requirements, considered when selecting debt facilities.  
• 
Fund board to be advised of the selection process and in the negotiation of terms and conditions of any debt package.  
• 
Where considered appropriate (and authorized by the fund agreements) derivatives used to manage interest rate exposure.  
• 
Calculations confirming adherence to borrowing limits, financial covenants under lending documentation, and hedging 
policies tabled at board meetings 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Medium 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 53 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
Currency Risk 
The risk is that future cash receipts/payments will decrease/increase due to adverse movement in exchange rates. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Most off-take agreements contracted by CI2 at the asset level are directly or indirectly denominated in USD leading to an 
influx of USD (or equivalent) amounts. 
• 
It is therefore estimated that most off-take agreements will be indexed to USD currencies. If deemed desirable/necessary, 
CI2 has the option to explore hedging opportunities made available by local markets or by TCX (the Currency Exchange, 
a hedging mechanism that enjoys wide support from the DFI community including FMO, EBRD and KfW) 
• 
In principle, CFM may only enter into futures, options, or other derivative transactions for the purpose of, and only to the 
extent required for, hedging currency positions on non-USD Investments. CFM is not obliged to do this, however 
• 
A hedging policy may be adopted in respect of non-USD currency commitments for imminent acquisitions or divestments, 
considered on a project-by-project basis or hedging of short-term distributions 
• 
Distributions and other cash flows from assets are not hedged 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Financial Close Risk 
Limited access to finance and protracted timelines to agree terms prevent projects from reaching financial close and subsequently 
refinancing. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Providing a one-stop-shop for finance at development, construction, and refinance phases to avoid protracted negotiations 
with multiple parties. 
• 
Match-making projects with suitable local, international, or public finance. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Exit Risk 
The risk that CFM is not able to dispose of all of its assets in full. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Development of high-quality projects 
• 
M&A activity in investment regions shows an appetite for water, sanitation, and oceans sector infrastructure. 
• 
Active divestment opportunity screening throughout the lifetime of a project 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Counterparty / Credit Risk 
The risk that a counterparty (the other party with whom an investment or borrowing transaction is made) will fail to perform 
contractual obligations and default in either whole or part under a contract. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 54 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
• 
Risk assessed as part of the due diligence process, preparing the underlying investment proposal and reviewed on an 
ongoing basis 
• 
International credit ratings checked where relevant 
Selected Risk Factor 11 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Liquidity Risk 
The risk that CFM and a CFM-managed asset do not have sufficient cash to meet forward commitments. Meaning that revenues 
on the manager or project levels are below expenses and there is a lack of liquidity. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Detailed 5-year cash forecast updated monthly  
• 
“Forward commitments test” and liquidity limits under which available liquidity must not fall. 
Selected Risk Factor 12 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
High 
High 
Description 
Political Risk 
The risk that sovereign rights exercised by governments are contrary to the rights of the Fund, or project company under the 
relevant agreements. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Virtue of donors as Official Development Assistance (ODA) providers and DFI funding 
• 
Acquiring Political Risk Guarantee (World Bank, MIGA) when specific events heighten the political risk in a project company 
• 
Government Letter of Support 
• 
GCF funding would be complementary to already establish ODA providers (European Commission, Dutch Government) in 
the Development Fund and T1 Construction Equity Fund of CI2, in providing additional political risk mitigation capabilities 
on the back of being established under the framework of the UNFCCC. 
Selected Risk Factor 13 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Impact on natural resources, employees, investors, customers, and community by the business activities of CFM or a CFM 
managed asset fund and its investments. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
The application of FMO’s developing countries’ experience in the design of CFM’s Environmental and Social Management 
System, which will apply to all CI2 investments 
• 
Adherence to international Environmental and Social standards as well as local legal requirements. 
• 
Disclosure of project-related information in accordance with local legal requirements as well as the IFC Performance 
Standards (PS).   
• 
Dedicated E&S specialist to implement CFM ESG due diligence processes at all stages. 
• 
Monitoring of implementation of the ESMS throughout the lifecycle of any project.

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 55 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
• 
Implementation of GIAP with particular focus on gender-responsive stakeholder engagement and consultation as well as 
gender-responsive grievance mechanisms 
Selected Risk Factor 14 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Technology Risk 
Risk of technology underperforming through inadequate natural resources, feedstock, and/or inadequate maintenance. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Risk assessed as part of due diligence and preparing the underlying investment proposal 
• 
Investing in proven technologies from known/trusted manufacturers 
• 
Contracting independent experts to assess the viability of resource potential of project sites 
• 
Securing EPC contracts and OEM maintenance contracts 
Selected Risk Factor 15 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Construction Risk 
The risk is that there are issues during project construction, triggering significant delays and construction overruns. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
Appropriate contractual arrangements and risk allocation mechanisms (including guarantees and liquidated damages) 
• 
High-quality planning and project management, and high-quality EPC and Balance of Plant contractors with an appropriate 
track record 
Selected Risk Factor 16 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Good Governance / Rule of Law / Corruption 
Risk of failed governance at the project company level; a counterparty or employee acting corruptly or fraudulently or in breach of 
law. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
• 
A focus on good governance at both the fund and project level which will benefit local counterparties through strict 
adherence to the rule of law and in mitigating corruption risk 
• 
Existence of robust and clear compliance policies and procedures including KYC, Anti Money Laundering and Counter-
Terrorist Financing and Anti-Corruption  
• 
Ensuring appropriate fraud insurance cover 
• 
Ongoing KYC, internal sanctions list, and anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing checks and verifications

=== PAGE 59 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 56 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
CFM, in cooperation with, and as approved by, the AE, has developed an Environmental and Social 
Management System (“ESMS”) to manage impacts and risks associated with the Funds under its 
management. The ESMS manual has been disclosed in accordance with the GCF’s ex-ante disclosure 
requirements for category A/I-1 projects/Programmes. The document, provided in Annex 6, describes the 
requirements, processes and arrangements required to comply with the requirements of the Responsible 
Investment Code (“RIC”) and to uphold the commitments set out in CFM’s Responsible Investment Policy 
(“RIP”). It describes how the arrangements are embedded into CFM’s investment lifecycle (from 
development to operational). It also describes the environmental and social (“E&S”) management 
measures that need to be adopted by the Project Companies. The ESMS has been designed in 
accordance with IFC Performance Standard 1 (“PS 1”) and other international standards including ISO 
14001 and ISO 45001 as well as the AE’s Sustainability Policy Universe.  
The structure the ESMS is presented in the figure below and summarized as follows:  
• 
Sections 1 and 2: Following an introductory section, section 2 of the ESMS outlines the context and 
scope, with a brief presentation of the CFM Managed Vehicles and the potential E&S impacts 
associated with them, a description of the key stakeholders with their needs and expectations and the 
scope of application of the ESMS.  
• 
Section 3 presents the senior accountability in place for oversight of the ESMS, the resources assigned 
for its implementation with their roles and responsibilities and how the right level of expertise and 
capacity is ensured. 
• 
Sections 4 and Chapter 5 describes CFM’s policies, principles, commitments, and E&S requirements 
that form the overall Responsible Investment Framework.  
• 
Chapter 6 describes how CFM operationalizes the RIP across the investment cycle through risk 
management and delivering positive impacts. 
• 
Chapter 7 presents the system in place for monitoring and periodically reviewing the effectiveness of the 
ESMS, through the definition of E&S performance indicators and impact indicators, audits, and 
management review.  
• 
Chapter 8 outlines the arrangements in place for communication with external stakeholders, including 
reporting to investors, public disclosure, and responsiveness to grievances.  
• 
The ESMS also includes a set of Annexures, including Annex 2 (List of Excluded Activities); Annex 4 
(Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework), and Annex 5 (Resettlement Planning Framework).

=== PAGE 60 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 57 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
E&S Governance and Management 
FMO, as the AE, plays a central role in CFM’s governance. Specifically in relation to E&S governance and 
management CFM has committed to FMO as AE to: (i) implement and maintain an ESMS to the 
satisfaction of FMO, (ii) appoint or acquire services of ESG specialists, (iii) submit annual reports including 
E&S performance and (iv) comply with all relevant GCF policies and procedures.  
CFM, as the EE, has a designated Head of ESG that oversees and implements all E&S commitments and 
responsibilities. The Head of ESG directly reports to the MB and is part of the Executive Committee. 
Reporting to the Head of ESG is a broader team of ESG professionals. The team will be expanded as 
necessary to ensure adequate resourcing.  
In addition, CFM will: (i) hire 
external E&S advisors to support 
with due diligence, specialist studies 
and ongoing monitoring; and (ii) 
partner with organizations (such as 
CSOs, development organizations, 
research organization and training 
institutions) to deliver specialist 
programmes including those 
focused on delivering community 
development interventions. 
Furthermore, all CFM Investment 
Staff have a responsibility for 
ensuring that all projects are 
developed and implemented according to CFM’s requirements as set out in the ESMS.  
At the project level, CFM will require the project to manage E&S risks as set out in the ESMS. Each project 
will ensure they have a project level ESMS as well as adequate staffing and resources. CFM’s ESG team 
will work closely together with the project company to ensure compliance.

=== PAGE 61 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 58 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
E&S Risk Management  
CFM’s approach to responsible investment is enshrined in the RIC which guides all investment decisions 
and management activities relating to the CFM Managed Vehicles. The principles and undertakings of the 
RIC are reinforced by a set of commitments which are contained in the RIP. These commitments are 
implemented through the arrangements described in the ESMS Manual and supporting documentation. 
The underpinning ethos is of managing risk and delivering positive benefits in line with legal requirements, 
and good international industry practices. This is presented schematically below.  
ESG considerations are fully integrated into the investment process, starting with providing inputs into the 
mandate fit stage of a potential investment, through screening and due diligence, to project development, 
construction, operation, and final exit. Each investment is assessed to confirm the potential for adverse 
impacts and risks, and this leads to a preliminary E&S risk categorization. As a general rule, Category A 
projects will not be pursued unless sufficient evidence is available to meet the conditions outlined in the 
ESMS manual. The risk category will inform the scope of the development activities that will be required, 
including the commissioning of an environmental and social impact assessment (“ESIA”) for all Category A 
and B projects. Mitigation, management, and monitoring measures will be defined during the development 
phase for adoption by the Project Company from the start of the construction phase. Section 6 of the 
ESMS manual provides a description of the way in which E&S impacts and risks are assessed and 
integrated into the investment and decision-making process. 
In addition to managing adverse impacts and risk, CFM is 
committed to maximizing opportunities for delivering 
environmental and social benefits, particularly to the local 
communities in the area of influence of its projects. These 
benefits are designed to be additional to the intrinsic 
positive impacts of the investments and are focused on 
local actions that can be taken to support progress 
towards achieving selected UN SDGs (refer to section 
D.3). Budget is committed to community development 
during the development, construction, and operational 
phases of an asset. A needs-based community 
development programme will be established during the 
development phase of the project, and the Project 
company will be required to implement it under the 
guidance of CFM. The programmes are typically 
delivered by development partners with the local network, 
local knowledge, and the expertise required to deliver 
successful outcomes. 
Human Rights 
CFM recognizes the centrality of human rights to sustainable development and ensuring fair distribution of 
development and opportunities and benefits. CFM is committed to operating in accordance with all legal 
requirements and agreements, including the ILO Core Conventions and the UN’s Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights. These principles have been implemented within CFM, eliminating all forms of 
unfair discrimination in the recruitment and selection of staff, and within all project companies, suppliers

=== PAGE 62 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 59 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
and other companies CFM has control or influence over.  Project companies will be required to provide 
information relating to their suppliers. 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment  
CFM’s gender policy, as described in G.1 and annexed to the FP, details the commitments and 
arrangements for achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment within the business and in 
relation to the projects. CFM recognizes that women have as much to gain from its projects (and 
particularly from increased access to energy and water and sanitation resources) as men but given their 
relative social position, will likely not profit as men from the access to energy, water, and sanitation 
resources. CFM considers women as employees, end-users and beneficiaries of its projects and requires 
risks and opportunities to be assessed and managed in accordance with a local gender action plan (see 
G.2) as well as in accordance with other E&S safeguards as described in the ESMS manual.  
Of particular note is the issue of gender-based violence and harassment to which members of the Project 
workforce and those in the local communities can be exposed. CFM therefore requires all projects to 
implement measures to safeguard female members of its workforce as well as in the broader communities 
it serves. This includes consideration of the risks associated with gender-based violence at all stages of 
the investment lifecycle, adoption of controls to avoid cases and measures to respond to and address 
reported or suspected cases. The grievance mechanism adopted by every project will make specific 
provisions for a survivor-centered approach as well as providing the necessary support to witnesses and 
others such as whistleblowers, with those involved in managing the case receiving appropriate training in 
line with international guidance. 
Indigenous Peoples 
CFM recognizes the critical importance of respecting the rights of Indigenous Peoples (“IP”) and of 
avoiding any adverse impacts on the IPs which may arise because of a Project. CFM will avoid proceeding 
with a Project beyond the Development Phase (activity 2.1.) where adverse impacts cannot be avoided. 
When avoidance is not feasible, CFM requires measures to be put in place to minimize and mitigate these 
impacts. Compensation shall only be considered as a last resort. Annex 4 of the ESMS manual describes 
CFM’s Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (“IPPF”) which is designed to guide all projects in terms of 
the minimum requirements wherever IPs are identified in a project area of influence. The IPPF is informed 
by the requirements of IFC PS7 and the associated guidance note, and the Green Climate Fund IPP and 
associated Operational Guidelines. 
Corporate Grievance Mechanism 
CFM provides a fund-broad grievance mechanism for external stakeholders on its website. This grievance 
mechanism is intended for use by stakeholders such as NGOs and CSOs, government representatives, 
investors, and the wider public. Grievance mechanisms are also implemented by the Project Companies 
and are intended for use by the Project affected communities. All grievance mechanisms must be 
designed and operated in accordance with the Effectiveness Criteria detailed in Principle 31 of the United 
Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. All grievance mechanisms will also consider 
gender-sensitivity and provide a survivor centered-approach for responding to reported cases of gender-
based violence and sexual harassment. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 63 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 60 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
CFM recognizes that the projects can only be successful if they are gender sensitive. The use of the term 
‘gender’ refers to the social relations between women and men; thereby the need to work with women and 
men to ensure both equitably benefit. It is further recognized that women have as much to gain from its 
projects (and particularly from increased access to water and sanitation) as men but given their relative 
social position, will likely not profit as men from the access to energy, water, and sanitation resources. 
CFM, in cooperation with the AE, has developed a Gender Action Plan (“GAP”) to present an overview of 
relevant gender-related issues in the water, sanitation, and oceans sectors in the 25 targeted countries. 
The GAP has been developed based on country assessment and analysis, with close reference to the 
approach described in the GCF guidance document for mainstreaming gender in projects. The GAP will be 
supplemented by local analysis of gender issues and opportunities, and a local gender action plan that 
aims to address these challenges and opportunities. The Project company will be required to implement 
this action plan throughout the lifecycle of every asset (and will form part of the handover at the exit of an 
investment). 
The GAP is intended to support the Manager in fulfilling its commitments to responsible investment in 
accordance with the Responsible Investment Framework and CI2’s Responsible Investment Policy. In 
particular, the GAP is based on the Framework’s commitment to “Do No Harm” and “Do Good” and the 
policy’s commitments. These include “avoiding and otherwise minimizing and mitigating the impact of its 
investments on local communities” and “maximizing opportunities for positive social benefits to be 
realized”. In this sense, the GAP provides a gender lens to the arrangements that already exist for 
addressing the social dimensions of CI2 financing. The GAP will include an (estimated) budget The AE 
and the EE also confirm that the budget would be readjusted in case it would be deemed insufficient during 
the implementation of CI2. 
The gender assessments and the full Gender Action Plan are to be provided as Annex 8. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The financial management is done at two levels: (i) the AE (FMO) and (ii) the EE (CFM). On the AE’s level, 
the AE will enter into the Funding Activity Agreement (FAA) with the GCF. The AE will oversee the 
fiduciary management of the GCF’s funding in its GCF account and on a ledger specific to CI2. The AE will 
request the GCF funds, based on the funding needs as predicted by CFM, on a bi-annual basis. The AE 
will then disburse these funds to the DF2 whenever CFM issues a drawdown request. CFM will not 
manage any unused funds of the GCF. The drawdown requests and payments at FMO will follow FMO’s 
standard policies and procedures for PE fund investment.  
Once received by CFM, the funds will be administered by CFM including drawdowns from and distributions 
to investors, as well as all fund-related accounting will be instigated, overseen, and performed by CFM (as 
asset manager). CFM has an Authorization and Payments Policy in place, which details the process of 
authorizing and making payments to external parties, including the various levels of internal authorizations 
required in order to ensure a sound control environment. CFM has controlled access to the CIO Fund bank 
accounts and is responsible for initiating and releasing payments according to the Authorization and 
Payments Policy and generally in accordance with the CI2 Funds’ governing documentation. All investor 
reporting is controlled and managed by CFM. A monthly review of the trial balance is performed by the 
CFM Finance Manager and quarterly and annual reports are prepared by CFM. The CI2 Funds’ and CFM’s 
accounts will be audited annually by PwC. Accounts will be prepared according to the International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and will consist of, among others, a balance sheet, profit and loss 
account, explanatory notes, auditor’s report, an overview of project turnover activity, breakdown of

=== PAGE 64 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 61 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
management fees paid, breakdown of fund operating costs, etc. CFM will require the project companies to 
prepare accounts in accordance with appropriately recognized financial reporting standards and each 
project company is required to appoint an Auditor. CFM’s financial reports will be subject to FMO review 
and approval through FMO’s participation on CFM’s supervisory board & CFM’s Audit, Risk, and 
Compliance Committee. 
The AE's approved procurement policy will be applied, in addition to CFMs, throughout the programme 
including in relation to activities implemented by the EE. Please refer to Annex 10, Procurement Plan, for 
further details on procurement thresholds and requirements  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 65 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 62 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
 
18 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
H. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/Programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/Programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation, and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/Programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence, or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a 
pilot project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)18 
☐ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 66 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 63 OF 63 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
i World Bank. 2015. The Forgotten Factor of Climate Change - Water: Technical Papers. Washington, DC: 
Roson, Robert and Sartori, Martina. 
ii https://www.international.gc.ca/world-monde/issues_development-
enjeux_developpement/environmental_protection-protection_environnement/water-eau.aspx?lang=eng 
iii McKinsey. (2019). Unlocking private-sector financing in emerging-markets infrastructure. Retrieved from: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capitalprojects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/unlocking-private-sector-
financing-in-emerging-markets-infrastructure 
iv International Monetary Fund. (2020). World Economic Outlook. Retrieved from 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/06/24/WEOUpdateJune2020 
v https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/may/06/human-society-under-urgent-threat-loss-earth-
natural-life-un-report 
vi https://grist.org/climate/flatten-the-curve-coronavirus-climate-emissions/ 
vii https://www.globalcarbonproject.org/carbonbudget/archive.htm 
viii https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/202001 
ix McKinsey. (2019). Unlocking private-sector financing in emerging-markets infrastructure. Retrieved from: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/unlocking-private-sector-
financing-in-emerging-markets-infrastructure 
x International Monetary Fund. (2020). World Economic Outlook. Retrieved from 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/06/24/WEOUpdateJune2020 
xi https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/eye-of-the-storm/earth-had-its-second-warmest-year-in-recorded-history-
in-2019/ 
xii xxvii UNEP 2016. A Snapshot of the World's Water Quality: Towards a Global Assessment. United Nations 
Environment Program, Nairobi, Kenya. 162 pp.   
xiiihttps://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/global/wash_statistics.html#:%7E:text=Worldwide%2C%20780%20million
%20people%20do,world%E2%80%99s%20population)%201%2C%203 
xiv https://washdata.org/sites/default/files/2020-08/jmp-2020-wash-schools.pdf 
xv Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al. 2015. Reviving the Ocean Economy: the case for action - 2015. WWF 
International, Gland, Switzerland., Geneva, 60 pp. 
xvi https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-23168-y 
xvii https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WG1AR5_Chapter13_FINAL.pdf 
xviii https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/sap-technical-guidelines-ecosystems-and-
ecosystem-services.pdf 
xix https://www.convergence.finance/resource/35t8IVft5uYMOGOaQ42qgS/view

=== PAGE 67 ===
64

=== PAGE 68 ===
65

=== PAGE 69 ===
66

=== PAGE 70 ===
20/04/2022 14:26
SEI/ME - 24169775 - Ofício
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=27113775&infr…
1/2
MINISTÉRIO DA ECONOMIA
Secretaria Especial de Comércio Exterior e Assuntos Internacionais
Secretaria de Assuntos Econômicos Internacionais
Subsecretaria de Instituições Internacionais de Desenvolvimento
Coordenação-Geral de Instituições Globais de Desenvolvimento
   
 
OFÍCIO SEI Nº 117330/2022/ME
  
 
Brasília, 20 de abril de 2022.
 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Deputy Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon City, Republic of Korea
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by fmo regarding the program "Climate Investor Two (CI2)"
 
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
 
1.
We refer to the program  titled "Climate Investor Two  (CI2)" as included in the funding
proposal submitted by FMO to us on March 1 2022.
2.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economy, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
4.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
a) The government of Brazil has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal;
b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is  in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
5.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
6.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
67

=== PAGE 71 ===
20/04/2022 14:26
SEI/ME - 24169775 - Ofício
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=27113775&infr…
2/2
7.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 
Best regards,
 
Documento assinado eletronicamente
ERIVALDO ALFREDO GOMES
Secretary for International Economic Affairs
National Designated Authority for Brazil
 
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Erivaldo Alfredo Gomes, Secretário(a) de Assuntos
Econômicos Internacionais, em 20/04/2022, às 12:36, conforme horário oficial de Brasília, com
fundamento no § 3º do art. 4º do Decreto nº 10.543, de 13 de novembro de 2020.
A autenticidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código verificador 24169775
e o código CRC 02844205.
 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco K, 8º andar, sala 874 - Bairro Zona Cívico-Administrativa
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF
(61) 2020-5644 - e-mail cgpin.sain.df@fazenda.gov.br - gov.br/economia
Processo nº 12120.100144/2021-11.
SEI nº 24169775
68

=== PAGE 72 ===
1 
Calle 26  13-19 Código Postal 110311 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia     PBX 381 5000   www.dnp.gov.co 
Bogotá D.C., viernes, 13 de mayo de 2022 
*20224500389531*
Al responder cite este Nro. 
DADS 
20224500389531 
The Green Climate Fund – GCF 
Att. executive-office@gcfund.org 
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij 
voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO) – regarding Climate Investor Two. 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the programme titled “Climate Investor Two” in Colombia, as included in 
the funding proposal submitted by FMO to us on March the 1st 2022. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Planning 
Department of Colombia. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included 
in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Colombia has no-objection to the programme as included in
the funding proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies and plans of Colombia;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the
programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national
laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the 
programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme. 
69

=== PAGE 73 ===
2 
Calle 26  13-19 Código Postal 110311 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia     PBX 381 5000   www.dnp.gov.co 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Best Regards, 
CAROLINA DIAZ GIRALDO 
Director of Environment and Sustainable Development 
National Planning Department 
CC o.arbelaez@climatefundmanagers.com; k.anderson@climatefundmanagers.com; 
j.paez@climatefundmanagers.com; vvilloria@gcfund.org; mrestrepo@dnp.gov.co
Prepared: Lukas Socarras 
Revised: Maria del Pilar Restrepo 
70

=== PAGE 74 ===
RepueLreue oe DJteourt
UNrrr-Écnltrr-Pntx
MIruISTTRT DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT
ET DEVELOPPEMNT DU RABLE
LE SECRETAIRE GENERAL
eg+++ 4+J9'e-' 1
ù*,Jl -ËlJlJl -âr=3Jl
Ll''i,"Jl i.J^xllJ Ai++llJ âtli_l
ptrJt 6yïl
N' PrU E
Djibouti, le 
Z $ $[p 10ll
MEDD
To: The Executive Director
The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Songdo International Business Centre
1.75, Art Center-Daero Yeong-gu
Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea
Re: Concept Note for the GCF by Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappii Voor
Ontwikkeiingslanden N.V. (FMO) regarding Climate Investor Two (CI2) programme.
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the programme title Climate Investor Two ICI2) in Djibouti as included in the concept note
submitted by Necierlandse Financierings-N{aatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden N'V. IFMO] to us on
l4 January 2021
The undersigned is the duly authorizecl representalive ol the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development the National Designated Authority / F'ocal Point of Djibouti.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.0B/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(aJ The government of Djibouti has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
[b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the nationaFpriorities,
strategies and plans of Djibouti;
[c] In accôrdance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included
in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations,
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in
the funding proposal has been duly follorved
We also conlirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the
scope of the programme
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Mr" Dini Abdallah 0mar
Ministry of Envi
é-r
-.à i ^,,-
(
SECBETAIRE GEI{EBAt
+2s3 2t -3s-oo-06 B +2s321 -3s- l6-l 8
mhuecabinet@gmail. com
lElsp rr
I 1.r-r- -35 l 6 l 8r.ys -350006ditÀ
r&,
*
*
,I,IEtlD
71

=== PAGE 75 ===
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAATE-SCC-2022-0229-0
Quito, D.M., 23 de junio de 2022
Asunto: Funding proposal for the GCF by FMO regarding the initiative "Climate
Investor two CI2
 
 
Señor
Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
GREEN CLIMATE FUND
En su Despacho 
 
 
We refer to the programme titled Climate Investor two “CI2” in Ecuador as included in
the funding proposal submitted by FMO. 
  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Environment, Water
and Ecological Transition, which acts as the National Designated Authority of Ecuador. 
  
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal. 
  
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
  
1.  The government of Ecuador has no-objection to the programme as included in the
funding proposal; 
2.  The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the
national priorities, strategies and plans of Ecuador 
3.  In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme
as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations.
  
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
  
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be
implemented within the scope of the programme 
  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
  
Kind regards,                                                                                       
  
1/2
* Documento generado por Quipux  
72

=== PAGE 76 ===
Dirección: Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía
Código Postal: 170525 / Quito - Ecuador ● Teléfono: (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec
Oficio Nro. MAATE-SCC-2022-0229-0
Quito, D.M., 23 de junio de 2022
 
Atentamente, 
 
 
 
 
Mgs. Karina Maribel Barrera Moncayo
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO CLIMÁTICO  
Copia: 
Señora Secretaria
Teresa Del Pilar Pérez Toscano
Secretaria de la Subsecretaria
2/2
* Documento generado por Quipux  
73

=== PAGE 77 ===
74

=== PAGE 78 ===
MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal.kemenkeu.go.id
Ref.
:
S-53/KF/2022
28 April 2022
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
Subject
:
Funding Proposal for the GCF by FMO regarding Climate Investor Two (CI2)
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
We refer to the program of Climate Investor Two (CI2) as included in the funding proposal
submitted by FMO to us on 17 March 2022.
The undersigned is the Chairman of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance as the National
Designated Authority of Indonesia.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Indonesia has no-objection to the program as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Indonesia’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the program as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to program as included in
the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within
the scope of the program.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
 Yours faithfully,
Ditandatangani secara elektronik
Febrio Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman
75

=== PAGE 79 ===
2
Dokumen ini telah ditandatangani menggunakan sertifikat elektronik yang diterbitkan oleh Balai Sertfikat Elektronik (BSrE), BSSN. Untuk memastikan keaslian tanda tangan
elektronik, silakan pindai QR Code pada laman https://office.kemenkeu.go.id atau unggah dokumen pada laman https://tte.kominfo.go.id/verifyPDF
76

=== PAGE 80 ===
77

=== PAGE 81 ===
MINISTERE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT 
ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE 
------------------- 
DIRECTION GENERAL 
------------------- 
DIRECTION DE LA LUTTE 
CONTRE LES CHANGEMENTS 
CLIMATIQUES 
------------------- 
Autorités Nationale Désignée 
(AND) 
REPUBLIQUE DE CÔTE D’IVOIRE 
Union – Discipline – Travail 
---------------- 
 
 
The Green Climate Fund 
The Executive Director 
Songdo International Business Centre 
175, Art Center-Daero 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004 
Republic of Korea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 January 2021 
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij voor 
Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO) regarding Climate Investor Two. 
 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
 
We refer to the programme titled “Climate Investor Two” as included in the funding proposal submitted 
by FMO to us on 18 January 2021. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative by Mr. Kouadio Kumassi Philippe, the 
 National Designated Authority  / Focal Point of Cote d’Ivoire. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of Cote d’Ivoire has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, 
strategies and plans of Cote d’Ivoire: 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in 
the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Kind regards, 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mr. Kouadio Kumassi Philippe 
National Designated Authority 
Cote d’Ivoire 
78

=== PAGE 82 ===
79

=== PAGE 83 ===
80

=== PAGE 84 ===
81

=== PAGE 85 ===
82

=== PAGE 86 ===
83

=== PAGE 87 ===
84

=== PAGE 88 ===
85

=== PAGE 89 ===
86

=== PAGE 90 ===
87

=== PAGE 91 ===
88

=== PAGE 92 ===
89

=== PAGE 93 ===
90

=== PAGE 94 ===
Private Bag X447, Pretoria, 0001, Environment House, 473 Steve Biko Road, Pretoria, 0002 Tel: +27 12 399 9000, Fax: +86 625 1042 
 
 
 
 
 
Batho pele- putting people first 
The processing of personal information by the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment is done lawfully and not excessive to 
the purpose of processing in compliance with the POPI Act, any codes of conduct issued by the Information Regulator in terms of the POPI 
Act and / or relevant legislation providing appropriate security safeguards for the processing of personal information of others. 
1 
Ref: EDMS 217568 
Enquiries: Shahkira Parker 
Tel: 012 399 9240    Email: sparker@environment.gov.za 
 
 
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District  
175 Art center-daero  
Yeonsu-gu 
INCHEON 22004  
Republic of Korea 
 
 
Email: fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
 
FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY NEDERLANDSE FINANCIERINGS-
MAATSCHAPPIJ VOOR ONTWIKKELINGSLANDEN (FMO) REGARDING THE CLIMATE INVESTOR 
TWO PROGRAMME 
 
Dear Sir/Madam 
 
We refer to the programme titled Climate Investor Two as included in the funding proposal submitted by 
the Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden (FMO) to us on 19 March 2022. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Department of Forestry, Fisheries, and the 
Environment, the National Designated Authority/focal point for South Africa. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the Programme as included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of South Africa has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, 
strategies and plans of South Africa ; 
 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as included in 
the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
91

=== PAGE 95 ===
FUNDING PROPOSAL FOR THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND BY NEDERLANDSE FINANCIERINGS-
MAATSCHAPPIJ VOOR ONTWIKKELINGSLANDEN (FMO) REGARDING THE CLIMATE 
INVESTOR TWO PROGRAMME 
2 
 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the programme. 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
 
Ms Nomfundo Tshabalala 
DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
DATE: 18/05/2022 
92

=== PAGE 96 ===
93

=== PAGE 97 ===
94

=== PAGE 98 ===
Page 95 
 
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Climate Investor Two (CI2) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij voor 
Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-1 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Colombia, Djibouti, Ecuador, 
India, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, 
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Philippines, Sierra Leone, South 
Africa, and Uganda* 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 N/A 
Remarks 
 N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 N/A 
Remarks 
 N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, February 25, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Arabic, Bengali, French, Hindi, Indonesian, 
Portuguese, and Spanish* 
Explanation on language 
English is the relevant language of Botswana, Kenya, 
Maldives, Namibia, Nigeria, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, 
South Africa, and Uganda.  
Arabic is the relevant language of Morocco. 
Bengali is the official language of Bangladesh. 
French is the relevant language of Djibouti, Ivory Coast and 
Madagascar. 
Hindi is the relevant language of India. 
Indonesian is the relevant language of Indonesia. 
Portuguese is the relevant language of Brazil.  
Spanish is the relevant language of Colombia and Ecuador* 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.fmo.nl/disclosure-esmf-ci2

=== PAGE 99 ===
Page 96 
 
Other link(s) 
  
Indonesian 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Indonesian.pdf 
 
Bengali 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Bengali-.pdf 
 
Hindi 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Hindi.pdf 
 
Arabic 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Arabic.pdf 
 
French 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-French.pdf 
 
Portuguese 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Portuguese.pdf 
 
Spanish 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-Spanish.pdf 
 
English 
https://climatefundmanagers.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/CFM-ESMS-English.pdf 
Remarks 
An Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
consistent with the requirement for a Category I-1 
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS) Manual”.* Climate Fund 
Managers (CFM) is the fund manager for the Climate 
Investor Two (CI2) fund. As co-founder and initiator of CI2, 
FMO has also taken a significant ownership stake in CFM. 
Considering (i) the status of FMO being a 50 percent 
shareholder of CFM, as well as (ii) the fact that all previous 
E&S safeguards-related information on CI2 has been 
published on the CI2 and CFM websites, the present ESMS 
disclosure is being done via the CI2 and CFM websites 
instead of the FMO website. Links to the CI2 and CFM 
websites may be found on FMO’s CI2 web page. For further 
details on the ownership role of FMO in relation to CFM, as 
well as on the overall involvement of FMO in CI2 as an 
initiator and investor, please refer to the below link to the 
FMO website:  https://www.fmo.nl/governance-related-to-
cio-and-cfm

=== PAGE 100 ===
Page 97 
 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
IPP Framework and RPF are part of the ESMS Manual* 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, February 25, 2022 
Place 
Online and in CFM offices in: Cape Town (4th Floor, The 
Citadel 
15 Cavendish Street, 
Claremont, Cape Town 
7700, South Africa), and The Hague (Korte Vijversberg 4 
2531BA – the Hague) and Singapore 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Sunday, July 17, 2022* 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
*Subsequent to the disclosure of this form to the Board and active observers on 25 February 
2022, the following updates have been made: Egypt, Mexico, Peru, Senegal, Thailand and Viet 
Nam have been deleted as they have been removed from the programme. Moreover, after 
further due diligence on the funding proposal, the Secretariat has confirmed that the 
“Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) Manual” is consistent with the 
requirements for a Category I-1 programme. The accredited entity has also updated the ESMS 
Manual to clarify the procedures and requirements for managing environmental and social risks 
and impacts pursuant to the ESS standards and comply with the revised Environmental and 
Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 as regards SEAH with respect to projects and 
programmes approved at or after the thirty-second meeting of the Board (B.32). Lastly, the date 
of the GCF Board meeting in which the funding proposal is to be considered has been updated.  
________

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 98 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP190 
Proposal name: 
Climate Investor Two 
Accredited entity: 
FMO – Dutch Entrepreneurial Development Bank 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I. 
 Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 
   Impact potential   
 
 
  
        Scale: Medium 
1. 
Overview: Climate Investor Two (CI2) intends to develop and construct 
infrastructure projects in developing countries in the water, sanitation and ocean sectors that 
reduce the effects and consequences of climate change by mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and by increasing resilience. The CI2 structure builds on and repurposes the multi-
tranche blended finance approach utilized by Climate Investor One (FP099) (approved by the 
Board at its twenty-first meeting (B.21)) while targeting new sectors. CI2 seeks to accomplish 
the programme’s objectives by mobilizing public investments and unlocking private capital 
across the following sectors: 
• 
Water: The water sector is defined by projects that source, transport and treat water 
from municipalities and other sectors. Climate adaptation benefits include building 
infrastructure that sources, transports and treats the water necessary for both 
municipal and industrial users in countries/subnational regions undergoing or 
expected to undergo water stress because of a changing climate; 
• 
Sanitation: The sanitation sector looks at treating waste and wastewater to avoid and 
sequester methane emissions and increase water availability in areas experiencing 
increasing water stress as a result of climate change;  
• 
Ocean: The oceans and ecosystems sector aims to (a) reduce GHG emissions from and 
enhance the resilience of ports and shipping; and (b) protect, strengthen and restore 
important ecosystems to safeguard their services in buffering droughts, floods and 
storm surges intensified by climate change. 
2. 
CI2 intends to deploy a whole-of-life financing approach utilizing two independent 
but operationally interlinked funds. The two funds focus on different stages of the project 
lifecycle: a Development Fund (DF) provides reimbursable grants to early-stage climate 
projects, whereas the Construction Equity Fund (CEF) provides follow-on finance during the 
construction phase. The DF has been set up to provide development loans (in the form of 
reimbursable grants), accompanied by technical assistance provided by Climate Fund 
Managers (CFM) and third parties, to project companies. The purpose of this is to fast-track 
qualifying development projects to financial close by reducing the development timeline and 
improving the ultimate bankability of infrastructure projects. Once projects successfully 
complete their development phase, CEF reimburses the grant to DF, and the project moves on 
to the construction phase. In this way, CEF ensures that DF remains capable of recycling its 
capital.  
3. 
CEF has been set up to finance the construction phase by providing up to 75 per 
cent of the required project equity. The CEF equity approach is designed to address a

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 99 
 
 
structural barrier of many local banks and lending institutions being unwilling to assume 
construction risk. It further aims to decrease the construction time and costs by: (i) reducing 
the complexity and costs at the project level through an equity-only funding strategy; (ii) 
reducing the construction timeline and thereby reducing the exposure period to investors; 
(iii) reducing costs by eliminating certain debt-specific costs; and (iv) recycling capital from 
completed projects to new projects to reduce the time any funding ‘stands still’.  
4. 
CEF itself is structured as a blended finance vehicle to better mobilize commercial 
capital at scale into CEF. It is made up of a multi-tiered structure to accommodate multiple 
investors’ risk/return preferences. The three tranches are structured as follows:  
Tier 1 makes up 20 per cent of CEF and is comprised of junior equity; 
Tier 2 makes up 40 per cent of CEF and is comprised of ordinary equity; and  
Tier 3 makes up 40 per cent of CEF and is comprised of senior equity.  
5. 
The CI2 funding proposal requests a total GCF contribution of USD 145 million, of 
which USD 45 million would be directed to DF and USD 100 million to Tier 1 of CEF. The 
expected capital size of the prospective funds is estimated at USD 90 million for DF and USD 1 
billion for CEF. GCF funding would play a key catalytic role in enabling CI2 by providing 
junior Tier 1 capital at concessional rates (0 per cent + inflation Consumer Price Index (CPI)). 
GCF participation in Tier 1 is intended to reduce investment risks for the larger Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 tranches and thus mobilize private sector finance into the facility. For instance, the 
junior status of Tier 1 capital ameliorates risks associated with investing in climate-related 
infrastructure in developing countries such as local currency fluctuation risk. This facilitates 
CI2’s ability to invest in projects where revenues are denominated in local currency while at 
the same time mitigate real and perceived local currency risk on the part of commercial 
investors.  
6. 
This programme would be GCF’s first at-scale private sector programme in the 
water and sanitation sector. The programme aims to mobilize capital at scale. The USD 145 
million investment by GCF will potentially catalyse USD 945 million at the fund level, and 
with further leverage assumed at the project level, the total capital expected to be mobilized 
will be higher.  
7. 
The Dutch Entrepreneurial Development Bank (FMO) will act as the accredited 
entity (AE) for this proposal. CFM, a joint venture between FMO and Sanlam, will act as the 
fund manager of CI2 and is the first executing entity (EE). DF and CEF, the two funds within 
CI2, will act as the second and third EEs. 
8. 
Impacts: CI2 aims to make investments which result in the scaling and replication 
of water, sanitation and ocean infrastructure that is aligned with the adaptation and 
mitigation needs of developing countries. The investments themselves are expected to 
generate measurable climate impacts and are also intended to have a market demonstration 
effect. CI2 contends that the financial and impact success of low-emission, climate-resilient 
sustainable development in host countries, with a risk-adjusted return, will catalyse 
commercial investors through demonstration.  
9. 
The water cycle is a key component of the global climate crisis. The World Bank 
estimates that by 2050, water shortages caused by climate change could reduce the gross 
domestic product (GDP) of developing countries in Asia by USD 4.4 trillion and developing 
countries in Africa by USD 1.6 trillion, compounding existing health and development 
challenges. Water can also be a substantial carbon emitter when managed improperly, with 
methane emissions from untreated waste and wastewater accounting for 7 per cent of global 
GHG emissions. Riverine, wetland, marine and coastal ecosystems have the potential to act as 
‘carbon sinks’ that sequester and avoid carbon emissions, and restoring them can enhance 
their services in buffering against climate change-intensified disasters.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 100 
 
 
10. 
The financing of the water, sanitation and ocean sectors has primarily been within 
the public domain. However, the budgets that developing countries have available to invest in 
these sectors are insufficient for the task at hand. Adequately addressing the lack of low-
emission water infrastructure that would contribute to staying within the 1.5-degree 
pathway while ensuring resilient water supply in areas experiencing reduced water 
availability because of climate change will require the mobilization of private sector finance. 
Traditional private investors, however, perceive the sectors as high-risk, particularly in 
developing countries.  
11. 
CI2’s two-fund blended approach is intended to address these risks (real and 
perceived) by both (i) providing private sector investors with a blended finance solution that 
reduces their risks; and (ii) demonstrating the commercial viability of water, sanitation and 
ocean infrastructure projects by demonstrating the possibility of risk-adjusted returns to 
investors. This can help investors to see the long-term benefits of investing in such sectors 
and countries and mitigate some of the perceived high risks.  
12. 
Furthermore, highlighting the commercial viability of water, sanitation and ocean 
infrastructure projects will help provide know-how and capacity for the development and 
implementation of such projects in the host countries by providing a transfer of knowledge to 
local parties. CI2 aims to do this by including local partners and developers in both the 
development as well as the construction phases of its projects. Lastly, it will aim to include 
local financial intermediaries, including direct access entities, in the refinancing of its 
projects. 
13. 
Successfully developing and implementing mitigation and adaptation projects for 
the water, sanitation and ocean sectors in developing countries will involve: (i) improving 
wastewater treatment capacity; (ii) improving access to water; (iii) improving access to 
sanitation; (iv) improving renewable energy capacity and generation; (v) improving access to 
fuel-efficient green ports and shipping; and (vi) restoring and/or protecting riverine, 
wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems. In terms of mitigation potential, improving 
wastewater treatment and capacity, renewable energy capacity and generation, and access to 
fuel-efficient green ports and shipping, and restoring and/or protecting riverine, wetland, 
coastal and marine ecosystems will then result in reduced GHG emissions in the water, 
sanitation and oceans sectors of host countries. With regard to mitigation benefits, CI2 is 
expected to reduce or avoid approx. 6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) 
per year for a total of approx. 56million tCO2eq over the implementation period. 
14. 
In terms of adaptation potential, developing and constructing additional water 
supply, treatment, distribution and wastewater treatment facilities, as well as enhancing 
ecological infrastructure, will enable CI2 to reduce the vulnerability of developing countries 
to climate hazards. CI2 aims to construct up to USD 3.7 billion in infrastructure projects in 
developing countries. The projects financed, developed and constructed by CI2 are expected 
to provide approx. 14 million people with year-round access to reliable and safe water 
supplies despite climate shocks and stresses. They will also protect and strengthen 
ecosystems covering approx. 900,000 hectares to help them adapt to climate variability and 
change.  
15. 
CI2 is also expected to contribute to technology transfer by proactively 
cooperating with local partners and developers during project development as well as during 
the the construction of the infrastructure assets. 
16. 
It is important that all investment projects in which GCF funds are used to take an 
equity stake in CI2 do ultimately deliver on the specific climate change adaptation and 
mitigation impacts sought in the funding proposal. All potential investment projects claiming 
climate change adaptation impacts must go through a robust climate adaptation assessment 
at the level of investee, activity and/or site prior to any decision on investment through DF

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 101 
 
 
and CEF. With regard to the broad way in which the funding proposal discusses interwoven 
development and climate challenges, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) 
identified a risk that a shortage of viable deals could lead to low standards being applied by 
CFM in the selection of investment projects aimed at adaptation, with CI2 ultimately funding 
business-as-usual water and sanitation investment projects that lack any clearly motivated, 
specifically contextualized climate adaptation logic. In response to questions from the 
independent TAP on this, the AE highlighted the screening process the Climate Investor Two 
Development Fund Investment Committee will use to judge proposals with intended 
adaptation benefits: “The deal teams will provide [the Climate Investor Two Development 
Fund Investment Committee] with historic climate trends (observed changes or variability in 
changes in the project areas), climate change projections in the areas, and climate impact (an 
explanation on how these changes will hurt communities in the project area). Adaptation 
benefits will be further addressed by explaining how the project company’s products, 
services, or technology will help the community adapt to these climate impacts, an 
explanation of how the proposed intervention will not lead to maladaptation, an explanation 
of the Rio Marker score for climate adaptation (to be achieved by the company) and an 
overview of the impact indicators that will be monitored to validate the above (including an 
identification of the baseline and mid-term (year 10) and final (year 20) projections).” 
17. 
Overall impact potential is assessed as Medium. The Medium rating is conservative 
and reflects pipeline risk (Do these project opportunities turn into concrete investments?) 
and execution risk. CFM demonstrated its capacity to manage a similar vehicle in Climate 
Investor One, but migrating to new and arguably more challenging sectors will require new 
capacity and expertise, leading us to hedge our impact rating somewhat.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
 
    Scale: Medium 
18. 
The focus of the funding proposal is an innovative investment scheme enabling 
new investors with no or minimal track record in developing markets to enter new sectors 
previously considered as high risk (water, sanitation, oceans), accelerating the development 
and implementation of projects and reducing costs across the entire process. CI2 provides 
different types of technical support to the private sector at the development stage as well as 
ready investment for the construction and operational stages, all of which are fundamental 
elements of the investment scheme and might be considered innovative for the targeted host 
countries.  
19. 
CI2 aims to create a paradigm shift by making investments which result in the 
scaling and replication of water, sanitation and ocean infrastructure that is aligned with the 
adaptation and mitigation needs of developing countries. These are sectors that are perceived 
as risky or better suited for public finance, especially in developing countries. CI2 has the 
paradigm shifting potential of introducing the private sector into a space dominated by public 
funding, although the success of these efforts will depend on participating countries’ policy 
and regulatory environments. Additionally, CI2 has the potential to demonstrate the actual 
versus perceived risk of climate-beneficial investments in the water sector and blue 
infrastructure generally. Data and learning from CI2 has the potential to change the way 
financial markets see these sectors by demonstrating the commercial viability and 
transferring sectoral technology and knowledge to local communities. 
20. 
Moreover, CI2’s whole-of-life financing approach itself is paradigm shifting by 
eliminating a series of barriers to low-carbon and climate-resilient development by ensuring 
that projects can progress smoothly and expeditiously from a concept or pilot project to a 
scaled, sustainable and replicable operation. CI2’s structure is a useful catalytic tool, as 
demonstrated by Climate Investor One’s success and now by the willingness and appetite of 
CFM and its investors to shift into more commercially difficult sectors with CI2. Its

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 102 
 
 
application to a new thematic area sets a precedent for similar approaches to be implemented 
by other institutions and in other sectors. By demonstrating a replicable and adaptable 
approach to catalysing private sector financing of climate-focused infrastructure, local project 
developers and international equity funds may adopt a similar approach, building on CI2’s 
precedent.  
21. 
CI2’s potential to catalyse impact in this manner is amplified by the scarcity of 
infrastructure-themed climate adaptation funds, which, despite the growing urgency for 
adaptation finance, can falter for a lack of established precedent. Bringing CI2 to market will 
provide recognition that climate adaptation-focused funds can work in practice at scale, 
contributing to a rebalancing of the primarily mitigation-themed funding available at present.  
22. 
In the longer term, CI2 will also create opportunities for scalability and 
replicability beyond its investments, through the transfer of knowledge and technical skills to 
local partners.  
23. 
Overall paradigm shift potential is assessed as Medium. Replicability of the 
investment scheme will depend on its success and results.  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
Scale: High 
24. 
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): CI2 contributes to the 
achievement of several SDGs, primarily Climate Action (SDG 13), Affordable and Clean Energy 
(SDG 7), Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6), and Partnerships for the Goals (SDG 17). By 
contributing to the above, CI2 can provide potential co-benefits relating to the following 
SDGs: Good Health and Well-Being (SDG 3), Gender Equality (SDG 5), Decent Work and 
Economic Growth (SDG 8), Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure (SDG 9) and Life Below 
Water (SDG 14). 
25. 
Environmental co-benefits: CI2 can improve water quality and in turn increase 
biodiversity and improve the livelihoods and resilience of local communities. Ecosystems and 
ecosystem management will also protect communities from floods and increase biodiversity 
and food stock. 
26. 
Social and health benefits: Changing climate patterns, together with growing 
economies and populations, could reduce urban water availability in 2050 by two-thirds 
compared to 2015 levels, putting over USD 6 trillion of developing nations’ GDP at risk. A 
study done by the World Health Organization in 2017 shows that globally, more than 785 
million people did not have access to at least basic water services, and more than 884 million 
people do not have immediate access to safe drinking water. One of the objectives of CI2 in 
the water sector is to realize climate change adaptation impacts in countries undergoing, or 
expected to undergo, water stress, by building the infrastructure which sources, transports 
and treats the water necessary for both municipal and industrial users to be resilient to the 
localized impacts of climate change. 
27. 
Gender-sensitive development impact: The lack of sanitation facilities is even more 
impactful for young women, as they are more likely to miss out on education due to 
insufficient sanitation at schools.1 Additionally, women are often more negatively impacted as 
they are frequently responsible for collecting the water for use in the household. This and 
other household responsibilities reduce the likelihood of women receiving education. By 
 
1 UNICEF. 2020. Progress on drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene in schools. Available at 
<https://washdata.org/sites/default/files/2020-08/jmp-2020-wash-schools.pdf>.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 103 
 
 
providing and improving sanitation infrastructures, CI2 will enhance the livelihoods of 
women.  
28. 
Economic co-benefits: In economic terms, the annual economic value-added output 
derived from the oceans is estimated at USD 2.6 trillion, making the oceans the world’s 
seventh-largest economy (after the United Kingdom),2 showcasing the ocean’s importance for 
many livelihoods. Regarding the water and wastewater treatment sectors, equipment market 
size was valued at USD 61.6 billion in 2020. The market value is expected to reach USD 84 
billion by 2028, growing at a Compound Annual Growth Rate of four per cent between 2021 
and 2028.3 This growth will be fuelled by a rising demand for clean water amid shrinking 
water access worldwide.  
29. 
The independent TAP assesses this programme as having High sustainable 
development potential with significant social, economic and health co-benefits. 
 
 
 
1.4 
Needs of the recipients   
 
Scale: Medium–High 
30. 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization estimates that 
over 2 billion people currently live in areas subject to water stress, with water availability in 
many areas worsening because of changes in precipitation patterns. Additionally, as noted 
earlier, up to 80 per cent of illnesses in the developing world are linked to inadequate water 
and sanitation, as well as pollution combined with climate change-induced rising sea levels, 
which contaminates trusted water sources globally. These factors can detrimentally impact 
local health, safety and economic opportunity. CI2 will provide much needed infrastructure 
and nature-based solutions for local communities of targeted host countries.  
31. 
The CI2 programme targets 25 different countries, spread over Latin America, Asia 
and Africa, that all have significantly different scales and intensities of climate vulnerability 
(including water-stressed areas). CI2 is designed to assess the needs and determine the 
intervention required on a case-by-case and per country basis. The 25 countries have been 
selected based on their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and whether CI2 
products are suitably aligned.   
32. 
To attract capital into host countries, CI2 requires investment from GCF as catalytic 
capital to help countries attract capital from private investors who have not been active in the 
water, sanitation and ocean sectors. 
33. 
The independent TAP assesses this programme as Medium–High in terms of needs of 
recipients. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium–High  
34. 
CFM has a demonstrated track record from Climate Investor One in building a positive 
relationship with many of the identified country national designated authorities (NDAs) and 
in procuring no-objection letters (NOLs) from such countries. CFM and the AE have already 
sought NOLs from 25 countries for CI2. A summary overview of CI2 was shared with each 
 
2 Sumaila, U.R., Walsh, M., Hoareau, K. et al. Financing a sustainable ocean economy. Available at 
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-23168-y#citeas>. 
3 Statista 2022. Available at <https://www.statista.com/statistics/1258838/water-and-wastewater-treatment-
equipment-market-size/>.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 104 
 
 
NDA, along with the CI2 concept note. As of May 2022, CI2 has received 14 NOLs and were 
expecting approximately 18–20 NOLs to be in place by B.32.  
35. 
CFM maintains regional offices in the relevant CI2 regions. CFM’s regional office for 
Africa is in Cape Town, South Africa. Established in 2017, the office has 19 full-time 
employees. CFM’s regional office for Asia is in Singapore. Also established in 2017, the office 
has 14 full-time employees. CFM’s regional office for the LAC region was established towards 
the end of 2021, and it is finalizing arrangements for its office in Bogotá, Colombia. The team 
consists of four full-time employees. To strengthen this local presence, the AE (FMO) also has 
headquarters in Kenya, Singapore and South Africa.  
36. 
The country selection for CI2 was based on national climate plans, including NDCs and 
national adaptation plans, as well as sector plans from relevant ministries, including water, 
sanitation, energy and environment, and other ministries as may be applicable. The countries 
selected recognize the importance of water, wastewaster management and renewable 
energy.  
37. 
We assess the country ownership of the funding proposal as Medium–High.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
Scale: Medium–High 
38. 
The GCF’s investment in CI2 is expected to mobilize a ratio of 1:4 at the fund level (as 
every USD 1 of Tier 1 will mobilize USD 4 in the more senior tranches). The total leverage 
amount of private sector financing resulting from GCF funding is estimated at 1:16 (fund-
level plus project-level mobilization). The impacts of the programme are dependent on the 
ability of FMO and CFM to raise additional capital of USD 945 million from investors. CI2 has 
already achieved its first close with total commitments of USD 675 million. 
39. 
CI2’s primary efficiency and effectiveness benefits are derived from its whole-of-life 
financing approach. Funding made available by CI2 at all stages of the project, including early-
stage development and for pilot schemes, generates a pipeline of projects while building the 
capacity of local developers. The recycling character of CI2 enables the development and 
construction of more projects during the implementation period of the fund (the capital is 
expected to be recycled twice). 
40. 
The whole-of-life approach also reduces the time project developers usually lose to 
fundraising at the different phases of project development. CI2 also provides financing 
flexibility by preferring equity financing during the construction phase of the project. This 
eliminates cash flow and financial distress from projects during construction, while also 
ensuring the long-term interest of the owners and investors in the project.  
Table. Project funding and costs 
Total framework size 
USD 1,090.0 million 
Requested GCF amount  
USD 145.0 million 
Total greenhouse gas emission reduction 
about 50.0 MtCO2eq 
Estimated overall cost 
USD 2.9/tCO2eq 
Estimated GCF cost 
USD 21.8/tCO2eq 
41. 
We note that although the CFM is experienced in fund management and in making 
equity investments in climate-focused sectors and projects, it does not have investment 
experience/a track record in the water sector and ocean-related investments. Hence, the 
success of this CI2 hinges upon the ability of CFM to establish a team of investment and 
climate professionals who have sufficient experience and a track record in investing in water, 
sanitation and ocean-related investments.  
42. 
This includes the need for expertise in the relatively untested and challenging area of 
“green infrastructure” investments (grouped under the Oceans theme on the grounds of a

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 105 
 
 
“catchment-to-coast” approach), for example wetland restoration for water retention or flood 
control, catchment restoration for water infiltration and erosion prevention, or mangrove 
restoration for coastal protection. The origination of such investment projects may rely on 
complex deals involving voluntary carbon market funding or other “payments for ecosystem 
services” such as income streams, and the establishment of innovative public-private 
partnerships. The existence of DF and the expertise of CFM in a range of adaptation 
strategies, including ecosystem-based adaptation, give the independent TAP some confidence 
that these challenges can be met. Although ecological infrastructure investments are likely to 
form only a small portion of the overall CI2 portfolio, this kind of innovation would be 
welcome. 
43. 
The funding proposal is assessed with a rating of Medium–High in terms of efficiency 
and effectiveness. 
II.     Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
44. 
Based on the assessment above, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal.  
45. 
We are pleased to see earlier GCF-approved blended finance models being expanded 
and applied to harder-to-solve financial barriers: mobilizing private finance for mitigation 
and adaptation in the water sectors.  
46. 
The one area that gave us some pause was the level of concessionality requested (0 
per cent return + CPI for GCF funding), albeit the request was in line with the level previously 
provided to Climate Investor One. In our view, the appropriate level of concessionality 
required to leverage private sector finance is an evolving target, as more firms become 
experienced in climate investments and are engaged in developing countries generally. What 
might have been the appropriate amount of concessionality needed to mobilize private 
funding in 2017 may be greater than what is needed in 2022.  
47. 
However, the information provided in the funding proposal and discussions with the 
AE made clear that the perceived risks associated with the water, sanitation and ocean 
sectors, and the lack of familiarity of private sector investors with this area, supported the 
requested levels of concessionality. Ultimately, we were persuaded that the risk of over-
subsidization is low in this case.  
48. 
Nevertheless, we would prefer to see future blended finance instruments with flexible 
structures that allow the GCF to make a return if the expected risks and barriers to fund 
mobilization and investment return prove to be overly conservative. We want to make sure 
that GCF concessionality strives to be priced (i) at the lowest necessary level to achieve the 
desired mobilization and climate impacts; (ii) to avoid crowding out commercial initiatives 
that do not have access to concessionality; and (iii) to support the financial sustainability of 
GCF itself. 
49. 
We also note approvingly that CFM is providing a General Partner contribution of 1 
per cent (up to USD 10 million) into CI2. Investors in private sector funds typically prefer to 
see managers allocate some of their fees into the fund itself or otherwise contribute. This is a 
sign of confidence in the expected returns and aligns investor and manager interests. We 
would prefer to see this become more commonplace in fund vehicles where GCF concessional 
funds are being requested. Additionally, we take note that CFM’s shareholders (which include 
the AE) are investing a combined total of USD 70 million into CI2.  
50. 
Finally, we observe that true paradigm shift will be achieved only if the CI2 funds are 
able to build a track record of performing impactful and successful investments, which 
increases the confidence of asset owners and encourages new investment managers to

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.33/02/Add.04 
Page 106 
 
 
structure new vehicles in these sectors. For that reason, it is important that CI2’s underlying 
investments ultimately deliver on the specific climate change adaptation and mitigation 
impacts sought in the funding proposal. All potential investment projects claiming climate 
change adaptation impacts are dependent upon a robust climate adaptation assessment being 
conducted at investee/activity/site-level prior to making a decision on investment. Owing to 
the programmatic nature of the proposal, such assessments would need to be carried out 
before project-specific investment decisions are made by CI2. This introduces a level of 
uncertainty as to the exact projects that will ultimately be financed. This is the nature of fund 
models where we must rely to a great extent on the capacity of AEs and their selection 
processes. In this case, we were ultimately able to become comfortable with the approach to 
be taken by CI2, including the use of third-party assessments to validate scoring at least 2 or 
higher in the Rio markers for climate mitigation and/or adaptation, as well as robust 
measurement, reporting and verification processes.

=== PAGE 110 ===
Page 107 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment 
findings (FP190) 
Proposal name: 
Climate Investor Two 
Accredited entity: 
Nederlandse Financierings-Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. 
(FMO) 
 
Impact potential 
The AE agrees with the iTAP’s observation that Climate Investor Two has a challenging mandate 
for a private sector Programme for the reasons mentioned. However, the AE believes the 
mandate to be highly impactful, with a significant part of its mandate focusing on much-needed 
adaptation and resilience projects, and that pipeline risks are being mitigated as much as 
possible. The AE would therefore argue that the Impact Potential would warrant a high score. 
   
Paradigm shift potential 
The AE would like to highlight that the investment scheme has already been successfully piloted 
by Climate Investor One (FP099) since its first close in 2017.  
 
Sustainable development potential 
This is well noted 
 
Needs of the recipient 
This is well noted 
 
Country ownership 
This is well noted 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The AE agrees that the Ecosystem part of the proposal has high impact potential but remains 
somewhat untested and challenging due to the lack of clear revenue streams. The AE does 
however already see a promising pipeline and is confident in its capabilities to source and 
execute deals for an anticipated 10% of the GCF’s proceeds.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
The AE agrees with most of the iTAP remarks. However, the AE would note that:

=== PAGE 111 ===
Page 108 
 
• 
It is of the opinion that the + CPI return for the Tier 1 providers is warranted due to the 
perceived investment risks of the water, sanitation, and oceans sectors (i.e., because of 
the lack of ‘clear’ revenue streams). Mobilizing private sector finance in these sectors 
still requires such levels of concessionality (which is also reflected by the status of the 
Tier 2 fundraising) 
• 
The Climate Adaptation Assessment, and more detailed climate studies, are typically 
done during the Development Phase (pre-approval of the Construction Equity Fund)

=== PAGE 112 ===
Draft Report 
Page i of 143 
Climate Investor 2: A 
Gender Assessment
Prepared for CFM
Date: 24 June 2022 
Authors: Claire Hughes, Sue Cavill, Martha Keega, Georgia Plank, George 
Murray, Daan Schuttenbelt, and Victoria Tully 
Submitted by Itad 
Page 109

=== PAGE 113 ===
Draft Report 
Page ii of 143 
 
 
Contents 
Contents 
ii 
Executive Summary 
iii 
List of acronyms 
viii 
Glossary of Selected Gender Terms 
10 
 Background to the Assessment 
12 
 Gender Assessment methodology 
14 
 Global Evidence Review: WASH & Climate Change 
20 
 Global Evidence Review: Gender & wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems 
34 
 Global Evidence Review: Gender & climate resilient port infrastructure 
39 
 National WASH policy and context in focal countries 
42 
 Problem Tree Analyses 
58 
 Opportunities for promoting greater gender equality 
61 
 Understanding the results and impact of gender mainstreaming 
66 
Annex 1: Bibliography for the literature review 
67 
Annex 2: Bibliography for the Policy Review 
72 
Annex 3: Stakeholder mapping interview guide 
77 
Annex 4: Stakeholders interviewed 
79 
Annex 5: Full Country Analyses 
80 
Annex 6: Gender Action Plan 
117 
 
 
 
Page 110

=== PAGE 114 ===
Draft Report 
Page iii of 143 
 
Executive Summary 
Overview of Scope and Methodology 
This Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan forms part of Climate Fund Managers (CFM) funding 
proposal to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for financial support to the Climate Investor 2 (CI2) to invest in 
infrastructure for water and sanitation services, the use and protection of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems as well as climate resilient ports in up to 25 countries.  
 
The Gender Assessment explores how, in the context of climate change women and men are affected by 
problems in three main areas: i) access to and management of water and sanitation (WASH) services; ii) the 
protection and management of wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems; and iii) the development of 
climate resilient port infrastructure.  
 
The preparation of the Gender Assessment comprised four main components (Figure 1): 
▪ 
A global evidence review, of 85 studies in the areas of WASH, wetlands, coastal and marine 
protection and port infrastructure; 
▪ 
Analysis of national WASH, climate change and gender policies in 11 priority countries, 
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Djibouti, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Morocco, Namibia, 
Nigeria, Uganda;  
▪ 
Analysis of selected SDG related quantitative datasets available for access to WASH, the 
protection of wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems and girls’ education. 
▪ 
Stakeholder analysis in 8 out of the 11 priority countries to map actors in the WASH sector 
and engage stakeholders in the Gender Assessment process. 
Figure 1: Methodology for the Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
 
Findings from each of these components were used to develop a problem tree analysis for each of the three 
areas covered by the Gender Assessment and identify opportunities for promoting gender equality through 
CI2 investments. 
 
Page 111

=== PAGE 115 ===
Draft Report 
Page iv of 143 
 
The opportunities identified in the Gender Assessment are expanded upon in the linked Gender Action Plan 
which provides further details on how CFM and its partners will take advantage of the opportunities 
available to promote gender equality internally within Project Companies and in communities where CI2 
supports investment. The Gender Action Plan includes a performance management framework with which 
CFM can be held accountable. 
Overview of Global Evidence Review 
WASH 
WASH infrastructure and services for households, in health care facilities and in schools are inadequate in 
most developing country contexts. Their supply is further undermined by climate change, which affects 
weather patterns, reducing water availability and damaging WASH infrastructure.  
 
Women and girls are disproportionately affected by inadequate WASH infrastructure and services. Their 
domestic and care-giving roles mean they are responsible for collecting water, for WASH practices within 
the household and for caring for family members when they are sick, sickness which often is a result of low-
quality WASH services available to them. Women and girls can often travel long distances to collect water, 
limiting the time they can spend on other, more enriching activities such as attending school, or engaging 
in productive activities.  It exposes them to the risk of violence whilst travelling to and from water points, 
and to a heightened risk of disease through greater exposure to poor quality WASH. 
 
Women and girls’ physiology means they have greater need for WASH facilities, for example, during 
menstruation or pregnancy, needs which often cannot be met. Cultural norms sometimes prevent women 
from sharing latrines with men, especially during menstruation, thereby limiting women and girl’s access to 
WASH and forcing them into situations where they are exposed to the threat of violence. Girls often miss 
school when menstruating as toilet facilities are inadequate.  As primary users of health services, women 
and girls face increased risk of infection and disease as a result of poor WASH facilities in health centres.  
 
Although most affected by limitations in the WASH system, women and girls have limited influence over 
the planning, design and management of WASH infrastructure and services. Social norms often exclude 
women from public consultation spaces or silence their voices when they are invited in and so their needs 
and priorities do not inform the development of the WASH system.  Female representation in the workforce 
is a major challenge in most countries in both government and NGO WASH services. Where women are 
found in the WASH sector workforce, they are more likely to be in junior or unpaid roles, although 
pioneering work in Asia is starting to break down traditional barriers.    
Wetlands, Coastal and Marine Ecosystems  
Relevant evidence identified through literature searches for the gender assessment speaks to: i) women 
and men’s use of and interaction with wetland, coastal and marine areas; ii) how climate change is affecting 
these different uses and interactions, and the impact on the populations concerned; and, lastly, iii) the 
different ways in which men and women are, are not and could be involved in the protection and 
management of wetland, coastal and marine areas.  
 
Key findings include that, as regards their participation in oceans-based industries (of which most of the 
relevant literature relates to fishing) women are disproportionately represented in informal and 
unregulated economies and concentrated in less profitable parts of value chains. Women’s participation is 
curtailed by gendered norms which restrict their mobility, constrain their access to finance and discourage 
other community members from viewing them as “real fishers”. Women’s participation in the fishery 
industry is often overlooked and undervalued, resulting in the marginalisation of women who do participate 
in the management of wetland, coastal, and marine areas. 
Page 112

=== PAGE 116 ===
Draft Report 
Page v of 143 
 
At the same time, and whilst the evidence base on the gendered impacts of unsustainable fishing practices 
is underdeveloped, it is women who are likely to be disproportionately affected by rising sea temperatures, 
levels and acidity.  
 
As regards gender mainstreaming in sustainability and management initiatives, women’s participation is 
currently very limited – a hindrance for the improvement of, for example, fishing sustainability because 
women tend to be more willing to engage in progressive sustainability practices. Policy and decision making 
remains mostly gender blind, with data collected by governments tending to focus on formal economies 
and evidence on gender-differentiated effects of innovation and technological advancements lacking. 
Unsurprisingly, then, existing women’s empowerment interventions, tend to take a segregated, ‘gap filling’ 
approach which fails to address underlying structural barriers, perpetuating discriminatory norms and 
gendered inequalities.  
Ports 
The evidence base on the intersect between gender, climate change and port infrastructure is particularly 
limited, primarily focusing on i) the different ways in which men and women use and benefit from available 
port infrastructure, as well as ii) those in which men and women are, are not and could be involved in the 
development of climate resilient port infrastructure. 
 
Women are not able to fully reap the benefits of economic growth from ports development due to their 
exclusion from related employment and, particularly, from operational and managerial positions. At the 
same time, there is a lack of evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of ports’ negative impacts on 
ecosystems.  
 
The development and expansion of new climate-resilient ports creates jobs and therefore opens up 
opportunities to train and hire women. Women’s recruitment, integration and progression is starting to be 
supported through training, mentorship and initiatives to improve working environments. More broadly, 
women have an important role to play in promoting climate resilient port development for the good of 
wider communities – but continue to be marginalized in discussions around new approaches. In the same 
vein, data on gender-differentiated benefits of optimised infrastructure and energy efficiency remains 
scant. 
Context Analysis in Focal Countries1 
As part of this gender assessment, 11 in-depth country analyses were completed to understand the national 
policy context for WASH in programming countries, as well as to identify relevant issues, opportunities and 
challenges at the national level to drive more equal outcomes. These analyses present a top-line picture of 
access to WASH facilities and look at the WASH context to understand how gender is addressed throughout. 
Summaries of these analyses can be found in Section 6 of this report, and the full country analyses are 
included in Annex 5, including a stakeholder mapping of the WASH sector.  
 
Overall, most countries have access to improved drinking water for around 90% of their population, with a 
few outliers. Drawing on WHO/UNICEF’s classification for WASH services, analysis suggests that the rate of 
access to different quality levels of service (e.g. either safely managed or basic drinking water services) 
varies more significantly. In terms of sanitation, access to improved facilities is more varied between 
countries, with some countries having eradicated open defecation while others are still working to get half 
of their population access to improved sanitation facilities. 
 
 
1 This section is based on detailed gender and energy profiles for each programming country. Key insights as they relate to the renewable energy 
sector are included in [Annex A].  
Page 113

=== PAGE 117 ===
Draft Report 
Page vi of 143 
 
The policy frameworks across different focal countries address a range of aspects related to water, 
sanitation and hygiene. All of them place a strong emphasis on the impact of climate change in exacerbating 
already existing issues in water availability, health problems, and inequality. For instance, it is widely 
recognised that climate change exacerbates the already challenging WASH landscape for women. At the 
same time, the degree to which gender is mainstreamed throughout policy and practice varies significantly. 
For instance, while all policies in Kenya concretely identify opportunities for women’s participation and job 
opportunities at different levels; Ivory Coast’s are relatively gender blind and do not propose how to create 
gender-inclusive environments. Many countries, such as Namibia, often reference gender as a cross-cutting 
issues in water and sanitation but fail to explore in much detail what role they can play or what 
opportunities exist for them.  
 
In terms of policy priorities, policies commonly identify a need to create more equal participation and 
outcomes for women. The notion of inclusion is echoed in national development plans, as well as more 
specific gender, water, health, and climate change plans. At the same time, many countries do not identify 
concrete actions to achieve these objectives. Nevertheless, this policy analysis identifies a number of 
common entry points across focal countries to improve the position for women, including greater 
participation of women in the workforce (including the WASH sector), education and training opportunities 
in specific areas (such as Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)) and ensuring that 
women and young people are consulted and have sufficient voice in policy and investment decisions.  
Overview of Gender Action Areas for CI2 
This Gender Assessment brings together analysis of the position, opportunities and challenges faced by 
women and men across CI2 sectors (drawing on the review of literature and the deep-dives into the analysis 
of country contexts). Building on this assessment, the Gender Action Plan annexed to this Assessment in 
Annex 6 (and summarised in Section 8) identifies action areas and entry points CFM and its Project 
Companies can leverage to enhance participation and equal outcomes for women in CI2 investments in 
these sectors. 
Improving women and girls’ access  
CFM and its Project Companies will use its investment projects and community development projects to 
address the physical, financial, attitudinal and safety barriers that may limit women’s access to WASH and 
Oceans Infrastructure.  
Using project development processes (such as Environment and Social Impact Assessment, community 
needs assessment and  targeted Gender Assessments), CFM will explicitly consider the barriers which affect 
women and girls’ access, specifically focusing on indigenous households and women and girls with 
disabilities. It will incorporate, where possible, appropriate actions to address these barriers into the design 
of investment projects (and will monitor progress in this area). CFM will seek to use community 
development projects to increase the direct benefits for women and girls resulting from investment by 
addressing identified barriers which cannot be addressed through the main investment. Examples of 
potential projects include working with families and communities to build their understanding of and 
support for good WASH practices and modifying water points to ensure access. Additional projects are 
outlined in the Gender Action Plan. 
Giving women voice in the planning, design and management of WASH facilities 
As a priority beneficiary group for CI2 investments, it is essential that stakeholder engagement and 
consultation processes service the needs and experiences of women and girls. This is to ensure that 
investment projects and community development projects can be responsive, as far as possible, to the 
WASH needs of women and girls. This is particularly pertinent given that social norms in CI2 focal countries 
often devalue and silence women’s voices, even when public consultation mechanisms are in place. 
Page 114

=== PAGE 118 ===
Draft Report 
Page vii of 143 
CFM and its Project Companies will adopt an  inclusive stakeholder engagement approach that provides 
conducive spaces for women and girls to voices their needs and experiences, including identifying women 
and girls , as well as other identified marginalized social groups in the targeted countries, as a distinct 
stakeholder group with whom to directly engage, identifying women’s leaders to work with to convene 
appropriate fora to hear a range of women’s and girls’ voices and working with community and men’s 
leaders to help them understand the rationale for engaging women in the planning of WASH facilities. 
In some projects, community-led WASH management committees may play a role in the management of 
WASH facilities. Where this is the case, CFM and its Project Companies will support committees to operate 
in a way that provides space for women’s voices to be heard, including by identifying and recruiting to the 
committee local women who are perceived (by men and other women) to have some legitimacy in speaking 
out on behalf of the community. Planned actions to provide a safe space for women’s voices in the planning, 
design and management of WASH facilities will be set out in the investment’s stakeholder engagement plan. 
Additional action points to ensure women and girls have an equal voice are outlined in the Gender Action 
Plan. 
Providing women with formal employment opportunities in the WASH sector 
Low levels of secondary education completion amongst girls in several of the CI2 focal countries combined 
with gender norms around acceptable productive roles for women and men can make the formal 
employment of women in the WASH sector challenging.  
CFM Project Companies will be proactive in hiring a gender-balanced team, making adjustments to working 
practices where this could level the playing field between male and female candidates. It is, however, 
recognised that in several focal countries, there are systemic issues beyond CFM’s control which are likely 
to limit the Companies’ ability to recruit senior female project staff. In such contexts, CFM will scope out 
opportunities to encourage more women into target sectors, including through scholarships for women 
embarking on tertiary education in relevant Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) 
fields. 
At the project level, Project Companies will identify employment opportunities for women in WASH 
enterprises and put in place appropriate mechanisms to recruit, train and support women in these roles. 
Opportunities might include roles as sanitation sale agents, in meter reading, water tank construction or 
cleaning, among others. Additional action points are outlined in the Gender Action Plan. 
Creating an enabling environment for gender mainstreaming in the CI2 Fund and the Project 
Companies  
CFM recognises the need to draw on specialist skills and advice to guide the company’s leadership on how 
to operationalise its gender commitments across the business and within the investments it manages. This 
is expected to be achieved through a network of gender and inclusion specialists who can be hired on an 
as-needed basis to provide fund and project specific support. 
CFM will support Project Companies to put in place essential internal systems which are gender-responsive 
and gender-transformative, and capacities that will facilitate gender mainstreaming through the project 
and its operations, thereby operationalising this CI2 Fund Gender Action Plan. Arrangements will include, 
developing a local (Project-specific) gender action plan, agreeing and implementing a Project-specific 
Gender Equality Policy which sets out the company’s commitments to gender equality and Project 
Companies also take steps to require their principal contractors to give due attention to gender issues in 
their own operations (such as developing an operational Gender Equality Policy and recruiting a gender-
balanced team). Further commitments are set out in the Gender Action Plan. 
Page 115

=== PAGE 119 ===
Draft Report 
Page viii of 143 
 
List of acronyms 
BCCSAP  
 
 
 
Bangladesh Climate Change and Action Plan  
 
CFM  
 
 
 
 
Climate Fund Managers  
 
CI2 
 
 
 
 
Climate Investor 2 
 
GCF  
 
 
 
 
Green Climate Fund  
 
HCF  
 
 
 
 
Health care facilities  
 
JPWSSH  
 
 
 
Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene 
 
KESHP   
 
 
 
Kenya Environmental Sanitation & Hygiene Policy  
 
KRA  
 
 
 
 
Key Result Areas 
 
MH  
 
 
 
 
Menstrual hygiene  
 
MOWS   
 
 
 
Ministry of Water and Sanitation  
 
NDP5  
 
 
 
Namibia’s 5th National Development Plan  
 
NCCSAP  
 
 
 
National Climate Change Strategy Action Plan  
 
NDP III   
 
 
 
National Development Plan III 
 
NHPSWSS  
 
 
 
National Hygiene Promotion Strategy for Water Supply and  
Sanitation Sector  
 
NPCC   
 
 
 
National Policy on Climate Change  
 
 
 
NPGD   
 
 
 
National Policy on Gender and Development  
 
 
NSWSS   
 
 
 
National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation  
 
NSDP   
 
 
 
National Sustainable Development Policy   
 
OD  
 
 
 
 
Open defecation  
 
STEM  
 
 
 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics  
 
ToR  
 
 
 
 
Terms of Reference 
 
MTP III  
 
 
 
Third Medium Term Plan  
 
UNFCCC  
 
 
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Page 116

=== PAGE 120 ===
Draft Report 
Page ix of 143 
Page 117

=== PAGE 121 ===
Page 10 of 143 
Glossary of Selected Gender Terms 
Empowerment 
The process through which people take control and action in order to overcome 
obstacles of structural inequality which have previously put them in a 
disadvantaged position. 
Gender 
Sex refers to the biological differences between male and female bodies. Gender, 
on the other hand, refers to the socially constructed attitudes, values, roles and 
responsibilities of women and men, in a given culture and location. These attitudes, 
values and roles are influenced by perceptions and expectations arising from 
cultural, political, economic, social and religious factors, as well as from custom, 
law, class, ethnicity and individual or institutional bias. Gender attitudes and 
behaviors are learnt and change over time. 
Gender analysis 
The close examination of a problem or situation in order to identify to differences 
in the gender roles, activities, needs, and available opportunities of men and 
women. Gender analysis of a development program involves identifying the gender 
issues within the problem which is being addressed and in the obstacles to 
progress, so that these issues can be addressed in all aspects of the program - in 
project objectives, in the choice of intervention strategy and in the methods of 
program implementation. 
Gender-aware policy 
A policy which takes into account the social relationships of women and men as 
well as the differences in their needs, as opposed to a policy that is gender neutral 
and implicitly assumes that women and men have the same needs. 
Gender blindness 
The failure to recognize that the needs of men and women are different. A gender-
blind approach assumes that gender is not an influencing factor in projects, 
programs or policies. 
Gender division of 
labour 
Is an overall societal pattern where women are allotted one set of gender roles and 
men another. An unequal gender division of labor refers to a division of labor in 
which there is an unequal gender division of reward. Discrimination against women 
in this sense occurs when women get most of the burden of labor, and most of the 
unpaid labor, but men collect most of the income and rewards resulting from labor. 
In many countries, the most obvious pattern in the gender division of labor is that 
women are mostly confined to unpaid domestic work and unpaid food production, 
whereas men dominate in cash crop production and waged employment. 
Gender equality 
Means that there is no discrimination on grounds of a person’s sex in the allocation 
of resources or benefits, or in the access to services. Equality exists when both men 
and women are attributed equal social value, equal rights and equal 
responsibilities, and have equal access to the means (resources, opportunities) to 
exercise them. Gender equality may be measured in terms of whether there is 
equality of opportunity, or equality of results. 
Gender equity 
Means fairness and justice in the distribution of benefits and responsibilities. 
Gender equity is the process of being fair to women and men. To ensure fairness, 
measures must often be available to compensate for historical and social 
disadvantages that prevent men and women from otherwise operating on a level 
playing field. Equity leads to equality. 
Gender gap 
A gender gap is an observable and sometimes measurable gap between men and 
women in terms of socioeconomic indicators, such as ownership of land, 
attendance at school or participation in the labor force, which is understood to be 
unjust and provides evidence of a gender issue to be addressed. 
Gender 
mainstreaming 
Is the systematic process of ensuring that women and men have equal access and 
control over resources, development benefits and decision-making at all stages of 
the development process through ensuring that the respective needs, interests and 
priorities of women and men are integrated into in all policies, programs and 
Page 118

=== PAGE 122 ===
Page 11 of 143 
 
projects. It requires: (a) continuous assessment of the implications and effects of 
energy-related projects and policies on women and men; (b) designing and 
implementing strategies and actions that aim to better address the needs of 
women and men, improve their well-being, and facilitate their participation in the 
development process; and (c) a mechanism for ensuring this is done and for 
reporting to managers. 
Gender neutral and 
gender blind 
 
Gender-neutral policies are not specifically aimed at either men or women and are 
assumed to affect both sexes equally. However, they may actually be gender-blind. 
Gender-blindness means ignoring the different roles, responsibilities, capabilities, 
needs and priorities of women and men. Gender-blind policies are based on 
information derived from men’s activities and/or assume those affected by the 
policy have the same (male) needs and interests. 
Gender relations  
 
The social relationships and power distribution between men and women in both 
the private (personal) and public spheres. 
Gender roles 
 
Gender roles are sets of behaviours assigned to men and women respectively, 
according to their cultural norms and traditions that determine which activities, 
tasks and responsibilities are perceived as male and which female. Gender roles are 
affected by age, class, race, ethnicity and religion, and by the geographical, 
economic and political environment. These roles shape identity, determining how 
we are perceived by others, how we are expected to think and act as women and 
men. Changes in gender roles often occur in response to changing economic, 
natural or political circumstances, including development efforts. 
 
 
Page 119

=== PAGE 123 ===
Page 12 of 143 
 
 
Background to the Assessment 
Climate Fund Managers (CFM) is preparing a funding proposal for the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to be 
presented to the GCF Board in June 2022. If successful, CFM will use its financing facility Climate 
Investor 2 (CI2) to invest in infrastructure for water and sanitation services, the use and protection of 
wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems as well as climate resilient ports in up to 25 countries.  
 
Both GCF and CFM are committed to promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women 
through their investments. By adopting a gender mainstreaming approach in investments, GCF and 
CFM expect not only to mitigate the risks for women and men associated with funded projects, but 
also to benefit women and men equally, reducing any gender differentials associated with 
vulnerabilities exacerbated by climate change and promoting sustainable and equitable development.   
 
This assessment has been commissioned to inform CFM’s funding proposal to GCF. In line with the 
assignment’s Terms of Reference (ToR), it aims to understand, within the context of climate action, 
how women and men are affected by problems in three main areas: i) access to and management of 
water and sanitation (WASH) services;2 ii) the protection and management of wetland, coastal and 
marine ecosystems; and iii) the development of climate resilient port infrastructure. The specific issues 
covered under each area are summarised in Table 1 below. 
 
Table 1: Issues covered in the gender assessment, by area 
Sector 
Issues covered 
Water and Sanitation 
• 
Women and men’s, girls’ and boys’ access to and use of WASH services, the barriers they 
encounter, including gender-based violence, and how climate change is affecting these 
• 
How women and men, girls and boys are affected my challenges in accessing quality 
WASH 
• 
The roles that men and women, boys and girls play in the WASH sector, including formal 
employment opportunities 
• 
Women and girls’ participation and leadership in the design, planning and management 
of WASH infrastructure and services 
• 
National policy in relation to gender, water and sanitation 
• 
Stakeholders involved in WASH 
• 
WASH problem tree analysis 
Wetland, 
coastal and 
marine 
ecosystems 
• 
Women and men’s use of, and interaction with, wetland, coastal and marine areas 
• 
How climate change is affecting these different uses and interactions, and the impact 
on the populations concerned 
• 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not, and could be involved in the 
protection and management of wetland, coastal and marine areas  
• 
Problem tree analysis 
Port 
infrastructur
e 
• 
The different ways in which men and women use and benefit from available port 
infrastructure 
• 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not and could be involved in and 
can benefit from the development of climate resilient port infrastructure 
• 
Problem tree analysis 
 
2 Although the assignment ToR refer to ‘water and sanitation’ only, the gender assessment also covers hygiene, including, to some extent, 
menstrual hygiene. This is because improvements in hygiene practices can often be achieved through improvements in access to water 
and sanitation services, and the benefits of these are considerable for women and girls. Given this slightly broader focus, we tend to refer 
to water, sanitation and hygiene and use the acronym ‘WASH’. 
Page 120

=== PAGE 124 ===
Page 13 of 143 
 
 
Findings from the assessment have informed the development of a Gender Action Plan, which sets 
out how CFM will mainstream gender and inclusive approaches in order to promote gender equality 
through the CI2 investment and supported projects. 
 
This report presents a gender assessment of the three areas of investment interest. It has been 
prepared over two iterations. The first iteration provided a high-level assessment of gender issues in 
the water and sanitation sectors, as well as country level context analysis for 8 priority countries: 
Bangladesh, Djibouti, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Morocco, Namibia Nigeria and Uganda. Responding to GCF 
feedback on the first iteration, this second iteration has an expanded scope. It now includes a high-
level global gender assessment of wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems and port infrastructure, 
stakeholder mapping and engagement for the original 8 priority countries, as well as country level 
context analysis for an additional 3 priority countries: Botswana, Brazil and Indonesia. 3  
1.1 This report 
The findings from the gender assessment are presented in this report in the following eight sections.  
We start by briefly outlining the methodology used in preparing the assessment (Section 2). 
In Section 3, we describe, at a global level, the main gender issues identified in the water and 
sanitation sectors, and how these gender issues are affected by climate change, drawing on evidence 
from academic papers and practitioner literature. 
In Sections 4 and 5, we conduct a similar exercise in the areas of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems and climate resilient port infrastructure. 
In Section 6 we analyse the policy context and data in 11 focal countries in which we describe the 
policy direction in relation to WASH, gender and climate change, and identify entry points at the 
national level to improve women’s participation and equal outcomes. For eight of these countries, 
those designated priority countries 1 and 2, the context analysis also includes a mapping of key 
stakeholders in the WASH sector from national to community levels. 
In Section 7 we draw together the literature reviews and country-level analyses into problem tree 
analyses which unpack the causes and effects of inadequate infrastructure and services for women 
and girls across the CI2 sectors. 
In Section 8, we use the problem tree analyses and the evidence reviewed to identify four 
opportunities for CI2 to promote gender equality through large scale investment in WASH, wetland, 
coastal and marine ecosystem protection and climate resilient port infrastructure development. 
In the final section (Section 9), we provide an overview of key indicators to monitor the results and 
impact of gender mainstreaming activities. 
 
 
 
 
3 It was not possible to conduct stakeholder mapping and interviews for these 3 additional countries as No Objection Letters were 
received too late in the process for this Gender Assessment. 
Page 121

=== PAGE 125 ===
Page 14 of 143 
 
 
Gender Assessment methodology 
The methodology for this Gender Assessment and the subsequent Gender Action Plan has been guided 
by GCF’s approach to gender mainstreaming (Figure 2). As part of it, we have conducted gender 
analysis of global evidence on gender issues in WASH, the protection of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems and port infrastructure, national policies for priority countries and available quantitative 
datasets; mapped country level stakeholders; and used this evidence to prepare the narrative and 
problem tree analysis that are presented in this report. Subsequently, the Gender Assessment has 
been used to inform a Gender Action Plan, which will guide CFM’s gender mainstreaming efforts in 
CI2. This Section describes in more detail the methodology used in preparing the Gender Assessment.   
Figure 2: GCF’s gender mainstreaming approach4  
 
 
This is a second draft of the Gender Assessment and Action Plan, which, following feedback from GCF, 
has been developed further. The second iteration responds to this feedback, especially focusing on 
the inclusion of Oceans Infrastructure in addition to the water and sanitation sector and reflect on 
findings from stakeholder analysis and engagement and will include a performance measurement 
framework and be relevant to a wider set of countries where CI2 will provide support.   
2.1 Information and Data Gathering   
The information/data gathering element of the Gender Assessment focused on: 
1. A review of global evidence in WASH, the protection of wetland, coastal and marine 
ecosystems, and the development of port infrastructure in developing country contexts. 
This included men’s and women’s, girls’ and boys’ access to and use of available resources, 
and associated constraints, including gender-based violence; their participation in the 
 
4 Source: guidelines-gcf-toolkit-mainstreaming-gender_0.pdf (greenclimate.fund) 
Page 122

=== PAGE 126 ===
Page 15 of 143 
 
planning and design of initiatives to improve facilities in the three thematic areas, as well as 
employment opportunities. 
2. National policies in WASH, gender and climate change in 11 focal countries: Bangladesh, 
Botswana, Brazil, Djibouti, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria and 
Uganda.5 
3. Quantitative datasets available for access to WASH, the protection and management of 
wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems and girls’ education, data primarily used for reporting 
against relevant SDGs. 
Review of global evidence in WASH, the protection of wetland, coastal and marine 
ecosystems and port infrastructure 
For the review of global evidence, we identified relevant search terms/keywords for the three 
thematic areas. These included: “gender”, “women”, “boys”, “girls”, “water”, “sanitation”, “hygiene”, 
“menstrual hygiene”, “handwashing”, “WASH”, “blue economy”, “ocean economy”, “sustainable 
ports”, “climate resilient ports” and “climate change”. These terms were used to manually search 
(through trialling different combinations of search terms) search engines and the websites of the 
organisations known to have a role in gender, WASH, oceans, port infrastructure and climate change. 
Through this, we identified relevant online resources from academic and practice-focused sources, 
which we then used to snowball additional sources by examining reference lists within the literature 
found. 
A total of 85 studies were identified and reviewed, including 71 focused on WASH, nine on wetland, 
coastal and marine ecosystems and eight (two being used for both) on port infrastructure (See Annex 
1 for bibliography). A selection of academic papers was included as well as multilateral agency reports 
and selected practitioner literature. To narrow down the extensive literature on WASH, the review 
focused primarily on what the Joint Programme Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JPWSSH) refer 
to as higher levels of service, in line with CI2’s focus on infrastructure.  Although hygiene is not 
specified in the assignment ToR, improved water and sanitation infrastructure will facilitate better 
hygiene, and so sources on hygiene were also reviewed.  
The global evidence review found that, with one notable exception (the Water for Women Fund), 
research with a comprehensive and combined focus on gender, WASH and climate, is relatively sparse. 
More studies were identified on the effects of climate change on WASH infrastructure than on its 
gendered impacts on WASH services. The exceptions here are the Water for Women studies which 
focused on rural settings and community managed WASH systems in the East Asia and Pacific region. 
In WASH overall, there is limited qualitative research and a lack of longitudinal research assessing the 
effects over time. For urban settings, utility level reports, complaint registers and WASH programme 
evaluations could provide additional sources of information.  
 
The global evidence review also found that most literature on wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems 
is largely gender blind. Most reports primarily examined benefits and impacts from an economic and 
biodiversity perspective, with limited discussion of benefits and impacts for people. When people 
were discussed, this was mostly associated with economic benefits, such as those relating to tourism 
and fishing, with little consideration of social impacts. 
 
5 The context analysis concentrated on WASH only, and did not include wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems, or port infrastructure, 
areas that were covered through global level analysis only. 
Page 123

=== PAGE 127 ===
Page 16 of 143 
 
Policy Analysis in focal countries 
This analysis focused on national policies, strategies and action plans in the 11 focal countries in the 
following areas: overarching national development, water, sanitation, hygiene, gender, climate 
change, health and education. Our review covered a total of 65 policies currently operational, 
including seven for Bangladesh, five for Botswana, nine for Brazil, six for Djibouti, five for Indonesia, 
four for Ivory Coast, seven for Kenya, five for Morocco, five for Namibia, six for Nigeria and six for 
Uganda (see full set of policies reviewed in Annex 2).  All of them were sourced online. Most were in 
English, although those for Djibouti, Ivory Coast and Morocco were largely in French and those for 
Brazil were largely in Portugese. 
Once collated, key data on core areas of interest (Box 1) was extracted from the polices into a 
spreadsheet and then analysed drawing out the overarching WASH policy direction, the extent to 
which gender issues are considered and tackled in WASH policy, and how climate change is affecting 
all of this.   
 
Quantitative data analysis 
Quantitative data on population access to WASH facilities and access to WASH facilities in schools and 
health centres has largely been drawn from the WHO and the UNICEF JPWSSH.6 This data has been 
complemented with data from UNICEF’s Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS)7, where available, 
and, for data on women’s education levels, from UNESCO’s Institute of Statistics.8 The latter is to 
understand the extent to which women may be equipped to access formal employment within the 
WASH sector. For the protection of wetlands, coastal and marine protection, we drew on SDG14 
reporting, but very little of it tracked men’s and women’s engagement. 
2.2 Stakeholder analysis 
 
6 Data | JMP (washdata.org) 
7 Surveys - UNICEF MICS 
8 UIS Statistics (unesco.org) 
Box 1. 
Areas of interest in the policy analysis 
1. What are the main water and sanitation and hygiene challenges identified? 
2. How is climate change affecting these challenges? 
3. How are men, women, boys and girls affected differently by these challenges? 
4. What are the main health consequences associated with the water and sanitation and hygiene 
challenges faced? Who is primarily affected by these?  
5. What are the main policy objectives in water and sanitation and hygiene?  
6. How do these policy objectives seek to address the impact of climate change? 
7. What formal and informal roles does the policy foresee men, women, boys and girls playing in 
the water and sanitation and hygiene sectors, and in adapting water and sanitation and hygiene 
management practices to minimise the effects of climate change? 
8. How does the policy framework encourage and support women and girls to pursue careers in 
areas relevant to water and sanitation systems development and management?     
9. Which agencies are responsible for overseeing and implementing the policy objectives outlined 
and what are their roles? 
Page 124

=== PAGE 128 ===
Page 17 of 143 
 
The stakeholder mapping was done through a series of interviews with key sector players in eight of 
the priority countries.9 Relevant actors were identified using the team’s personal contacts and through 
online sources. From this longlist, a selection of key informants were identified from national 
ministries in charge of water, sanitation, hygiene, gender and climate change, CSOs working on gender 
and/or WASH issues and other country-based WASH experts. We contacted these individuals to 
request a short interview. A total of 50 individuals were contacted in the eight priority countries, 29 
of whom responded and were interviewed (Table 3).  
 
Table 2: Stakeholders interviewed, by country 
Country 
Interviews  
Type of Stakeholder Interviewed   
Bangladesh  
3 
CSO (2), National WASH Expert (1) 
Djibouti 
4 
CSO (3), National Government (1) 
Ivory Coast 
2 
National Government (1), CSO (1) 
Kenya 
7 
National Government (2) CSO (5) 
Morocco 
0 
- 
Namibia 
2 
Multilateral (1), National WASH Expert (1) 
Nigeria 
3 
CSO (2), Multilateral (1) 
Uganda 
8 
National Government (3) Multilateral (2), CSO (3) 
TOTAL 
29 
 
 
Stakeholder interviews were used to explore three main issues: 
▪ 
Current efforts to promote gender equality in water and sanitation infrastructure 
development; 
▪ 
The main actors involved in promoting gender equality in water and sanitation 
infrastructure development and their roles; and 
▪ 
Stakeholder recommendations for CI2 investments in their country and feedback on the 
opportunities identified in the first iteration of the Gender Assessment. 
The interview guide is attached in Annex 3, with the list of stakeholders involved and the main points 
emerging provided in Annexes 4 and 5 respectively.  
 
The interview guide is attached in Annex 3, with the list of stakeholders involved and the main points 
emerging provided in Annexes 4 and 5 respectively.  
2.3 Gender Assessment Narrative and Problem Tree Analysis  
Findings from the global evidence review of WASH and protection of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems and port infrastructure, as well as the deep dive analysis of focal countries in the WASH 
sector, are presented separately in this Gender Assessment, in Sections 3, 4 and 5 respectively. We 
have used these findings to prepare problem tree analyses for each of the three thematic areas, all of 
which can be found in section 7.  
The opportunities for promoting gender equality through CI2 investments presented in section 8 of 
this report draw on the full dataset collated through the global literature review, the stakeholder 
mapping, the national policy review in 11 countries and problem tree analysis in the three areas.  The 
 
9 It was not possible to conduct stakeholder interviews with stakeholders in the remaining three countries as No Objection Letters were 
received too late in the process. 
Page 125

=== PAGE 129 ===
Page 18 of 143 
analysis process to identify these opportunities involved two steps.  Firstly, as part of the first iteration 
of this Gender Assessment, we used the findings from the literature review of gender issues in WASH 
to identify potential opportunities for promoting gender equality through WASH.  We then validated 
these using the country analysis in an initial set of 8 focal countries. Overall, there was a good 
alignment between the two. Secondly, in the second iteration of this Gender Assessment, we used 
findings from the literature review of gender issues in the protection and management of wetland, 
coastal and marine ecosystems, and in the development of port infrastructure, to identify 
opportunities for promoting gender equality in these areas. The opportunities aligned well with those 
already identified for WASH and the two have been combined.  This integrated set of opportunities 
form the basis of the material presented in section 8 of the report. 
2.4 Limitations 
Availability of global evidence on the protection of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems, and climate resilient port infrastructure 
The existing evidence base on gender as it relates to oceans and, particularly, port infrastructure is 
extremely small. Many qualitative reports reviewed were gender-blind and did not explore how 
benefits and impacts may differ for women and men. No reports explored differentiated impacts for 
boys and girls, with children in general referred to only in relation to food security.  
More broadly, most reports primarily examined benefits and impacts from an economic and 
biodiversity perspective with limited discussion of benefits and impacts for humans. When people 
were discussed, this was mostly associated with economic benefits, such as those relating to tourism 
and fishing, with little consideration of social impacts. With the majority of ocean-related reports 
authored by INGOs and other issue-focused organisations who collaborate through groups such as 
Ocean Panel and WorldFISH, many reports are sector specific, particularly fisheries and, to a lesser 
extent, tourism.  
The literature on good practices for involving women in, and maximising benefits for them from, the 
protection and management of wetland, coastal and marine areas or the development of climate 
resilient port infrastructure is also scant.  
Quantitative data is similarly scarce. Most data identified focused on developed countries or regions 
(e.g., the EU). Available data also tends to focus on the formal sector with little or no 
consideration of impacts in the informal sector, where women tend to be concentrated. The most 
recent unpublished statistics for SDG 14 are from 2014 and, as above, focus on physical indicators 
such as marine and coastal protected areas and fish stocks, rather than related human benefits or 
impacts. 
Availability of national policy documents 
The research team has encountered some challenges in accessing required data. For example, it has 
not been possible to include in the review policies that are not accessible online. This has led to some 
significant omissions, for example, we have not been able to access Water and Sanitation policies for 
Nigeria and Uganda, and we have only been able to review three policies for Ivory Coast. Similarly, 
there are gaps in the quantitative data available which are noted in the country summaries in Section 
6. Furthermore, the gender analysis in policies can be quite scant, suggesting that a full consideration
of the gender issues in WASH has not been done at the policy level.
Page 126

=== PAGE 130 ===
Page 19 of 143 
 
Time pressures for conducting the stakeholder mapping 
With only three weeks to prepare the stakeholder mapping, the scope for engaging stakeholders has 
been extremely tight. It is positive that 29 stakeholders have been engaged but there are gaps: we 
have not been able to engage any stakeholders in Morocco, nor have we been able to conduct a 
stakeholder mapping for the three countries added in the second iteration of the Gender Assessment, 
namely Brazil, Botswana and Indonesia, for which No Objection Letters came through too late in the 
process. 
    
 
 
 
Page 127

=== PAGE 131 ===
Page 20 of 143 
 
 
Global Evidence Review: WASH & Climate Change 
In this Section, we present findings from the global evidence review exploring the main gender issues 
in WASH.  It considers the following questions, identified as the more pertinent issues based on our 
review of the relevant literature: 
• 
Women and men’s, girls’ and boys’ access to and use of WASH services, the barriers they 
encounter, including gender-based violence, and how climate change is affecting these; 
• 
How women and men, girls and boys are affected by challenges in accessing quality WASH; 
• 
The roles that men and women, boys and girls play in the WASH sector, including formal 
employment opportunities; 
• 
Women and girls’ participation and leadership in the design, planning and management of WASH 
infrastructure and services. 
3.1 Differences in WASH access and consequences  
Women and girls are largely responsible for household water collection and latrine cleaning, yet there 
are often differences in their ability to access and use WASH facilities. In 2017, WaterAid estimated 
that WASH-related diseases were the fifth biggest killer of women worldwide, causing more deaths 
than AIDS, diabetes or breast cancer. This section outlines the differences in access to and use of water 
supply, sanitation and hygiene in households, health facilities and schools. Some of the key barriers 
which affect access to WASH facilities are summarised in Table 3 below. 
Access to water in household settings 
Fetching water is a physically challenging task and is typically carried out by women and children. It 
has musculoskeletal health risks and other potential injuries, including spinal damage, hernia and 
prolapse, as well as an increased risk of miscarriage10. Distance to reaching water and sanitation 
facilities makes people vulnerable to physical or verbal abuse, rape and assault11. Other risks include 
rough terrain (particularly when carrying water) and attack from dangerous animals12. Water 
collection can affect people’s quality of life in a number of ways: time devoted to water-related tasks 
limits women’s time for other household chores, rest and leisure and income-generating activities13. 
 
Increasing access to sufficient quantities of water can also contribute to better hygiene (such as 
handwashing with soap or face washing) and thus improve health (in terms of diarrhoea and 
respiratory infections). Women have an increased need for water for hydration, sanitation and 
hygiene during menstruation, pregnancy, the postnatal period and caring for sick family members or 
young children14. Limited supplies of water, as well as competing water needs in the household, can 
trigger stress and violence between spouses and parents and children15. For this reason, women might 
put partner/family water needs above their own to avoid abuse. There is some evidence that 
household piped water helps reduce intra-household conflict16. Examples of sextortion (the practice 
 
10 Fisher (2008) 
11 Geere et al. (2018) 
12 Caruso et al. (2021) 
13 Sorenson et al. (2011) 
14 Kayser (2019) 
15 House et al. (2014) 
16 Devoto et al. (2012) 
Page 128

=== PAGE 132 ===
Page 21 of 143 
 
of extorting sexual favours) for public water supply in low-income settlements have been documented 
in Kenya17. 
Access to sanitation facilities in household settings 
Many communities have strict cultural norms around men and women sharing household or public 
toilets. Where norms prevent women from sharing latrines with men during menstruation, this often 
compels open defecation. Social expectations of modesty mean that women should not be seen 
urinating and defecating. In order to avoid using the toilet during the day, women report reduced 
intake of food/drink or taking anti-diarrhoea tablets18. Poor sanitation practices (such as open 
defecation) and WASH-related diseases can induce stress during pregnancy and may also contribute 
to miscarriage and still birth19. Pay-per-use latrines are often inequitable for women as there are often 
fewer cubicles for women (leading to longer queues), and women use toilets more frequently than 
men, making it more expensive20. Women report becoming practised at going for several hours 
without urinating due to the lack of facilities in a variety of settings (including in the workplace, in 
public buildings and spaces or when travelling). Those needing more frequent toilet use (e.g. pregnant 
women) or incontinence (older women) are limited in their ability to travel far from home21. 
Dehydration from not drinking due to poor latrine access (especially for women and girls) can affect 
personal hygiene and enhances the risk of reproductive and urinary tract infections. 
 
Men tend not always to use a toilet for defecation, either when they are at home or away. A range of 
reasons are cited for this, including: to slow the rate of the pit filling, men having more time available 
for open defecation (OD), not having a toilet where they work, the greater mobility of men and 
reverting to OD when household toilets are in high demand22. Open defecation is considered less risky 
for men regarding security/safety concerns and perhaps, in some cases, less shame about OD. Male 
open urination is a commonly accepted practice, although it can offend public decency, and is often 
prohibited through by-laws and punishable with fines23. 
 
Table 3: Examples of barriers inhibiting use 
 
Physical 
• 
Women have more limited land rights, which constrains their ability to decide 
whether or not to construct a household latrine or improved water point.  
• 
Use may also be limited by rough terrain (particularly when carrying water).  
• 
Men migrating for paid work means less support for physical labour. Women 
may need to pay men for construction of infrastructure24 
• 
Dependence on others for water assistance or visits to the latrine could result in 
stress and anxiety for people with disabilities, sick or older relatives and others.  
Financial  
• 
Paying for water has gender implications: women earn lower wages, give up paid 
work to collect water and have less control over assets within the household. 
Water was a major expense for many women. Constrained finances limited 
 
17 KEWASNET (2020) 
18 Kulkarni et al. (2017) 
19 Bijaya et al., (2015) 
20 WaterAid et al. (2019) 
21 Scott, Sohail and Cavill, (2017) 
22 Chambers and Myers (2016) 
23 Scott, Sohail and Cavill (2017) 
24 Megaw, Kohlitz and Chong, 2020).  
 
Page 129

=== PAGE 133 ===
Page 22 of 143 
 
women’s access to preferred water sources, desired water quantity and water 
treatment methods. 
• 
Wealthy women report spending money to access water sources with shorter 
wait times or higher quality, or to compensate male neighbours, laborers or 
drivers for water collection.  
• 
Using public pay-per-use toilets mean women incur higher costs than men due 
to more frequent need.  
Safety  
• 
General safety concerns include feeling unsafe collecting water or feeling unsafe 
where they bathe and wash clothes.  
• 
Long absences from home for water collection could lead to conflicts because of 
husbands suspecting wives of infidelity.  
• 
Inadequate access to sanitation (when toilets lack doors, locks, lighting or are far 
away) is also associated with a heightened vulnerability to various forms of 
violence by men25. This includes taunting, teasing, name calling and throwing 
things at women or girls when going to latrines and open defecation sites, 
especially after dark. 
• 
Women frequently accompanied one another or asked men to accompany them 
for safety when open defecating.  
• 
Women might only let their daughters go out for open defecation at night or go 
with them26. 
• 
Women use make-shift arrangements (like potties) within the household to 
avoid using public toilets27.  
• 
Quarrels over contributions toward maintenance of shared toilets affects ability 
to use such facilities.  
Attitudinal 
• 
Women are often unable to use sanitation facilities or touch water when 
menstruating due to perceptions that menstruation is polluting. Taboos around 
menstruation can also affect participation in community life28. Menstrual 
hygiene is linked to emotional and psychosocial stress, resulting in feelings of 
shame, fear, anxiety and distraction.  
• 
Participation in a water project can lead to intrahousehold conflict and violence 
or shunning, for instance, if women spoke in meetings. 
• 
Husbands became angry or physically abusive when women took too long to 
collect water, when there was not enough water available for bathing and other 
purposes or when they were asked to assist with water collection.  
• 
Women and girls report shame related to sanitation and menstruation 
behaviours and experiences.  
 
Access to hygiene in household settings   
Globally, men are reportedly less likely to consistently wash their hands with soap at critical times. In 
households, women are typically the ones targeted by hand hygiene promotion through WASH 
programmes (often in their role as mothers). Women play a key role in supporting the hand hygiene 
of family members, for instance, by ensuring soap and water is available for hand hygiene or reminding 
family members to wash their hands before eating or after using the toilet. Women, in their role as 
 
25 Heller, 2014; House et al., (2014) 
26 Kulkarni et al. (2017) 
27 Lennon (2011) 
28 Megaw, Kohlitz, Gero and Chong (2020) 
Page 130

=== PAGE 134 ===
Page 23 of 143 
 
community health promoters, also play a role in supporting this wider practice within the community. 
The Global Scaling Up Handwashing Project29 in Senegal included men in handwashing promotion 
discussions after recognition that: (1) men control their household’s access and provide funds for 
soap, (2) men can follow up the outreach session to ensure that household members wash their hands 
with soap and (3) men can enable, reinforce and sustain behavioural change by washing their hands 
with soap while encouraging others to do the same.  
 
Adequate menstrual hygiene (MH) refers to using a clean menstrual management material to absorb 
or collect menstrual blood.  It can be changed in privacy as often as necessary for the duration of a 
menstrual period, using soap and water for washing the body as required. It also encompasses having 
access to safe and convenient facilities to dispose of used menstrual management materials (Joint 
Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene, 2020). Clean water is a fundamental aspect of 
safe and dignified menstruation. Water is needed for (1) personal washing during menstruation and 
(2) washing of reusable menstrual products like menstrual cloths. MH is limited by inadequate access 
to water and sanitation infrastructure, limited availability of menstrual products (absorbents), lack of 
a private place to wash or change products, poor hygiene awareness and problems arising from stigma 
and taboo. 
Access to WASH in health facilities and schools  
Health facilities 
According to the JPWSSH (2020), a quarter of health care facilities (HCF) lacked basic water services in 
2019. HCF may rely on handpumps on their premises for their water supply. If the handpump stops 
working, staff have to collect water from nearby communities. Smaller facilities may not have the 
systems needed to provide buffer capacity by storing water on-site, meaning that where there is no 
caretaker, medical staff must collect water daily (or more often) for use in the HCF. In times of 
shortage, family members, likely to be women, may be expected to bring drinking water for patients 
as well as water for bathing. Water quality may also not be sufficient, and handpumps may not always 
be chlorinated (or the quality of water tested) on a regular basis so health care facilities may not 
always have the quality of water necessary for use.  
 
Integrating handwashing/basic hygiene is fundamental to primary health care and the prevention of 
Hospital Acquired Infections. Although clinic staff may have knowledge of the importance of 
handwashing, HCFs do not always have functional handwashing stations and soap. In 2019, one in 
three HCFs did not have hand hygiene facilities at the point of care. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
handwashing stations have been increasingly deployed at the entrance of HCFs to ensure patients and 
staff, including all visitors, adhere to COVID-19 measures. Health facilities may lack sufficient numbers 
of functional sanitation facilities, separate for staff and patients: in 2019, 10% of health care facilities 
had no sanitation service. Female friendly public toilets would: be safe and private, cater for hygiene 
requirements, be accessible for users, be affordable and available when needed, be well maintained 
and managed, and meet requirements of caregivers and parents. There would also be sufficient 
numbers of cubicles for men and women to reduce queues30. 
 
Increasingly, development partners are supporting improved WASH in HCF with improved WASH 
infrastructure and training on proper handwashing and handwashing stations. In particular, WASH can 
also support dignity in childbirth: a survey by the White Ribbon Alliance (2019) found that women 
 
29 WSP (2010) 
30 WaterAid et al. (2019) 
Page 131

=== PAGE 135 ===
Page 24 of 143 
 
want WASH in health care facilities for a dignified birth experience: expectations include running 
water, indoor toilets, clean beds and sheets. 
Schools  
Globally, 69% of schools had a basic drinking water service in 2019 while 63% had a basic sanitation 
service31. Whilst there are global and national standard ratios for pupils’ latrines, many schools are 
unable to provide enough toilets for pupils, or their limited budget means that materials are not 
always available to regularly clean toilets or to ensure anal cleansing materials and soap are always 
available. Soap should be included in the school budgets, but parents may also be encouraged to 
contribute funds. 
 
WASH in schools is intended to have a positive impact on child health, thereby reducing absences from 
school. WASH services in schools can be an incentive for parents to send their children to school, 
particularly girls in the transition from primary to secondary schools32. Adequate consumption of 
water at school can also lead to better hydration, which has a number of health benefits as well as 
benefits for learning (Hunter et al., 2015). 
 
A lack of WASH at home can impact girls’ education, for instance, when they are enlisted to help with 
water or sanitation-related tasks at home. Where there is no caretaker, students and teachers have a 
role to ensure the WASH facilities are maintained and that clean water is available. When girls attend 
school, they may also be asked to collect water for the school or clean toilets instead of being in class. 
There is some evidence that adolescent boys are impacted by poor sanitation in secondary schools; 
however, they are less impacted than girls. Overcrowding in schools has been associated with both 
boys and girls avoiding toilets. Students avoid using the toilet due to the anxiety of using a filthy latrine, 
queuing during the break or a lack of privacy when toilets do not have doors or locks.  
 
Globally, 57% of schools had a basic hand hygiene service in 201933. Handwashing in schools is 
promoted through a number of WASH in-school programmes and by school Health Clubs that promote 
WASH among the school community. Female teachers are often the main champions of handwashing 
with soap in the school environment.  
 
Self-reporting by girls suggests that inadequate toilet facilities in schools (lack of toilets, filthy toilets, 
insufficient water and limited access to menstrual materials) are a contributory factor for truancy, 
failing classes, absenteeism and drop out. Similarly, the lack of facilities for female teachers is a factor 
in staff retention/turnover. WASH programmes are increasingly tackling taboos and stigmas about 
menstruation through education and increasing as well as availability of WASH facilities at school by, 
for example, increasing girl’s access to sanitary absorbent materials.  
3.2 Effects of climate change on access to and use of WASH services 
At its most basic level, changing weather patterns affect WASH facilities by reducing water availability 
and damaging WASH infrastructure (Figure 3). Low-income households are more likely to be situated 
in areas affected by water shortages, floods, landslides and sewage overflow during floods. They are 
also more likely to use WASH facilities that can be easily destroyed or disrupted by climate hazards. 
 
31 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (2020) 
32 Chard et al., (2019) 
33 JMP, (2022) 
Page 132

=== PAGE 136 ===
Page 25 of 143 
 
The poorest typically have the least capacity to cope with and adapt to shocks34. This section reviews 
the general impacts of climate change on access to and use of WASH services, before reviewing the 
specific effects on water, sanitation and hygiene services.  
 
Figure 3: How WASH issues caused by climate change are exacerbated by other urban challenges, WUSP, 2021 
 
 
The literature review suggests that climate change affects access to and use of WASH facilities in five 
main ways: 
 
• 
Nuisance and disruption: Disruption to residents is an immediate implication of climate-
related damage to WASH infrastructure. For instance, flooding could lead to sewage back-up 
in homes connected to the sewerage network, overflowing pit latrines, as well as flooding of 
homes. As household managers or home-based workers, women are more likely to be 
affected by the nuisance caused by the maintenance and repair of WASH systems and 
disruption to WASH services caused by climate change, for instance, in ensuring the 
cleanliness of the home or dealing with nuisance such as odours. Clean-up activities are likely 
to cause temporary closure of markets, shops and roads leading to disruption for women in 
particular. 
• 
WASH health outcomes: Waterborne diseases are predicted to become more prevalent due 
to an increase in climate-related hazards35. In addition, exposure of residents to untreated 
faecal sludge or wastewater poses an immediate threat to public health, including faecal-oral 
disease and vector-borne diseases. Increased faecal sludge contamination is associated with 
health risks meaning that temporary evacuations of homes may be required. Women are 
more likely to be caring for sick with WASH-related diseases and elderly relatives within 
households.  
 
34 Mills, Willetts, Evans, Carrard and Kohlitz (2020) 
35 Ibid 
Page 133

=== PAGE 137 ===
Page 26 of 143 
 
• 
Elevated levels of depression and other mental health outcomes: Water insecurity and 
scarcity, as well as open defecation, are considered significant stressors for individuals36. 
Water insecure communities experience higher levels of anxiety and depression, and this is 
particularly the case for older women37. High stress levels are a result of perceived unfairness 
in water distribution38. Loss of WASH services to residents is also highly likely to cause stress 
and reduced mental health for residents, and this may be due to a decrease in the 
functionality of water-based toilets, toilets not flushing, unusable taps or a lack water for 
bathing etc. Water stressed communities are more prone to arguments, disagreements and 
violence39. 
• 
Increased WASH costs: Inadequate WASH can also increase financial strains40. Where men are 
the decision makers over household’s budgets, this can increase stress for women. Climate 
related damage to WASH infrastructure will require increased maintenance, repair and 
running costs. For those with networked services, increased preventive maintenance and 
water quality management costs are likely to be passed on to the household through tariffs. 
A rise in water fees or the cost of buying water from private providers can make safe water 
unaffordable for poorer households. 
• 
Loss of productive time/income: Homes, schools, HCFs and businesses may incur clean-up 
costs and a loss of income due to climate related events. Repair works are likely to cause 
temporary closure of businesses. Businesses that require water for operations e.g. catering, 
tea stalls, brewing, hairdressing or laundry, often run by women, are more likely to be affected 
by loss of income.   
Access to water in household settings 
Following extreme weather events, water scarcity can result from resource limitations (i.e. physical 
hydrological constraints) or accessibility/affordability constraints.  
 
Damage to piped water networks can mean that water is supplied through mobile tankers instead. 
Women and girls might have to queue to collect the water which is then stored in the household and 
its use carefully rationed. Women typically have higher water needs for hygiene and are thus impacted 
more. This brings a stress on families as a result of this water scarcity. Disputes are reported when 
men use too much water for bathing or when children spill water41. Households without many storage 
containers must make more trips to collect water instead. Warmer temperatures lead to increased 
demand for drinking water, with the poorest city residents particularly at risk due to the phenomenon 
of urban heat island42. On extremely hot days, water-carrying women and girls (especially elderly 
women) can be affected by heat stress/exhaustion. Women with limited physical abilities (e.g., 
pregnant women or the elderly) are more likely to struggle to access waterpoints and toilets when 
land conditions become waterlogged, muddy or slippery.  
 
The poorest people in cities, already reliant on intermittent services, are most affected by water 
shortages43. Augmentation strategies include the use of multiple water sources to meet household 
 
36 Young et al. (2021) 
37 Simiyu et al. (2021) 
38 Brewis et al. (2021) 
39 Adams et al. (2021) 
40 Javidi and Pierce (2018) 
41 Caruso et al. (2021) 
42 WSUP (2021) 
43 Ibid 
Page 134

=== PAGE 138 ===
Page 27 of 143 
 
water needs, and this has implications for water quality, cost and the time required to collect water. 
Residents might have to pay private water providers for additional water deliveries or find other 
private water solutions such as kiosks and bottled/sachet water during periods of water scarcity. To 
save costs, the poorest may use unsafe sources such as surface water or hand-dug/shallow wells. 
Increasing rainwater storage capacity could help to address water shortages, but poor households are 
less likely to have resources to store water (e.g., safe storage tanks). Water borrowing from 
neighbours is a strategy to overcome access constraints, particularly for those with longer round-trips 
to fetch water44, but this is associated with feelings of shame, fear and indebtedness45. 
Access to sanitation facilities in household settings 
Climate change will accentuate existing weaknesses in sanitation services. In many cities, little of a 
household’s sewage reaches the treatment plant due to poor design or poor management, or as a 
result of broken sewer pipes, pump failures or power supply outages or a non-functional treatment 
plant. Instead, faecal sludge is dumped or discharged into open drains, bodies of water and the 
surrounding environment. The public health risk this poses will increase in the context of climate 
change e.g., increased faecal contamination of water sources and residential areas. Bad practices in 
rainy season include taking advantage of flooding to flush out pit latrine contents (instead of paying 
for pit emptying). Men often provide pit latrine emptying services and experience increased health 
risks from working with inadequate sanitation services without properly health and safety equipment.  
 
Where toilets are no longer usable because they’ve been destroyed or damaged by climate hazards, 
poor households are more likely to struggle to repair toilets and may be more likely to be driven to 
revert to open defecation. During periods of water scarcity in a peri-urban community in Botswana, 
residents with toilets connected to a sewer reverted to using pit latrines46. The poorest live on land at 
risk from flooding and human-driven deforestation, which can create flash floods and landslides. 
Rebuilding damaged facilities or purchasing new devices after extreme weather events can be difficult, 
particularly for those living in remote areas and who may be cut off from access to markets that 
provide products and services. Gendered norms, such as men being responsible for decision making 
on household purchases or re-constructing damaged facilities, can result in delays rebuilding if male 
figures are absent (e.g. because of out-migration for work) or if men consider sanitation a low 
household priority47. Continual damage or destruction of a facility has an impact on WASH behaviour, 
and it can result in fatigue/apathy such that households must be motivated to re-build a toilet and 
handwashing facility, or it may result in reversion to open defecation (permanently or on a seasonal 
basis). Women and girls are likely to face issues with privacy or harassment while defecating or 
managing menstrual hygiene.  
 
Adaptations for climate change include the scheduled emptying of latrines in advance of flood 
seasons, low water-use toilets and improved construction quality to reduce the infiltration of water 
into septic tanks or sewers48. 
Access to hygiene in household settings 
Hygiene improvements create demand for water. Where water supplies are limited, households 
typically prioritize consumption over hygiene, and this has implications for women and girls in 
 
44 Rosinger et al. (2020) 
45 Wutich et al. (2008) 
46 McGill et al. (2019) 
47 Kohlitz et al. (2020) 
48 Oates et al. (2014) 
Page 135

=== PAGE 139 ===
Page 28 of 143 
 
particular. This section reviews hand and menstrual hygiene in the context of increased high-intensity 
rainfall, decreased rainfall, different types of flooding and tropical cyclones and other weather events.  
 
Extreme weather events (such as heavy rain, landslides, floods and cyclones) can destroy or damage 
hand hygiene facilities, disrupt the functionality of the facility, or make it difficult for people with 
physical limitations to access facilities. For example, where households have their handwashing 
station outdoors or next to their toilet, storms could cause damage to the station. Handmade devices 
are more prone to break down; however, variable rainfall also undermines the operations of 
handwashing facilities served by a piped water supply. Climate change also affects people’s journeys 
to wash their hands. This can be a particular problem for children, people with disabilities or older 
people49. 
 
Handwashing with unsafe water may increase the risk of diarrhoea50. For instance, handwashing with 
water contaminated with high levels of E. coli is likely to transfer more E. coli onto hands than it 
removes through washing51. Intensive handwashing with contaminated water can cause skin lesions 
that can lead to infections entering the bloodstream52. 
 
Climate hazards can mean that access to urban centres or other places to purchase soap or 
commercial menstrual products may not be accessible all year-round. Climate-related events can 
disrupt transport networks, affecting the final link of a supply chain i.e. preventing products available 
in the district town from reaching the village shop or household in sparsely populated rural areas.  
 
Water scarcity can force choices about how water is used at the household level. With menstrual 
hygiene already insufficiently prioritized in many cases, this challenge could easily become even more 
problematic for women and girls in the face of climate-induced water shortages. 
 
Water shortages at home and at school make personal hygiene more difficult to maintain during 
menstruation. Hotter days, more rain and higher humidity can increase the risk of reproductive tract 
infection, making personal hygiene that prevents disease even more critical. Washing intimate areas 
with unsafe water may plausibly increase the risk of infections. Saline intrusion in coastal areas can 
make water unsuitable for bathing or washing menstrual cloths e.g. causing fabrics to become rough 
and chaffing skin, which necessitates the usage of single-use, disposable products instead. Hand 
washing after changing a sanitary product or handling menstrual waste is often promoted as a critical 
time for hand hygiene, again highlighting the importance of access to water.  
 
Prolonged shortage of water affects how reusable menstrual product are used, the frequency and 
manner in which they are washed and whether fuel is available to make it possible to sterilise them 
with boiling water. It also affects whether women and girls are able to wash their menstrual cloths 
effectively. Prolonged rainfall or very windy weather can make it impossible to dry reusable cloths in 
direct sunlight as recommended for hygiene reasons since drying and storing cloths in a dark or shady 
place (or using damp cloths) can lead to infections. 
 
Climate change may make conventional disposal options for single-use products irrelevant, both those 
that are safe and hygienic (disposal in solid waste systems, incineration, composting and deep burial) 
 
49 Kohlitz et al. (2020) 
50 McCormick et al. (2016) 
51 Verbyla et al. (2019) 
52 Lemery et al. (2015) 
Page 136

=== PAGE 140 ===
Page 29 of 143 
 
or improvised (flushing products down the toilet, shallow burying of menstrual waste and throwing 
used products into drainage channels or open spaces). High-water table, heavy rainfall and 
overflowing sewers and flooding mean burial is not a viable option. Incorrect disposal of single-use 
menstrual products can exacerbate climate change if they block sewers or drainage systems, cause 
flooding and pollute water. Inadequate disposal options can result in the further stigmatisation and 
marginalisation of menstruating women and girls. During climate related disasters, social norms and 
stigma that impact MH often become more entrenched. This could make it difficult to discuss 
menstruation, hygiene and more sustainable ways for women to manage their menstruation.  
Access to WASH in health facilities and schools  
Staff, students and patients in schools and health care facilities require sufficient WASH facilities. 
Increasingly deep boreholes are being installed with overhead tanks to provide a higher-level of 
climate resilience to services in schools and health care facilities53. The use of renewable energy 
sources (such as solar energy) for pumping systems can further optimize their resilience. Storage 
containers provide water supply in drought and can provide a gravity-fed water supply to 
handwashing/drinking water tap stations. Simple adaptations to the water pipe system include water-
efficient fixtures and leakage management.  
 
Moreover, the greater rooftop area and storage capacity can mean that institutions provide greater 
efficiency in rainwater collection. The water collected can then be used for toilet flushing, cleaning, 
washing hands and also drinking, with adequate filtration and proper treatment. In coastal areas 
affected by salinity, water storage facilities based on the rainwater harvesting can provide continuity 
of safe water to communities. Greywater can also be captured and recycled for non-potable uses such 
as irrigation of trees.  
 
Repair works are likely to cause temporary closure of schools. Additionally, increased domestic WASH 
work leaves less time for education, and this is likely to affect girls in particular. During weather events, 
schools are often used as shelters for temporarily displaced people, and this can place strain on WASH 
services. When schools re-open for students, latrines may need to be emptied and cleaned and 
supplies of water treatment products and soap restocked. If it is too dangerous to go to school or if 
schools are closed, girls might not be able to collect their entitlement of sanitary pads (if the 
government has a pad distribution programme). All of this has consequences for girls and women’s 
ability to access their preferred menstrual product, or to change the product as often as needed. 
3.3 Agency in accessing and managing WASH facilities 
 
Women, men, boys and girls have different roles in WASH services in household, community and 
schools and health care facilities. Where women have relatively lower social and legal status and hold 
less political power within a community, this limits their influence on decisions about how families 
and communities maintain WASH in accessing, using, developing and managing services against 
climate change impacts54. 
Household 
Women are very often given responsibility for household WASH, for example, fetching water for the 
household, storing water safely, washing plates and cleaning toilets. Women and girls are usually 
 
53 Charles et al. (2009) 
54 Kohlitz et al. (2020) 
Page 137

=== PAGE 141 ===
Page 30 of 143 
 
tasked with filtering or boiling water before drinking55. Women also take care of the toileting needs of 
children and older people. They also spend considerable time caring for family members ill from 
water-related disease. Despite being primary managers of water and charged with the WASH related 
care for their families and households, women are not always consulted in decisions on household 
WASH services. Routray et al. (2017) found that in rural Odisha (India), the majority of construction of 
household level sanitation facilities was done exclusively by the male head, attributed to women’s 
lack of education and limited exposure to the world beyond their home and inability to influence the 
household's financial decisions.  
 
Care and the domestic WASH-related work burden falls disproportionately on women in all cultures, 
but the degree of this inequality varies. A shift in gender roles, with men taking some responsibility 
for cleaning the house, toilets, and the environment can help women and girls take on other roles and 
options within and outside the home, including work and schooling. Men more often take on 
household roles related to both building and financing WASH facilities. 
Community  
Women’s perspectives or voices are not always reflected in WASH decision making. Particularly in 
indigenous communities, women often hold important traditional knowledge about how best to 
manage and use both water and land resources, making them valuable experts56. Community WASH 
committees may have a requirement for female representation, for instance, the Government of 
Nepal’s 2011 Sanitation Master Plan requires 33% of WASH committee members to be women; 
however, women might not be empowered to contribute fully to WASH decision making. Women’s 
groups are rarely identified as stakeholders in the process of developing City Sanitation Plans, and so 
have limited input to guide strategic planning and investment decisions. Unless men are engaged in 
facilitating opportunities for women’s decision-making in WASH processes, a WASH programme can 
inadvertently run the risk of increasing burdens for women. Time spent by women on community 
WASH activities can be a source of conflict within the household, particularly if this is viewed as 
impacting on women’s time for household and family responsibilities57. 
 
When the household is invited to attend village meetings, typically the male head-of-household will 
go and women will stay in the home to take care of domestic responsibilities58. Facilitating men’s 
allyship to support women’s active participation in WASH decision-making is an emerging area in the 
WASH sector.  
Workforce  
UN Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking Water (GLAAS) data indicates that a 
large majority of countries lack sufficient human resources to implement national WASH plans. There 
are insufficient workers with the appropriate competencies in the right positions, including in rural or 
hard-to-reach areas or communities.  
 
Men hold the majority of professional positions in the WASH sector. Studies in Vietnam, Indonesia 
and Timor and elsewhere indicate that men hold the majority of professional positions in water and 
sanitation companies and utilities59. 
 
55 Megaw, Kohlitz, Gero and Chong (2020) 
56 USAID (2020) 
57 IWDA (2015) 
58 Megaw, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
59 Leahy et al., 2017; Grant et al. (2017) 
Page 138

=== PAGE 142 ===
Page 31 of 143 
 
 
Female representation in the workforce is a major challenge in most countries in both government 
and non-governmental WASH services. While men take on more paid roles, women are more likely to 
be offered unpaid roles as community health volunteers or health promoters. In many countries, 
women are missing in technical fields or management roles in the WASH sector. For instance, the HR 
Capacity assessment in Bangladesh found that the HR composition of government and WASH sector 
agencies is dominated by engineers and technicians, most of whom are men. The number of women 
employed in the sector is very low, and the majority tend to work as health extension workers and on 
community level hygiene promotion activities. Data from the IBNET database60 reveals that 
Bangladesh had around 6% female staff in utilities (1% female engineers) in 2017. In Sri Lanka61, the 
number of female engineers in the WASH sector has grown steadily over the past three decades. Sri 
Lanka’s free education policy has had enormous impacts on the sector, improving the ratio of women 
on engineering and technical water and sanitation courses in higher education. In Sri Lanka, 
international agencies prefer female candidates for WASH activities, and there are numerous rural 
water supply schemes run by women-led organisations.  
 
SACI Waters pioneering work in 2010 documented the experience of female water professionals in 
the region and shared their personal stories62. Since then, participation of women in WASH enterprises 
is increasing63. In Nepal64, having female sanitation sale agents is found to drive higher overall latrine 
use, and additionally, women are more effective at selling water and sanitation products/services to 
marginalized households65. WaterShed (2019) has worked in rural Cambodia to support women’s 
engagement in private WASH markets, including latrine sales and WASH product retail. Women’s 
ability to succeed often depends on their having self-belief, technical knowledge and safe workplaces 
free of harassment. It is also important they have the ability to work from home and simultaneously 
complete housework or supervise children as well as having family buy-in and permission to be away 
from home. Elsewhere, women have engaged in water vending, selling water from kiosks, meter 
reading, water tank cleaning, water filter selling and rainwater harvesting tank construction. Women 
also work in water-dependent, income-generating activities like catering, brewing and hairdressing. 
Additionally, women can work in sanitation related occupations such as toilet pan selling, toilet 
cleaning, latrine construction, serving as toilet attendants, doing manual scavenging work/pit 
emptying, managing public toilets or running faecal sludge management enterprises. In India, it is 
common for Dalit woman sanitation worker to clean and remove faecal waste from dry toilets, without 
the proper safety gear, risking infections66: ’A woman sanitation worker, working as a sweeper on the 
road, has no facilities such as toilets, or a resting shed to take a break, especially when working under 
the hot sun …. These women do not raise their voice against it, because they feel powerless and 
replaceable.’ Improvement in household water and sanitation services have freed up time for other 
income-generating activities.  
Schools and health care facilities  
Gendered power issues are at play, not only in how WASH is managed within households, but also in 
community interventions. For instance, latrine cleaning in schools often remains a female teacher or 
 
60 https://database.ib-net.org/DefaultNew.aspx  
61 IWA (2013) 
62 SaciWaters (2010) 
63 Indarti et al., 2018; Indarti et al. (2019) 
64 USAID and IDE (2020) 
65 Ibid 
66 Participatory Research in Asia (2019) 
Page 139

=== PAGE 143 ===
Page 32 of 143 
 
girls’ role. School-based WASH behaviour change programmes focus on the practice of WASH 
behaviours in all students. Integrating household WASH issues, gender and climate awareness within 
‘life skills’ curricula could support change. Play-based WASH activities have been developed to help 
girls and boys learn WASH behaviour, but have also been used to teach boys about the importance of 
taking on WASH related work in the home and thereby challenge their preconceptions of which tasks 
are ‘appropriate’ for their gender.  
3.4 Effects of climate change on agency  
In some cases, climate change is entrenching existing gender norms and roles, but in other cases, it is 
contributing to a (temporary) shift in norms and expectations around WASH related work in the 
household, community and workforce67. 
 
In extreme weather events, due to the dangerous conditions, men and women make more decisions 
together about when and how to do WASH related tasks, as opposed to in normal conditions when 
women mostly make these decisions. Men and boys may take over water collection (usually women’s 
duty) due to the dangerous conditions that can arise during extreme rain and wind, for example, 
slippery surfaces and falling trees. Men may assist women and girls more with washing clothes due to 
the heavy loads and security issues associated with walking longer distances to water sources. Clothes 
are heavy, and therefore, they will help with this heavy work68. Men might also support in the bathing 
of children. However, when this happens it appears more on a temporary basis during a crisis and is 
done to ‘help’ women rather than signifying a more permanent shift in gender roles. Men and boys 
may still be embarrassed to be seen collecting water and are more likely to use bicycles, wheelbarrows 
or motorcycles to collect water. Anecdotally, some husbands help their wives in collecting water from 
far away (with donkey carts). They may also help when wives are sick or pregnant or when they are in 
the postnatal period69.  
 
At the community level, men may take on more responsibility and work load for public clean up and 
for repairing damage to infrastructure after a climate related weather event such as strong winds and 
heavy rain70. Dangerous conditions may also lead to men fixing water systems and building toilets 
alone rather than with help from boys71. 
 
Men often have better access to education and information about climate change and water 
management than women (such as access to climate forecasts, early warning information and 
emergency and post-disaster services), and this can reinforce their role as WASH decision-makers72. 
Men often take more responsibility making decisions for restoring WASH access following a weather 
event73. Men may attend more community activities and meetings than women in dangerous 
conditions.  
 
Women’s work inside the home generally increases with water scarcity due to gender roles and norms 
that govern house work and decision-making. Women often take on responsibility for managing scarce 
 
67 Dery, Bisung, Dickin and Dyer (2020) 
68 Kohlitz et al. (2020) 
69 Assefa et al. (2021) 
70 Leahy, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
71 Ibid 
72 Megaw, Kohlitz, Gero and Chong (2020) 
73 Ibid 
Page 140

=== PAGE 144 ===
Page 33 of 143 
 
water resources in the household74. Climate change can also lead to the migration of men to find 
alternative jobs outside of the village, which increases the burden on women in terms of caring for 
their household, including taking sole responsibility for their household’s WASH needs. Water sources 
become more time consuming to access due to climate-related shortages75; accessing them requires 
waking up early to queue for water, walking long distances and includes long waiting times. It also 
leads to quarrels and conflicts at water points and the need to identify multiple water sources to 
diversify risk76, all of which are stressful for women77. Women may also expect that men will assist 
more with collecting water if they have to travel longer distances to reach it, which suggests some 
potential for conflict78. Young girls and boys may also be asked to help mothers with increased 
workloads. Deteriorating water quality (or use of surface water instead) means that women and girls 
will usually be tasked with treating contaminated drinking water to make it safe to drink79. Constraints 
on women’s time can limit their ability to access the fuel needed to treat or boil water. When people 
with disabilities or older people in the household are no longer able to access sanitation facilities, 
either because they cannot reach the facilities or the facilities are not functional, they will depend on 
others (usually women) to help them take care of their toileting and hygiene needs80. Women may be 
dependent on men to generate and spend income for WASH climate change adaptations such as 
storm-resistant toilets or water storage tanks for the dry season81. 
 
Access to information influences how people are impacted by, and respond to, climate change. 
Women are less likely to have access to information about climate events (e.g., early warning 
systems), and therefore are likely to be less able to prepare (e.g. to store clean water in their home 
before a storm hits). Women often acquire information from other women about water issues and 
are often excluded from decision-making processes on the maintenance of water resources and assets 
that could make services more resilient82. Megaw, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) report how this inequality 
in decision-making is linked to the perception of the man’s role in physical response, such as building 
back infrastructure, as being more vital to decisions than the woman’s role in caring for the house, 
family possessions and the wellbeing of household members. WASH clubs in schools can help raise 
awareness and foster individual behaviour change around climate and WASH at the household level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 Leahy, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
75 Caruso et al. (2021) 
76 Daly et al., 2021; Elliott et al. (2019) 
77 Megaw, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
78 Leahy, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
79 Megaw, Kohlitz and Chong, (2020) 
80 Leahy, Kohlitz and Chong (2020) 
81 Megaw, Kohlitz, Gero and Chong (2020) 
82 Kohlitz, Chong and Willetts, (2019) 
Page 141

=== PAGE 145 ===
Page 34 of 143 
 
 
Global Evidence Review: Gender & wetland, coastal and marine 
ecosystems 
In this Section, we present the findings of the global evidence review in the protection of wetland, 
coastal and marine ecosystems. It considers the following areas of discussion, identified as the more 
pertinent issues based on our review of the relevant literature: 
▪ 
Women and men’s use of, and interaction with, wetland, coastal and marine areas 
▪ 
How climate change is affecting these different uses and interactions, and the impact on 
the populations concerned 
▪ 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not, and could be involved in the 
protection and management of wetland, coastal and marine areas.  
4.1 Different interactions with wetland, coastal and marine areas 
Gendered roles in the fishery industry 
Fishing at sea with specialised equipment is usually carried out by men, while women generally fish 
on shallow reefs, tidal flats, and coastal estuaries. Formal and paid fishing activities are usually 
dominated by men, with women only representing 2% of maritime workers.83 In most places, women 
only have access to the less profitable parts of the fish for selling, and have limited trade connections, 
as well as less access to boats, fishing gear, and limited financial capital due to barriers to taking out 
loans and accessing credit84. This has contributed to a gender pay gap, with women earning 64% of 
men’s wages in the aquaculture industry for carrying out the same work85. Within value chains, women 
predominate in the post-harvest processing, marketing, and trading of fish, while most fishery 
agencies focus on the production aspect; 15% of harvesting jobs and 90% of fish processing jobs are 
carried out by women globally.86 Moreover, women are disproportionately employed in the informal 
and unregulated fish economies, including shellfish gathering and food processing. This can lead to 
exploitation, as there is little oversight and labour trafficking and sanitary issues can be easily 
masked.87   
Gender norms as a barrier to women’s participation in formal activities 
Women’s participation in the fishery industry is often overlooked and undervalued, resulting in the 
marginalisation of women who do participate in the management of wetland, coastal, and marine 
areas. Studies show that fishing is seen as a “man’s job”, and women are not expected to fish due to 
the arduous labour and long hours that keep them outside of the home for long periods of time.88 For 
example, gender norms in the Philippines prevent women from straying far from home to go fishing.89 
In Zambia, fishing gear is often only owned by men.90As mentioned before, in many countries, women 
 
83 Stuchtey et al, 2020 & Österblom et al, 2020. 
84 Österblom et al, 2020.  
85 Friends of Ocean Action, 2020.  
86 OECD 2020.  
87 Stuchtey et al, 2020.  
88 Stuchtey et al, 2020 
89 Österblom et al, 2020 
90 Ibid. 
Page 142

=== PAGE 146 ===
Page 35 of 143 
 
are denied bank loans or do not have access to credit, which prevents them from buying large fishing 
boats and other equipment needed to engage in formal fishing. Women may not be viewed as 
constituting part of the market, and tend to lack access to bank accounts or their own personal 
financial capital.91  
Maternal health concerns related to consuming large amounts of fish  
High reliance on marine organisms for nutrition leads to higher exposure to methylmercury and 
organic pollutants. Pregnant women are impacted by high levels of mercury from consuming seafood 
and must avoid certain fish species.92 Infectious diseases from fishing can impact food security, and 
industrial activity near oceans can lead to contaminants ending up in food webs and human food 
supply. No further gender specific impacts pertaining to these health concerns have been found in the 
literature.  
Lack of evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of unsustainable fishing practices  
Food insecurity leads to reliance on seafood, which causes overexploitation of fish stock. This causes 
fishers to spend more resources locating and catching stock, as well as moving to shallower waters 
which leads to more overfishing.93 Tourism, mining, and energy industries disrupt natural habitats, 
displace marine species, and the spread of contaminants to food webs and human food sources.94. 
Gender-specific impacts of overexploitation are not mentioned in the literature reviewed. 
Seafood makes up for 16% of all animal protein consumed globally. Fishing from oceans provides jobs, 
nourishment and livelihoods for coastal communities. Apart from fishing, sources of income include 
ports, shipping, tourism, and energy. The fishing sector continues to grow, with fishery productions 
expected to expand by 20% over the next ten years worldwide (OECD 2016). However, we have not 
yet seen any wholesale shift from extractive fishing practices to biologically sustainable production 
practices; this is likely to prove particularly difficult given the great (and increasing) pressure on the 
fishing industry to provide livelihoods to entire communities and societies. The literature does not 
explore gender-specific impacts in relation to the supply of food or employment.   
4.2 Effects of  climate change on different uses and interactions 
Rising sea temperatures are likely to disproportionately affect women’s livelihoods and 
food security 
Rising sea temperatures due to climate change causes changes in the behaviour of fish stock, 
permanent changes to ecosystems, and extinction of some species. The elimination of important 
ocean habitats will have serious effects on the food security of vulnerable communities. Whilst not 
explicit in the oceans literature, we know that women tend to bear the responsibility for managing 
crises within households and often reduce their own food consumption relative to that of other family 
members in contexts of food insecurity. Job opportunities will decrease in a context where there are 
already limited opportunities for employment, especially for women who are excluded from much of 
the fishery industry. Climate change disproportionately affects coastal communities who do not have 
 
91 Ibid. 
92 UN Environment, 2019.  
93 High level panel for a sustainable ocean economy, 2020 & UN Environment, 2019. 
94 UN Environment, 2019 
Page 143

=== PAGE 147 ===
Page 36 of 143 
 
alternatives to certain fish supplies and do not have the resources to respond to changing fish 
behaviours.95Because women are often barred from taking out loans or accessing credit, they are less 
likely to be able to access resources that would enable them to adapt to these changing behaviours.  
Rising sea levels are likely to disproportionately affect women’s livelihoods and food 
security 
Heat-induced expansions of water lead to a rise in sea levels which increases the risk of storm surges 
for islands and coastal communities. Exposed infrastructure is also at risk.96Rising sea levels leads to 
submerged lands, salinised soil and groundwater, and erosion of coastlines.97Tropical storms put 
coastal regions at risk of significant economic damage, especially due to damage to ports and 
harbours. Women and children are especially vulnerable in these instances as it is more difficult for 
the former to relocate and find work outside their communities. 
Rising acidity in oceans are likely to disproportionately affect women’s livelihoods and food 
security 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions have increased acidity in oceans by 26% since the industrial 
revolution.98This harms shell-forming animals such as corals, phytoplankton, bivalves, and 
zooplankton, who make up the basis of many marine food chains. Poor water quality and rising acidity 
causes shifts in fish stock behaviour and movements, which leads to food insecurity for many coastal 
and island communities (OECD 2016). Food supplies will shift locations, and coral reefs that serve as 
tourist attractions will die. Vulnerable communities, especially women and young workers, who 
already face difficulty in finding jobs, are unlikely to have the resources necessary (or for women, 
sufficient mobility) to follow the movement of fish stocks. 
4.3 Involvement in the protection and management of wetland, coastal and 
marine areas  
Women’s (potential) roles in community-based management  
Provision of clear boundaries for access and rights to fisheries are associated with a community 
commitment to usage rights. When this occurs, management is often more sophisticated with better 
registration records for boats and fishers.99Managing specific areas that communities understand as 
“theirs”, leads to the elimination of outsiders skimming off the benefits of good management 
behaviours.  
The role of women in sustainability and management initiatives for the ocean economy is very limited. 
Because women are rarely viewed as members of the formal fishing sector (or as “real” fishers), they 
are often excluded from discussion around the rights and needs of communities. They may even face 
negative social repercussions for participating in harvesting processes, despite the nutritional needs 
of their families.100As a result, recorded engagement of women in new management initiatives is very 
 
95 Stuchtey et al, 2020. 
96 UN environment, 2019.  
97 Stuchtey et al, 2020.  
98 Stuchtey et al, 2020.  
99 Österblom et al, 2020.  
100 Österblom et al, 2020.  
Page 144

=== PAGE 148 ===
Page 37 of 143 
 
low,101causing their ideas to go unheard in community-based management and protection of marine 
and coastal life.  
Women’s exclusion is a hindrance for the improvement of fishing sustainability because they are often 
more cognisant of the need to make conditions better for future generations, and are more willing to 
engage in progressive sustainability practices.102For example, when First Nation Heiltsuk women in 
British Columbia took on leadership roles in the management of wetlands, they helped transform the 
governance of herring in their coastal region (Ibid). 
However, as developments in the ocean economy progress, there have been more pushes to include 
local voices and developing communities in decision making processes – with some attempts at 
inclusion involving women103 (Österblom et al, 2020). With this new call for bottom-up processes, 
women are more likely to be included in discussions, but empowerment of civil society and localised 
movements (still new developments in the ocean economy) is necessary for women to exercise agency 
and decision making power (UN Environment, 2019).  
Gender-blind policy and decision making  
Institutions need to be agile, adaptable and follow ‘top-down, bottom-up’ practices that are informed 
by science. Women face barriers to accessing governing institutions, with their voices often left out of 
decision making practices. In Senegal, for example, women constitute only 5% of fishing management 
bodies, causing decisions to be made that only benefit some groups (Österblom et al, 2020), making 
it difficult to understand how women are affected by industry developments.  
Data collection by governments often only includes information on men’s engagement in the paid 
harvesting sector of the fish production chain and excludes women’s engagement (Adam et al, 2021). 
Such conventional gender-blind approaches to research and policy development for the fishery 
industry which only take into account formal and paid fishing activities mean that women’s activities 
in the sector are largely unaccounted for, with the resultant policies, including those concerning 
livelihoods, not designed with women in mind.104 For example, spatial policies that designate certain 
areas as ‘no-take’ lands, disproportionately impact women who do not have the resources to fish 
elsewhere. In these cases, women have had to resort to fishing illegally, which removes them still 
further from the formal fishing industry.105  
Limited evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of technological advancements  
Innovations in marine resource management have often been assumed to be “gender neutral”, 
meaning that approaches “leave gender out of it”.106In reality, such initiatives’ “gender neutrality” has 
contributed to male bias in their design.107 
Climate Smart Aquaculture (CSA) is a new technology that is used to ensure sustainable fishing and 
the continuity of the fish supply chain. Limited research has been conducted to see how women 
 
101 Adam et al, 2021. 
102 Österblom et al, 2020.  
103 Österblom et al, 2020. 
104 Österblom et al, 2020.  
105  Adam et al, 2021.  
106  Adam et al, 2021 
107 Ibid.  
Page 145

=== PAGE 149 ===
Page 38 of 143 
 
engage with and benefit from this new technology, despite the fact that climate change affects rural, 
low-income, communities of women particularly adversely.108Innovation in feed and seed breeding 
technologies are also lacking in gender-related analysis, resulting in a lack of evidence as to how new 
technological advancements are affecting women.109  
However, there have been some studies on gender differences in CSA initiatives. When a study was 
conducted in Bangladesh to investigate the potential role of women in CSA, several conclusions were 
made about women’s empowerment as a result of training, including over 75% of women reporting 
that they had experienced positive changes in their decision-making power.110In Bangladesh and India, 
women were found to relate fish trait preferences to household food and nutrition security.111 
Prevalence of gender-segregated interventions which fail to address underlying barriers 
Capacity development for local communities to engage in good fishing practices aims to maximise 
profits whilst reducing overfishing.112 Effective fishing practices that include women would not only 
generate wealth but also allow for better distribution of resources, and an ocean economy where all 
voices have decision making roles.113 Building institutions that support women’s employment in the 
fishing industry will protect against inequity, and prevent inefficiencies and unidimensional decision 
making. Including women in all segments of the fishery industry requires transparency, and 
monitoring of the supply chain for those who participate in illegal activity and exploitative practices 
such as labour trafficking.114 
However, existing training for women in the fishing sector largely follows a “gap filling” approach 
which seeks to accommodate (but, critically, not address) the normative barriers that women 
face.115Training tends to be held close to women's homes and often the technology or strategies 
introduced relate to jobs that can be performed from home. These interventions target women 
separately from men, and have limited impact as they fail to address the underlying power dynamics 
and barriers that perpetuate gendered inequities at the foundation of the fishing industry. These 
interventions often do not recognise that women are not viewed as “true” fishers, themselves treating 
women separately and as different from men.  
In select instances, gender transformative measures which address these underlying normative issues 
have been introduced in natural resource management, as seen in a study on the implementation of 
women-targeted training in Bangladesh.116  However, implementation in developing countries 
remains difficult. Barriers to gender-transformative approaches include low political and social will, 
poor messaging about gender norms and a lack of assistance from governments and NGOs.117 
 
108 Adam et al, 2021.  
109 Ibid. 
110 Ibid.  
111 Ibid.  
112 UN Environment, 2019.  
113 Stuchtey et al, 2020.  
114 Ibid.  
115 Österblom et al, 2020.  
116 Ibid. 
117 Ibid.  
Page 146

=== PAGE 150 ===
Page 39 of 143 
 
 
Global Evidence Review: Gender & climate resilient port 
infrastructure 
In this section, we present the findings from the global evidence review on climate resilient port 
infrastructure. It considers the following areas of discussion, identified as the more pertinent issues 
based on our review of the relevant literature: 
• 
The different ways in which men and women use and benefit from available port 
infrastructure; and  
• 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not, and could be, involved in and can 
benefit from the development of climate resilient port infrastructure. 
5.1 Different uses and benefits from available port infrastructure 
Women do not benefit equally from the employment benefits of port infrastructure  
Ports are a major hub for trade, and are vital for national economies as they provide job creation and 
employment opportunities. In Eastern and Southern Africa, seaborne trade accounted for 80% of total 
trade volume in 2016.118Seaports have contributed to the expansion of urban populations and growth 
of local markets.119 Women, however, are not able to fully reap the benefits of this economic growth 
due to their exclusion from operational and managerial positions.120 
Lack of evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of ports’ negative impacts on 
ecosystems  
Activities related to port infrastructures can damage city port, delta and river ecosystems, through 
land reclamation, dredging and construction. As ports grow in number, it is difficult to find areas that 
have the space for sustainable expansion.121 There is a need for port infrastructure development that 
respects the environmental constraints of a particular area, and can adapt to climate and technological 
change122. Ports were originally built with the prioritisation of trade and economic growth in mind, but 
little consideration of environmental and health impacts. No gender-disaggregated impact analysis 
could be found in this specific literature.  
5.2 Different involvement and benefits from  the development of climate 
resilient port infrastructure 
Women’s (potential) role in employment and leadership roles in climate resilient ports 
The expansion and development of new climate-resilient ports creates jobs and therefore opens up 
opportunities to train and hire women. However, according to reports from seafaring institutions, 
female trainees only made up 6% of training participants in 2021.123 
 
118 Humphreys et al, 2019.  
119 Ibid.  
120 Patrick Verhoeven, 2020.  
121 Shipper et al., 2015.  
122 Ibid.  
123 BIMCO & International Chamber of Shipping, 2021.  
Page 147

=== PAGE 151 ===
Page 40 of 143 
 
Women’s recruitment, integration and progression is starting to be supported through training, 
mentorship and working environment initiatives. Training institutions for maritime trade management 
are looking to include women in their training programmes. One step institutions have taken is to offer 
a 10% discount to female students.124 
Mentorship programmes have been implemented to connect women to those with experience in 
senior level roles, including roles that work with digital technology and autonomous vehicle 
operations.125These initiatives focus on the challenges women encounter in the maritime industry, 
finding ways of advancing and retaining female talent. With women rarely involved in the operational 
aspects of ports, initiatives may have a particular focus on teaching women how to use certain vehicles 
and technologies to build operational knowledge, skills and confidence.  
Through family-friendly human resources (HR) policies and adequate sanitation facilities for women 
(e.g. separate toilets), the development of new climate-resilient ports can encourage women to work 
in the port environment.126 
Women’s (potential) roles in promoting the importance of ecosystems  
More broadly, women have an important role to play in promoting climate resilient port development 
for the benefit of wider communities. Through the utilisation of ecosystem-based management 
approaches, the health, function and resilience of ecosystems can be restored and protected. No-
impact port development involves the development of ports which have no negative impact on the 
environment, and recognises the complexity of ecological systems, as well as the intricate ways in 
which elements of oceans and coasts interact with each other. One aspect of this is reducing noise 
pollution in order to reduce physiological stress and change on the environment. To limit disturbances 
to current ecosystems, no-impact ports are preferably created in natural locations that do not require 
dredging.127 Women are often excluded from discussions around new approaches, but tend, as noted 
above, to be more willing to engage in sustainable or environmentally friendly practices, and should 
be enabled to participate meaningfully in consultation and planning processes. 
Lack of evidence on gender-differentiated benefits of optimised infrastructure and energy 
efficiency 
Increased trade capacity and employment opportunities can stimulate local economies. The expansion 
of ports will create many jobs in the areas of operations and building, as well as increase business to 
the ports. This has the potential to grow under-developed economies in an environmentally friendly 
way. Moreover, better ports will lead to a decrease in the cost of sea and inland transport and 
operational expenses, increasing profits for post-operators and decreasing prices for port-users.128The 
optimisation of infrastructure and the use of digital technologies to combat climate change can benefit 
port users while also minimising the impact of port activity on the environment. However, the 
literature does not explore whether or how the optimisation of port infrastructure can benefit men and 
women differently. 
 
124 Ibid.  
125 Patrick Verhoeven, 2020.  
126 Patrick Verhoeven, 2020.  
127 Schipper et al. 2015.  
128 WWF & Deltares 2015.  
Page 148

=== PAGE 152 ===
Page 41 of 143 
 
Through the production and sourcing of local renewable energy, encouragement of clean energy 
initiatives and increasing energy-efficient port equipment, negative environmental externalities of 
ports can be reduced. These energy initiatives also improve the health and safety awareness of 
employees and local communities. However, the literature does not explore whether or how these 
changes benefit women and men differently.  
GHG emissions from ships can be reduced through onshore power supplying, incentivising best-
performing vehicles and investing in energy efficient infrastructure.129 Operations can be made more 
energy efficient through innovative processes, production technologies and the implementation of 
clean and renewable energy. An incentive scheme can help to promote these actions, such as an 
Environmental Ship Index that incentivises best-performing vessel initiatives. Concession agreements 
and lease clauses could be used to encourage clean energy initiatives from third parties.130 However, 
as it stands, the introduction of new technologies is likely to further marginalise women, who are often 
excluded from technical training and leadership positions. In order to limit inequities in port 
infrastructure development, it could be beneficial to engage in mentorship and training programmes 
for women first, before enacting any technical improvements.  
 
 
 
129 Patrick Verhoeven, 2020.  
130 Patrick Verhoeven, 2020.  
Page 149

=== PAGE 153 ===
Page 42 of 143 
 
 
National WASH policy and context in focal countries 
In this Section, our focus shifts to the country level to present a summary of national WASH policy and 
context in the 11 focal countries: Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Djibouti, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Kenya, 
Namibia, Nigeria, Morocco and Uganda. For each of these countries, we present a summary of country 
analyses that were completed and which can be found in full in Annex 5. These country analyses 
provide a top-line picture of access to WASH facilities, drawing on data from the WHO/UNICEF Joint 
Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JPWSSH)131 and making reference to JPWSSH’s 
ladders for drinking water and sanitation service (Table 4) as a means of differentiating the level of 
water and sanitation services the population has access to. Each country summary also appraises the 
WASH policy context to understand the extent to which, and how, current policy frameworks identify 
and seek to address gender issues in WASH, whilst building climate resilience. In 8 out of the 11 
country summaries, we also include a stakeholder mapping.132 
Table 4: Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene ladders for drinking water and 
sanitation service 
Drinking water ladder 
Sanitation service 
Safely 
managed 
Drinking water from an 
improved water source that is 
accessible on premises, 
available when needed and free 
from faecal and priority 
chemical contamination 
Safely 
managed 
Use of improved facilities that 
are not shared with other 
households and where excreta 
are safely disposed of in situ or 
removed and treated offsite 
Basic 
Drinking water from an 
improved source, provided 
collection time is not more than 
30 mins for a roundtrip 
including queuing 
Basic 
Use of improved facilities 
which are not shared with 
other households 
Limited 
Drinking water from an 
improved source for which 
collection time exceeds 30 mins 
for a roundtrip including 
queuing 
Limited 
Use of improved facilities 
shared between two or more 
households 
Unimproved 
Drinking water from an 
unprotected dug well or 
unprotected spring 
Unimproved 
Use of pit latrines, without a 
slab or platform, hanging 
latrines or bucket latrines 
Surface water 
Drinking water directly from a 
river, dam, lake, pond, stream, 
canal or irrigation canal 
Open 
Defecation 
Disposal of human faeces in 
fields, forests, bushes, open 
bodies of water, beaches and 
other open spaces or with solid 
waste 
 
131 A joint WHO/UNICEF initiative to improve global monitoring of drinking water, sanitation and hygiene in the context of the new 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, How we work | JMP (washdata.org) 
132 A stakeholder mapping could not be conducted for Brazil, Botswana and Indonesia as No Objection Letters were received late in the 
Gender Assessment process. 
Page 150

=== PAGE 154 ===
Page 43 of 143 
 
6.1 Bangladesh 
Key Messages 
Bangladesh generally has high levels of access to improved drinking water sources and relatively high 
levels of access to some form of sanitation facility. Improving water, sanitation and hygiene is a key 
part of Bangladesh’s national policy framework, with the Bangladesh Climate Change and Action Plan 
(BCCSAP) (2008) identifying connections between WASH and negative impacts caused by increased 
weather extremities. The plan identifies the need to take specific approaches for vulnerable people, 
to mainstream gender in improving hygiene promotion, including by shifting organisational culture 
and ways of thinking and by developing procedures relating to gender responsibility, accountability, 
coordination and personnel policy. While most WASH-related policies do not explicitly consider 
advancing women’s formal roles in the WASH sector, the National Women Development Policy, 
identifies a need to advance career development opportunities for women employees and equal 
participation of women in decision-making and governance at all levels. In general, women are limited 
in their careers prospects within the WASH sector by low rates of secondary education and policies 
which focus on opportunities in low-skilled jobs.  
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to Drinking Water: 98.9% of the population has access to an improved source for drinking 
water, of which the majority, 58.5%, is safely managed drinking water and women are the main 
collectors of water133. 
 
Access to Sanitation: 78% of the population has access to an improved facility, of which 38.7% has 
access to safely managed sanitation services. None of the population is reported to practice open 
defecation.  
Policy framework 
Improving water, sanitation and hygiene is a key part of Bangladesh’s national policy framework, as 
identified in their overall sustainable development strategy, as well as further, more specific water 
strategies. The policies recognise the increasing impacts of climate change, rapid urbanisation and 
water contamination, and inequitable access, identifying these as challenges for future development 
in water, sanitation and hygiene.  
 
Bangladesh’s location makes it highly susceptible to the adverse effects of climate change, hindering 
its development, including access to safe and economic opportunities for women and other 
vulnerable groups. The Bangladesh Climate Change and Action Plan (BCCSAP) of 2008 looks further 
into the negative impacts caused by increased weather extremities. Strategic objectives to combat 
identified challenges include ensuring safe drinking water, undertaking specific approaches for 
vulnerable people, gender mainstreaming, improving hygiene promotion, adapting to climate change 
and undertaking integrated and accountable development approaches. These objectives seek to 
include gender mainstreaming in all the service planning, implementation and monitoring by shifting 
organisational culture and ways of thinking and by developing procedures relating to gender 
responsibility, accountability, coordination and personnel policy and the consideration of women’s 
role in hygiene promotion, both as a token role and also as an empowered advocate.   
 
 
133 MICS (2019) 
Page 151

=== PAGE 155 ===
Page 44 of 143 
 
Most of the policies reviewed did not explicitly consider advancing women’s formal roles in the 
WASH sector, but they still discussed the need for community involvement in the planning, 
implementation, operation and management of water and sanitation facilities. Some policies present 
opportunities to consider for the advancement of women's involvement in, for example, 
entrepreneurial activities. Within the National Women Development Policy, there is a broader 
emphasis, within all sectors, on career development opportunities for women employees and equal 
participation of women in decision-making and governance at all levels. Additionally, due to only 
21.1% of women completing upper secondary schooling134 and 19.8% enrolment in tertiary 
education,135 women are limited in the careers prospects within the WASH sector, and a focus on 
policies is placed on opportunities in low-skilled jobs.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Bangladesh, the Policy Support branch of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development 
and Cooperatives has primary responsibility for Water and Sanitation Supply and Strategy. Other 
national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
for hygiene, and Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), covering irrigation, flooding, and climate-
related water protection.  
6.2 Botswana 
Key Messages 
Botswana has high levels of access to at least basic sources of drinking water and basic sanitation 
services. In the policy environment, key challenges identified in the WASH sphere include water 
shortages and droughts in the water sector, and the inadequate capacity of sanitation infrastructure, 
and pressure on sanitation and health services because of increasing levels of urbanisation, facilitate 
access to water of suitable quality adopting ‘smart agriculture’ as an opportunity and working at the 
interplay between climate change, the water sector and public health. No specific policies related to 
women and WASH are identified, but the National Development Plan calls for equal participation and 
representation of all women and men in all development processes. Key challenges and opportunities 
identified in the policy landscape include the currently low participation of females in STEM subjects, 
a need for gender-sensitive policies for climate change and including gender and climate change into 
academic curriculum.  
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 92.2% of the population has access to a basic level of drinking water and 
4.7% of the population has access to a limited level of drinking water.  1.7% of the population relies 
on unimproved drinking water whilst 1.3% of the population has access only to surface drinking water. 
Th 
 
Access to sanitation: 80% of the population has access to basic sanitation services and 5.6% of the 
population has access to a limited level of sanitation services. 9.8% of the population practices open 
defecation in sanitation services.  
 
134 UNIS (2019) 
135 UNIS (2020) 
Page 152

=== PAGE 156 ===
Page 45 of 143 
 
Policy framework 
Botswana’s WASH policy landscape is focused around its 11th National Development Plan, including 
Botswana’s Vision 2036. One of the key development challenges facing Botswana’s population 
includes water resources, and related sections on migration, population distribution and urbanisation. 
Challenges identified here, and further elaborated on in the National Water Policy include water 
shortages and droughts in the water sector, and the inadequate capacity of sanitation infrastructure, 
and pressure on sanitation and health services because of increasing levels of urbanisation, as well 
as further WASH-related health consequences. 
 
Future objectives is set around a framework that will facilitate access to water of suitable quality and 
standards for the citizenry and provide the foundations for sustainable development of water 
resources in support of economic growth, diversification and poverty eradication. Climate is a key 
consideration throughout all documents, including the Climate change policy. They identify water 
shortages and droughts and water supply for agriculture and industry as key issues, and expanding on 
adopting ‘smart agriculture’ as an opportunity. Between documents, interplay between climate 
change, the water sector and public health is pointed out. The National Health Policy elaborates on 
the impact of water shortages and their potential for causing malnutrition, and also identifies the 
negative public health consequences of a lack of access to adequate sanitation and safe drinking 
water.  
 
The National Development Plan largely ignores specific gender considerations in the water and 
sanitation sectors. However, it does state that the government recognizes the need for equal 
participation and representation of all women and men in all development processes. In further 
policies, an opportunity is identified in working towards gender and social equity in accessing water 
resources, in particular, women shall be empowered to participate fully in issues and decisions relating 
to sustainable development and management of water resources. Although it is identified often as an 
important consideration, throughout all policies it is not further elaborated how this will be 
operationalised. 
 
There are some key gender challenges and opportunities identified around over the policy landscape. 
First, the low participation of females in  Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) 
subjects is identified as a key challenge facing the education sector, despite women having relatively 
high school completion rates. However, they fail to articulate how this challenge impacts women’s 
employment in the water and sanitation sectors. Second, Botswana’s climate policies discuss that 
measures should be gender sensitive, by empowering women and youth to actively participate in 
the implementation of climate response measures, adopting strategies that are targeted at increasing 
women and youth’s resilience to climate change, and including gender and climate change into 
academic curriculum at all levels.  
6.3 Brazil 
Key Messages 
Brazil has a high rate of access both to improved water sources for drinking water and to improved 
sanitation services. Brazil’s National Policies for Water and Sanitation identify the importance of WASH 
in daily life and lay out clear objectives to ensure the impact on human livelihoods and activities. These 
policies present a number of opportunities within the sector, for instance working to increase 
environmental education and capacity building in technology and science, and both seek to 
incorporate gender equality in all actions and to develop ongoing training that promotes female 
Page 153

=== PAGE 157 ===
Page 46 of 143 
 
leadership. In addition, at the Federal level, policies emphasise the need to achieve equality, including 
from a gender perspective. There are few specific recommendations with regard to WASH and gender 
at either national or Federal level, however. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 99.3% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which the majority, 85.8%, has access to safely managed drinking water, and only 0.1% has 
access to a limited level of drinking water.  
Access to sanitation: 90.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
48.7% has access to safely managed sanitation service, while 9.8% of the population uses unimproved 
sanitation services, including 0.3% who practice open defecation2.   
Policy framework 
Brazil’s National Policies for Water and Sanitation both discuss in-depth the importance of WASH in 
daily life and lay out clear objectives to ensure the impact on human livelihoods and activities, such as 
business, is limited. They examine the negative impacts that water scarcity creates in vulnerable 
communities, including increase in conflict, siltation of water, water pollution, and changes in natural 
characteristics from high degradation. They add the impact of climate change leaders to further 
alterations to available water resources and impacts both the energy and agricultural sector. They 
present innovative opportunities within the sector, all working to increase environmental education 
and capacity building in technology and science for water resource management. They also seeks to 
incorporate gender equality in all actions and develop ongoing training that promotes female 
leadership and empowerment, but does not provide any detail on practical implications of this 
intention.   
In terms of sanitation, Brazil’s policies identifies issues with parts of the population continuing to lack 
access to basic sanitation facilities and/or proper disposal of solid waste and associated health 
consequences.  There are clear objectives and programmes to overcome identified issues, such as 
increasing and improving infrastructure, management, and monitoring of sanitation facilities, and the 
suggestion of creating a circular economy for solid waste disposal. It does not explicitly mention 
gender in the policy objectives. The cross between health and climate change is brought up the 
country’s climate change policies, discussing the impacts extreme weather has on the health and 
livelihoods of people, which includes the effect it has on water reserves in the country. 
As a federal state, Brazil’s lower tiers of government play an important role in the provision of 
sustainable WASH services. The current National Policy for Regional Development II (2019) 
emphasises achieving equality, within regions and between regions. It seeks to ensure equal access to 
economic opportunities within all the regions, both from a socio-economic and gender perspective. 
However, there is no specific discussion of WASH-related challenges and objectives in the policy, nor 
are there are gender specific strategies within outlined climate action measures. Brazil’s policies 
further explore the importance of including a gender lens in the sustainable use of water, and 
emphasises the importance of valuing women’s contribution to farm work and equal participation in 
leadership and decision making. Moreover, the Education and Health Plans aim to reduce inequality 
in their respective systems. 
 
 
 
Page 154

=== PAGE 158 ===
Page 47 of 143 
 
6.4 Djibouti 
Key messages 
Djibouti generally has high levels of access to improved sources of drinking water and relatively high 
levels of access to improved sanitation services. It’s policy framework identifies a number of areas of 
connection between WASH and climate change and although connections between WASH and gender 
aren’t typically made explicitly, it’s Vision 2035 acknowledges women’s’ role in enforcing new 
behaviours and practices as well as the importance of engaging men to change their views to women’s 
role. Policies also acknowledge that various stakeholders, including women and youth, should have a 
larger role in the policy-making process. Finally, policies recognise opportunities to incorporate 
women into the workforce due to their higher levels of education. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 90.8% of the population has access to an improved source of drinking 
water, although for the majority (76%), this is basic access[1] and women are the main collectors of 
water.[2] 
Access to sanitation: 73.8% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
37.1% has access to safely managed sanitation services. 
Policy framework 
There are a number of key policies which relate to WASH and gender in the Djibouti policy 
environment and which offer opportunities for engagement. For instance, the Djibouti 2035 Vision 
(2010–2035) presents a long-term developmental vision for sustained growth and with respect to 
WASH, the vision focuses primarily on water supply throughout the country and its implications for 
other areas of the primary sector, with a lesser focus on sanitation and hygiene. This is complemented 
by the climate section of the vision, which includes sustainable water management as an area of 
priority, amongst other strategy objectives unrelated to WASH. Furthermore, Vision 2035 identifies 
the link between climate change and WASH, specifically in terms of how they will experience 
increased instances of droughts and flooding which will impact food production and supplies 
throughout the country. 
 
Vision 2035 includes a specific section on gender which acknowledges womens’ role in enforcing new 
behaviours and practices; however, it emphasises how ’in order to improve women's situation, men 
should be included in the project. It is important to work with men to push them into changing their 
approaches towards women and their approach with themselves’ (Djibouti 2035 Vision, 2010, p. 98). 
 
The 2010 Development Plan for the Primary Sector and the 2015 Strategy of Accelerated Growth and 
Promotion of Employment echo the focus on access to water for agriculture and livestock, as well as 
the hygiene risks that a lack of sanitation infrastructure poses in cities. Although the latter two policies 
touch on gender and the need to address gender inequity throughout the primary sector and for 
growth, they do not directly link WASH issues to gender. The problems identified, such as health 
consequences and hard to reach water points, are known to generally affect women more, but this is 
not specified in the policies. They do acknowledge that various stakeholders, including women and 
youth, should have a larger role in the policy-making process. 
 
Page 155

=== PAGE 159 ===
Page 48 of 143 
 
Education is a strong focus of Djibouti’s 2011–2021 Gender Policy, the policy that most identifies how 
water and sanitation challenges are an extra burden on women. The policy covers accessibility to 
water and sanitation facilities in their communities, remoteness of water points and sanitation deficits 
in their immediate environments. Currently, the completion rate for upper secondary is higher for 
women than for men; this presents a great opportunity to incorporate women into the workforce 
due to their higher levels of education. To this end, the 2018—2022 National Strategy for Social 
Protection identifies a role for women in the country’s goal to increase primary sector employment, 
specifically in fishing and agriculture. 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Djibouti, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Fisheries Resources and the 
National Office of Water and Sanitation have primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, the leading ministry in 
implementing sanitation and hygiene programmes at national level, and the Ministry of Housing, 
Urbanism, Environment and Territorial Development, who monitor WASH service delivery.  
6.5 Indonesia 
Key Messages 
Indonesia has both high levels of access to improved water sources for drinking water and access to 
improved sanitation services. Faced by the challenges of climate change and rapid urbanisation, in 
terms of the policy environment it sees water supply and increasing sanitation facilities as a key 
component to ensure self-reliance and development for all people. National climate policies highlight 
that climate-related challenges disproportionally impact women due to issues such as limited access 
to water supplies for domestic and economic use and lower rates of access to safe sanitation facilities. 
WASH and health policies recognise the need for gender mainstreaming to reach the country’s long-
term goals but entry points in WASH are not explored, such as providing career opportunities in the 
WASH sector. However, the National Plan identifies more broadly the need to increase women’s role 
in development and decision-making, especially within health, education and the labour market. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 93.3% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which almost all, 92.4%, have access to a basic level of drinking water. 
Access to sanitation: 92.6% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
86.5% has access to a basic level of sanitation service, and 6.1% who practice open defecation136.  
Policy framework 
As a country with over 200 million spread out over 6,000 islands, and a major reliance on raw water 
supply to provide for their water resource, Indonesia has placed natural resource promotion and 
recovery as a priority. With the growing effects of climate change impacting the water cycle, rapid 
urbanization, and contamination of water supply it sees water supply and increasing sanitation 
facilities as a key component to ensuring self-reliance and development for all people. Whilst it 
 
136 JMP 2020 
Page 156

=== PAGE 160 ===
Page 49 of 143 
 
recognises the need for gender mainstreaming in policies to reach the country’s long-term goals, the 
specific gender dimensions of WASH are not explored.   
 
The National Plan talks about using the 3R approach - Reduce, Reuse, Recycle - and the circular 
economy to increase effective waste disposal, to address cross-cutting issues of climate and WASH. 
They aim for 90% of the population to have access to safe and proper sanitation. As for water 
resources, they seeks to improve infrastructure to meet the goal of 100% of the population having 
access to safe drinking water. Policies see community involvement as a main way to ensure 
implementation and management of safe and adequate water and sanitation facilities and practices. 
This includes increasing women’s role in development and decision-making, especially within 
health, education, labour market, economy, and public sectors. National climate policies highlight 
that climate-related challenges are something that disproportionally impacts women due to limited 
access to water supplies for domestic and economic use, limited access to safe sanitation facilities, 
and an imbalance in capacity for understanding the importance of safe water and sanitation practices.  
Health concerns due to poor handwashing and water contamination persist in the country, and this is 
attributed to the lack of progress by local governments. The national Health Strategy presents 
opportunities for governments to partner with NGOs and the private sector, subsidise communal 
sanitation facilities, and encourage community engagement. The Health Strategy does not consider 
gender-related issues in community-based sanitation and there is no consideration to the specific 
sanitation needs of women. However, all the policies discuss increasing the capacity of communities 
and workers to lead to increased community engagement and awareness of these issues, but there is 
limited or no discussion about providing women specifically with career opportunities in the WASH 
sector.  
6.6 Ivory Coast 
Key Messages  
Ivory Coast has average levels of access to improved sources of drinking water as well as improved 
sanitation services, although they perform stronger on drinking water access. A high proportion of 
their population still practice open defecation. It’s policy framework has a strong focus on structural 
economic reforms, balanced with an understanding that these go hand in hand with the development 
of human capital. The two largest problems that are brought out are very low water availability, 
worsening due to climate change, as well as high levels of disease due to poor water and sanitation 
facilities. Policies argue for diversified representation and improved governance from better 
consideration of gender in public policies. However, all policies are quite gender blind and not propose 
how to create gender-inclusive WASH environments, other than brief mention of increasing inclusion 
of women in the employment sector. 
Headline data on access to WASH services: 
Access to drinking water: 79.8% of the population has access to an improved water source, of which 
only 35.2% has access to safely managed drinking water. 20.2% of the population access unimproved 
Page 157

=== PAGE 161 ===
Page 50 of 143 
 
drinking water, including 6% who only access surface water.137 Women are the main collectors of 
water.138  
 
Access to sanitation: 57.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of whom 
34.6% has access to basic sanitation service, while 25.3% of the population still practices open 
defecation. 
Policy framework 
Ivory Coast’s national development plan has a strong focus on structural economic reforms, which is 
balanced with an understanding that these go hand in hand with the development of human capital, 
one of which is water and sanitation. The challenges that Ivory Coast faces in water and sanitation 
range from governance of resources, quality of health services and the population’s health, and lastly, 
lacking infrastructure. Beyond the general lack of access to water and sustainable sanitation systems, 
it is acknowledged there is a heavier burden on populations in cities that are rapidly urbanizing. 
Consequences, such as the rapid spread of diseases like cholera, and food shortages due to water 
scarcity often impacts women more severely. In terms of solutions, they aim to increase accessibility 
to drinking water, build new water pumps and transfer the responsibility and ownership of adopting 
laws and regulations to local communities. Local communities should also include women’s 
associations and further diversified representation.  
Climate Change programmes further discuss health consequences of water scarcity and cleanliness, 
in changing circumstances. Suggested strategies focus on more than just the construction of new 
facilities and assure uptake of these new facilities to ensure their effectiveness. They have 
demonstrated that urban populations are more vulnerable, but there is no mention of the 
differentiating impact between women and men. The National Development Plan does, however, 
identify how improved governance will result from better consideration of gender and the 
environment in public policies. With regard to gender, the strengthening of the institutional and 
regulatory framework will be necessary, as will the development of the skills of actors who apply it in 
plans, programs and projects. Furthermore, the plan proposes increased vocational training for 
women to include them in the employment sector, boosted by the improvements in water and 
sanitation infrastructure.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Ivory Coast, the Ministry of Hydraulics, Sanitation and Hygiene has primary responsibility for WASH. 
Other national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of the Environment of 
Urban Sanitation and Sustainable Development, who have a key role in the adaptation to climate 
change, and the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene, leading on hygiene policy and programmes 
 
 
.  
 
137 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
138 MICS (2016) 
Page 158

=== PAGE 162 ===
Page 51 of 143 
 
6.7 Kenya 
Key Messages 
Kenya has average levels of access to improved sources of drinking water as well as improved 
sanitation services, although they perform stronger on drinking water access. It’s policy framework 
focuses on climate change, lacking infrastructure and lack of strategy as the main causes of lacking 
water and sanitation access. Approaches for improvement focus on capacity building, public 
participation, adoption of innovative technical approaches, and multi-sectoral collaboration. 
Women’s more disadvantaged position in society, and the negative consequences poor WASH 
facilities have on health and education are recognised throughout and a big emphasis is put on job 
opportunities and the inclusion of women in leadership. The impacts of climate are discussed but do 
not relate directly to gender. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to water: 71.1% of the population has access to an improved water source, of which 61.6% has 
access to basic drinking water and 9.5% has access to drinking water categorised as ‘limited.’  
 
Access to sanitation: 58.2% of the population has access to improved sanitation services while 41.8% 
of the population uses unimproved sanitation services, with 8.5% practicing open defecation.139   
Policy framework 
The drive to advance livelihoods in Kenya is laid out through the four key areas, dubbed the Big Four 
Agenda, within the National Development plan. Water, sanitation and hygiene continues to be a key 
sub-focus area. Within the plan it sees environmental degradation, climate change, inadequate 
infrastructure and lack of water conservation strategies as hindrances to the development of a clean, 
safe environment and access to water and sanitation services. Approaches identified to combat 
these challenges are capacity building, public participation, adoption of innovative technical 
approaches, multi-sectoral collaboration and adequate water and sanitation facilities.  
 
There is mention of the under-valuation of women’s contribution to the economy, under-
employment and skills mismatch. In relation to health issues, key issues are identified such as the 
mortality and morbidity burden associated with unsafe water and sanitation and the risk of rape and 
domestic violence for women and girls due to inadequate sanitation facilities. Moreover, within 
schools, girls tend to be more affected by inadequate WASH facilities, and this impacts their 
attendance and can expose them to increased risks of gender-based violence. To limit the impact on 
children’s schooling, the National Education Sector Strategic Plan includes, among its objectives, the 
construction of facilities for safe and clean drinking water in schools and separate sanitation facilities 
for boys and girls.  
 
To address these issues, they intend to scale up access to improved rural and urban sanitation and 
build governance and leadership capacity for sanitation. The policy discusses an increase in 
education, training and skill development for sanitation, including increasing the availability of skilled 
personnel in the planning and management of sanitation facilities, though it does not suggest these 
efforts are focused on any one gender/sex. Interwoven throughout these policies is the continual 
discussion on the inclusion of equal opportunities for stakeholder participation throughout the 
planning, implementation and management of water and sanitation projects/programmes and the 
 
139 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 159

=== PAGE 163 ===
Page 52 of 143 
 
push for participation of female leaders on community-led committees through gender 
mainstreaming. While most policies include opportunities for job creation, many do not discuss career 
opportunities for women specifically, with a specific focus on seeking to encourage women’s 
participation in the technologies and sciences and STEM based courses.  
 
With climate change being a major discussion in most of the policies, the National Climate Change 
Policy examines how increases in weather extremities, including droughts, floods and water 
salinisation greatly impacts the water, sanitation and hygiene sector, with the biggest focus being on 
inadequate sanitation systems which lead to clogged drains and water contamination.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Kenya, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, responsible for sanitation 
and Hygiene provision and policy, and the Ministry of Environments and Forestry, who set 
environmental standards, and the Ministry of Housing, who handle WASH infrastructure.  
6.8 Namibia 
Key Messages 
Namibia has a high level of access to improved sources of drinking water, with over 90% of the 
population, while less than half of the population has access to improved sanitation services. It’s policy 
framework looks at water and sanitation as two separate sectors, with the former focusing on water 
availability and infrastructure and the latter focuses on health consequences and more on delivering 
through advocacy efforts. While all policies reference gender as a cross-cutting issue in the water and 
sanitation sectors, none explore in any great detail how women, youths and marginalised groups are 
impacted nor the roles that these groups can play in these sectors. The policy landscape recognizes 
that women continue to be under-represented, and highlights the importance of education. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 91.4% of the population has access to an improved source of drinking water, 
of which 84.3% has access to basic drinking water and 7.1% has access to limited drinking water. 
 
Access to sanitation: 48.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
35.3% has access to basic sanitation services. 47.2% of the population continues to practice open 
defecation.  
Policy framework 
Namibia’s National Development Plan looks at water and sanitation as two separate sectors, rather 
than looking at water and sanitation through a combined WASH lens. As such, analysis of the 
challenges faced in the water and sanitation sectors fall within two separate pillars. The first is 
economic progress, focusing on water availability and demand in urban areas and for agriculture and 
infrastructure. The second is social transformation, focused on improved sanitation systems and 
infrastructure as well strengthening advocacy. 
Namibia’s Water Supply and Sanitation Policy (2008) goes into detail on the challenges themselves, 
the context, the health consequences and Namibia’s policy objectives in response to these challenges. 
Page 160

=== PAGE 164 ===
Page 53 of 143 
 
They continue to handle water availability and infrastructure separately from sanitation challenges. 
Namibia’s 2011 National Policy on Climate Change also analyses the issues of water supply and 
provision of sanitation services, but focuses on the impact of climate change on both sectors, as well 
as the potential health consequences and Namibia’s vulnerability of water supply to climate change is 
recognized. 
While all policies reference gender as a cross-cutting issue in the water and sanitation sectors, none 
explore in any great detail how women, youths and marginalised groups are impacted nor the roles 
that these groups can play in these sectors. Namibia’s National Gender Policy explicitly tackles the 
gender issues affecting the water and sanitation sectors. The policy argues that women continue to 
be under-represented in policy and decision-making forums on the utilisation of natural resources, 
environmental development and water management. The policy also explores the roles that women 
play within the water and sanitation sectors, as well as exploring the health inequalities related to 
water and sanitation. A lack of these basic amenities has a detrimental effect on the health of rural 
communities, and this disproportionately affects women and female-headed households.  
The policy states that the government will include gender and climate change, including issues such 
as water supply, in the curriculum of education and training programmes. However, all policies are 
very limited in their consideration of women’s employment levels in the water and sanitation sectors 
and in terms of opportunities for women to access employment in these sectors. It is put forward that, 
as a strategy for gender mainstreaming, women should be involved in interventions to achieve the 
objectives of environmental sustainability, including in the water and sanitation sectors. 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Namibia, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform has primary responsibility for WASH. 
Other national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include Ministry of Urban and Rural 
Development, ensuring implementation of national WASH strategy for urban settlements, and the 
Ministry of Health and Social Services, implementing and enforcing hygiene practices.  
6.9 Nigeria 
Key Messages 
Nigeria has relatively high levels of access to improved water sources, although much of this is still at 
a basic level, but less than half of their population has access to improved sanitation services. It’s 
policy framework presents a balance of WASH-related issues between economic impacts, governance 
and coordination issues, and health and culture. The importance of including women in the planning, 
implementation and management of programmes is recognised throughout, seeking to integrate a 
gender perspective in all their solutions. In all policies reviewed, there was a clear theme around 
capacity building and job creation. Their policies do not go much further than recognising the 
importance of inclusion into suggesting gender specific policies and opportunities. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 78% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which the majority, 55.9%, is access to a basic level of drinking water. 40% of the population 
are women who are the main collectors of water. 
  
Page 161

=== PAGE 165 ===
Page 54 of 143 
 
Access to sanitation: 43% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 30.5% 
has access to safely managed sanitation service. 18.7% practice open defecation.140 
Policy Framework 
As Nigeria continues to experience rapid urbanisation and growth, they also aim to socially develop in 
areas of water resources and sanitation, water and gender equity and employment, and job creation. 
Challenges identified include ensuring economic diversification, private sector investment in WASH 
services, lack of coordination and communal disputes, negative impacts of climate change, 
contamination of water sources and it’s impacts on health and poor operation and maintenance 
culture. Some of the main ways they seek to overcome these challenges is by continuing to improve 
sanitation services, extending water supply access and adopting an integrated planning and policy 
formulation approach, while also increasing training, developing the bioeconomy and circular 
economy, and increasing access to finance and technical support. 
 
One recurring theme in their policies is the increase in negative impacts on Nigeria’s development 
brought about by climate change. Their climate change policy examines the impact that extreme 
weather places on an already strained water, sanitation and hygiene sector. Nigeria seeks to 
overcome issues related to climate change and inadequate water and waste infrastructure through 
the implementation of a circular economy, as well as increasing infrastructure and reforms in the 
establishment, management, operation and maintenance of water supply and sanitation schemes and 
services. They recognise the importance of including women in the planning, implementation and 
management of programmes, and seek to integrate a gender perspective in the adoption of new 
technologies and infrastructure. 
 
In all the policies reviewed, there was a clear theme around capacity building and job creation. Within 
the Climate Change Policy, there is discussion on collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Women 
Affairs to ensure equitable policies and programmes. This discussion seeks to encourage women’s 
participation in the planning and management of climate change programmes. This includes 
investment to promote water security and climate change resilient growth and development to 
sustain jobs, employment, economic growth and social stability. The National Gender Policy of 2006 
looks at the importance of including women in the work force and actively participating in decision 
making, calling for equal inclusion throughout.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Nigeria, the Ministry of Water Resources has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include The National Council on Water Resources, a water 
resources policy formulating body, and the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education, who have 
roles formulating community sanitation and hygiene. 
 
 
 
 
140 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 162

=== PAGE 166 ===
Page 55 of 143 
 
6.10 Morocco 
Key Messages 
Morocco has a very high level of access to improved water sources and relatively high levels of access 
to improved sanitation services. It’s policy framework is centred around creating a sustainable water 
and sanitation system as it identified the important crossover between climate change and WASH. 
Throughout its policies, there is an emphasis on combatting social inequalities; however, they often 
remind quite gender blind and don’t present concrete action points on how to create gender-sensitive 
programmes and systems. There is recognition that women are more vulnerable to WASH-related 
health and climate impacts, and places importance on equal participation, as well as capacity building 
and training for all communities. 
Headline data on access to WASH services 
Access to drinking water: 90% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which the majority, 79.9%, has access to safely managed drinking water. 
  
Access to sanitation: 87% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, while 9.5% of 
the population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 1.7% who practice open defecation.141  
Policy Framework 
Due to continued threats to available water resources throughout the country, the National 
Sustainable Development Policy 2017 (NSDP) recognises the importance of water, sanitation and 
hygiene improvements for the development of the country. Not only does it seek to improve facilities, 
access and programmes around water, sanitation and hygiene, it identifies the opportunities available 
for transitioning to a circular economy through recycling water usage. It also examines the need for 
human development and combat social inequalities and promotes equality, however, it remains 
quite gender blind with regard to the incorporation of gender in policies.  
 
Moroccan Climate Change Policy 2014 highlights the impact of climate change on health and water 
access in the country, which impact women and girls more than men as women are typically 
responsible for managing water. It also points to the importance of increasing financing and 
programmes focused on combating climate change, including education and awareness on 
alternative solutions and the re-use of water resources. Morocco’s water policies also sets out the 
need to protect communities against floods, especially for sanitation facilities and agricultural 
drainage systems.  
 
Within all these policies, there is no clear examination of how to increase job opportunities for 
women. However, they discusses increasing employment opportunities more generally. The Gender 
Strategy sees the value of ensuring there is equal participation of women and men in communities, 
especially around decision-making, and identifies the impact that inadequate water and sanitation 
facilities place on women, such as leaving them more vulnerable to illness, it also discusses the 
importance of equal access to education. The Climate Change Policy further discusses the importance 
of capacity building and training for individuals, communities, interest groups and public and private 
enterprises.  
 
141 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 163

=== PAGE 167 ===
Page 56 of 143 
 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Morocco, the Ministry of Interior has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national Ministries 
with some WASH responsibility include The General Directorate of Hydraulics, the lead agency for 
water resource planning, and The Ministry of Health, responsible for drinking water quality control 
and water-related laws.  
6.11 Uganda 
Key Messages 
Uganda has a relatively high access to improved sources of drinking water, but has low access to 
improved sanitation services. It’s policy framework strikes a balance between a good quality of life for 
all and economic productivity, therefore focusing their water programmes on investing in the effective 
management of the entire WASH value chain segments. The country’s policies are built around the 
worsening impacts of climate change. Connections between climate change, WASH, and gender are 
quite explicit throughout, with emphasis on the disproportionate burden that women and girls suffer. 
There is a commitment to mainstream gender issues throughout policy and practice, and a strong 
focus on including women in employment or income-generating opportunities. Although there is a 
lack of practical points to implement gender-sensitive policies, there is a commitment to stakeholder 
participation throughout all phases of a programme. 
Headline data on access to WASH services: 
Access to drinking water: 83.1% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which a large part, 39.2%, has access only to a basic level of drinking water. 
 
Access to sanitation: 37.4% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, while 62.6% 
of the population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 4.7% who practice open 
defecation.142  
Policy Framework 
There has been a recent decreased attention to water, sanitation and hygiene in national policy in 
Uganda. Nevertheless, water, sanitation and hygiene remain a core area of Uganda’s Human 
Development Programme, one which seeks to improve labour productivity for increased 
competitiveness and better quality of life for all. It also foresees investing in the effective 
management of the entire WASH value chain segments, including containment, emptying, 
transportation, treatment, safe reuse and disposal. 
It is recognised that all development will be more challenging due to the effects of climate change, 
with more extreme weather patterns leading to increased water stress, impacting water availability 
and quality for both domestic and commercial uses as well as the water and sanitation infrastructure 
already in place. The Uganda National Climate Change Policy (2015—2020) articulates the challenges 
further and highlights that, given their domestic role, women are likely to experience the effects of 
climate change on water and sanitation facilities most keenly. It commits to mainstream gender 
issues across climate change adaptation and mitigation actions including ensuring climate change 
related policies and activities are gender sensitive. 
 
142 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 164

=== PAGE 168 ===
Page 57 of 143 
 
The National Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy seeks to ‘empower men, women, boys, girls and 
vulnerable groups through ensuring equity in access to and control of resources in the water and 
sanitation sub-sector’. The Strategy highlights the burden and risks for women and girls that come 
with poor access to water, sanitation and hygiene. In Uganda’s Water Policies, the most direct benefits 
to women and girls are likely to come through the rehabilitation and expansion of water and sanitation 
facilities, as well as support so women and girls can take advantage of employment or income-
generating opportunities. The Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy recognises the importance of 
building the capacity of Ministry of Water and Education staff on gender and of encouraging a gender-
sensitive work environment, but stops short from promoting actions to increase women’s 
participation in formal roles in the planning, development, management and maintenance of water 
and sanitation facilities. Interestingly, the National Development Plan III outlines clear plans for 
expanding education provision in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics and increasing 
the number of graduates in these areas, but places no emphasis on encouraging women specifically 
into education and careers in these areas.  
There is a commitment to stakeholder participation in the planning, implementation and 
maintenance of water and sanitation projects. Whilst this commitment provides opportunities for 
women and girls to influence the development of water and sanitation infrastructure in their 
communities, they bring an additional time burden which women and girls may struggle to take on. 
Social traditions which encourage women and girls to defer to men may inhibit women and girls’ 
abilities to participate further. The Second National Health Policy and the National Education and 
Sports Strategic Plan also highlights that, as the main users of primary health centres, women and 
girls can be severely affected by inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene practices in these centres. 
Similarly, inadequate toilet facilities are often a barrier to girls’ attendance at school. The Education 
and Sports Sector Plan includes, amongst its objectives, the expansion and improvement of safe water 
supply infrastructure to government supported primary schools as well as the construction of 
sanitation facilities primarily in primary schools.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Uganda, the Ministry of Water and Environment has primary responsibility for WASH. Other 
national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, responsible for 
sanitation and hygiene, as well as WASH in health care facilities, and the Ministry of Education and 
Sports, which has responsibility for WASH in schools.  
 
 
 
Page 165

=== PAGE 169 ===
Page 58 of 143 
 
 
Problem Tree Analyses 
The global evidence reviews for WASH, Wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems, and port 
infrastructure, have identified the most pertinent issues related to gender and climate change in these 
sectors. To pull together our findings and present the main causes and effects of issues from a gender 
perspective per sector, problem tree analyses have been created per sector. They have been prepared 
in line with GCF guidance and draw on and distil the main issues emerging from the global evidence 
reviews, and the national policy reviews for WASH. By unpacking the causes and effects, it identifies 
some of the central issues that CI2 investments need to address to promote gender equality, issues, 
which have directly informed the opportunities presented in the section 8 of this report.    
7.1 WASH 
The WASH global evidence review and national policy review have both highlighted the multiple ways 
in which women and girls are affected by inadequate WASH infrastructures and services. They have 
also pointed to some of the causes of this situation. Whilst national policies in focal countries commit 
to tackling this core problem, in addition to tackling climate change and mainstreaming gender 
through policy action, few countries appear to have a considered and comprehensive approach 
promoting gender equality through investments in the WASH sector. The problem tree analysis 
presented here seeks to unpack the causes and effects of inadequate WASH infrastructure and 
services from a gender perspective.  
 
Figure 4: WASH Problem Tree Analysis 
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments 
have been slow to 
take action to 
mitigate effects of 
climate change 
and build 
resilience 
A weak state-
citizen social 
contract inhibits 
policy 
implementation 
and investment in 
essential public 
services 
Gender norms relegate women 
and girls to the domestic space, 
undermine investment in girls’ 
education and exclude women and 
girls from formal and informal 
decision-making fora  
Women and 
girls’ 
physiology 
Weak public 
health 
systems  
CAUSES 
Climate change 
depletes available 
WASH 
infrastructure and 
resources 
Insufficient 
investment into 
WASH 
infrastructure, 
maintenance and 
service 
management 
Women and 
girls are 
responsible for 
household 
chores, 
including water 
collection, and 
caring for family 
members 
Women and 
girls do not 
influence the 
design, 
planning and 
management 
of WASH 
services 
Women and 
girls’ have 
increased and 
specific WASH 
needs 
Men and 
women, boys 
and girls have 
insufficient 
knowledge 
about the 
need to 
prioritise 
good hygiene 
practices 
 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
INADEQUATE WASH INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES PLACE A HIGH BURDEN ON WOMEN AND 
GIRLS 
 
Page 166

=== PAGE 170 ===
Page 59 of 143 
 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS
Women and girls spend more time on household chores and family care giving 
Women and girls face increased risk of sexual harassment and gender-based violence 
Families, especially men, are unwilling to spend scare resources on WASH services 
Girls, especially adolescent girls, do not attend school consistently 
Families, but especially women and girls, face an increased risk of ill-health and low levels of well-being, including 
mental well-being 
Available WASH infrastructure and services do not respond to women and girls’ needs or priorities 
Women and girls are not able to attend to their physical needs 
EFFECTS 
Women and girls are not able to invest in empowering activities such as going to school, income generating 
activities, community leadership 
People, especially women and girls, have a poorer physical and mental health status 
Girls are not able to complete basic levels of education 
Few women have the education and skills to work in the WASH sector  
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained 
 
7.2 Wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems 
As regards wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems, the Gender Assessment found that women are 
mostly excluded from the formal sector and most profitable parts of value chains in oceans-based 
economies, as well as from dialogue and decision making around community-based protection and 
management initiatives. At the same time, and in spite of gaps in the evidence base on climate-related 
impacts, they are likely to be disproportionately affected by damage to ecosystems. The causes and 
effects of this situation are summarized in the Problem Tree Analysis below (Figure 5). 
Figure 5: Wetland, coastal, and marine ecosystem Problem Tree Analysis  
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments have been 
slow to take action to 
mitigate effects of 
climate change and build 
resilience 
Gender norms relegate women to the domestic 
space: limiting the amount of time they can spend 
outside, and distance they can stray from, the home; 
and constraining women’s access to credit and 
specialised equipment  
Design of community 
protection and 
management initiatives 
does not take into 
account restrictions on 
women’s participation  
CAUSES 
Climate change damages 
wetland, coastal and 
marine ecosystems  
 
Women are mostly 
excluded from the formal 
sector in oceans-based 
industries, and are 
disproportionately 
represented in informal 
and unregulated 
economies 
Women are 
concentrated in less 
profitable parts of value 
chains 
Low female participation 
in community protection 
and management 
initiatives across relevant 
sectors 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
WOMEN ARE MARGINALISED IN THE USE, PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF WETLAND, 
COASTAL AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS 
There is limited evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of damage to ecosystems 
At the same time, rising sea temperatures, levels and acidity are all expected to disproportionately affect 
women’s livelihoods, with women facing disproportionate and additional barriers to adaptation 
Women working in oceans-based industries earn less than men for carrying out the same work 
Women working in informal or unregulated economies are vulnerable to exploitation, including unsanitary 
work environments 
EFFECTS 
Policy- and decision-making are gender-blind, overlooking women’s needs, interests and potential roles in 
protection and management 
Women and their families have poorer economic status and food security 
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained or exacerbated 
 
Page 167

=== PAGE 171 ===
Page 60 of 143 
 
7.3 Resilient Port Infrastructure 
In spite of particularly limited evidence on the intersect between gender, climate and port 
infrastructure, the Gender Assessment likewise identified widespread exclusion of women from the 
development and operation of port infrastructure, particularly from employment in operations and 
management. The Problem Tree Analysis below summarises the causes and effects of this situation 
(Figure 6). 
Figure 6: Resilient Port Infrastructure Problem Tree Analysis  
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments have 
been slow to take 
action to mitigate 
effects of climate 
change and build 
resilience 
Gender norms dictate that port employment is overwhelmingly dominated by men 
CAUSES 
Operation of 
traditional port 
infrastructure  
damages 
ecosystems  
 
Women comprise 
only a fraction of 
recruits and 
trainees to the port 
industry 
Female employees 
are particularly 
underrepresented 
in port operations 
and management 
There is a lack of 
support to the 
integration and 
progression of 
female employees 
(for example, 
through 
mentorship 
programmes) 
Working 
environments are 
insufficient to 
enable retention of 
female 
recruitments (e.g. 
by providing 
separate sanitation 
facilities and 
family-friendly HR 
policies) 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
WOMEN ARE EXCLUDED FROM THE DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION OF (CLIMATE-RESILIENT) 
PORT INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS 
There is a lack of evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of ports’ negative impacts on ecosystems, as 
well as of optimised infrastructure and energy efficiency 
Women do not benefit equally from the employment benefits of port infrastructure 
Women are excluded from discussions around new approaches such as no-impact port development, despite 
tending to be more willing to engage in sustainable or environmentally friendly practices  
EFFECTS 
Policy- and decision-making are gender-blind, overlooking women’s needs, interests and potential roles in the 
development of climate resilient port infrastructure 
Women have poorer economic status 
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained  
 
 
 
Page 168

=== PAGE 172 ===
Page 61 of 143 
 
 
Opportunities for promoting greater gender equality  
Although global evidence with a combined focus on gender, WASH and climate remains relatively 
sparse, our review has highlighted the significant burden placed on women and girls by inadequate 
access to WASH, access that volatilities associated with climate change are exacerbating. Our national 
policy and context analysis echoes this, pointing to the opportunity costs associated with the time 
women and girls spend collecting water and their increased risk to disease and gender-based violence. 
Distilling this evidence in a problem tree analysis highlights the need for more investment in climate 
resilient WASH, investment which women and girls have the opportunity to influence so that it 
responds to their needs and from which they should expect to benefit.  
The existing evidence base on the intersect between gender, climate and, each of, the protection and 
management of wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems and climate resilient port infrastructure is 
more scant still, but likewise suggests a lack of understanding of the gender-differentiated impacts of 
climate change in these sectors. The literature also points to widespread exclusion of women from 
participation in formal economies, as well as dialogue and decision making around relevant initiatives. 
Despite this sombre picture, our policy analysis shows that national governments in the focal countries 
have made important commitments to continue improving access to WASH for households, as well as 
in health and education facilities, and to do this in a climate-smart way. Generally speaking, there is 
an intention to do this in a gender-responsive way, with opportunities for women to shape service 
design, delivery and management.  
Drawing on our problem analyses, and the evidence we have reviewed, we can identify four areas of 
opportunity for CFM to promote gender equality through CI2 investments. These areas of opportunity 
are discussed in this section 8 of the gender assessment.  The gender action plan in Annex 6 
summarises the actions to be taken by CFM, and at Fund level, in order to mainstream gender issues 
in the investment lifecycle of the CI2 fund.  
8.1 Opportunity Area 1 
Making better quality, climate-smart WASH facilities more accessible in urban and rural 
communities and in schools and health facilities  
Building on the progress already made to improve the population’s access to WASH facilities has the 
potential to bring multiple direct benefits to women and girls. Such benefits include: 
▪ 
Reducing the time women and girls spend collecting and cleaning water, freeing up time 
for other activities, such as attending school, or engaging in income generating activities. 
▪ 
Reducing the incidence of illness in the family and the associated care burden that women 
and girls carry. 
▪ 
Reducing women and girls’ risk of being subjected to GBV as a result of travelling long 
distances to fetch water, to inadequate sanitation services, and to conflict in the 
household associated with expenditure on WASH services. 
▪ 
Increasing women and girls’ physical and mental well-being for being better able to care 
for themselves, including during menstruation, and for an improved sense of personal 
dignity. 
Page 169

=== PAGE 173 ===
Page 62 of 143 
 
▪ 
Development of WASH facilities in primary and secondary schools to contribute to 
improving girls’ school attendance and their completion of basic education. This brings 
benefits to the individual girls concerned, but as evidence suggests, also brings it to their 
families and to society more generally. 
▪ 
Development of WASH facilities in health centres and hospitals, not only to reduce the 
incidence of disease but also to help lower mortality rates. 
JPWSSH data suggests that in many of the focal countries, good progress is being made in providing 
the population with access to an improved water source for drinking water, although there is clearly 
scope for improving the level of service by making drinking water available on premises and improving 
water quality. However, there is an urgent need to tackle the much lower levels of access to improved 
sanitation services and to ending the practice of open defecation. 
Whilst improving physical access to WASH services is essential to benefit women and girls, maximising 
the benefits of this also requires financial, attitudinal and safety barriers to be addressed. This calls 
for infrastructure development initiatives to complement other initiatives addressing these barriers. 
Examples of complementary initiatives which could be considered include: 
▪ 
Building family and community understanding of the health benefits of good WASH 
practices: this appreciation is critical if families, especially men, are to accept the need to 
use scarce financial resources to cover costs associated with WASH services. Such 
interventions could also usefully cover the importance of good hygiene practices in an 
effort to erode the taboos often associated with menstruation. As men often control 
financial decision-making in households, involving men in these conversations and 
garnering their support is critical. 
▪ 
Cross-subsidisation approaches to make sustainable WASH facilities accessible to poorer 
sections of the community: in such scenarios, wealthier sections of the community would 
pay higher rates so that user rates for the poorest households could be reduced or 
eliminated. 
▪ 
Adapting WASH facilities so they are physically accessible to women and girls with 
disabilities. 
It should be noted that working with households and communities on good hygiene practices, 
including during menstruation, can help increase demand for WASH facilities and therefore the return 
on investment. 
8.2 Opportunity Area 2  
Giving women voice in the planning, design and management of facilities and initiatives 
If WASH facilities, wetland, coastal and marine ecosystem protection and management initiatives, and 
climate-resilient port infrastructure are to meet the needs of women and girls, then their planning, 
design and management need to be done with an awareness of those needs and a sensitivity to them. 
As we have seen in the WASH policy analysis, most countries foresee community participation in the 
sector. There are, however, strong social norms which devalue and often silence women’s voices, even 
when formal public consultation spaces are available.    
A different approach to public consultation and participation is needed to truly provide space for 
women and girls to inform the planning, design and management of WASH facilities, wetland, coastal 
and marine ecosystem protection and management initiatives, and climate-resilient port 
infrastructure. This approach needs to first and foremost identify women and girls as a specific 
Page 170

=== PAGE 174 ===
Page 63 of 143 
 
stakeholder group (rather than part of ‘the community’) and put in place an engagement strategy 
which counters the power dynamics which often silence women and girls to allow them to be heard 
and understood. Such an approach might involve: 
▪ 
Recognising that within the broad category of ‘women’ and ‘girls’, there are intersecting 
sub-groups with different needs e.g. indigenous women, women with disabilities, 
chronically poor women and adolescent girls, and that it is important for each of these 
sub-groups to be given the opportunity to be heard. Ways to reach out to and convene 
representatives of these sub-groups will need to be identified. 
▪ 
Identifying women’s leaders to work with to convene appropriate fora to hear a range of 
women’s and girls’ voices about their needs and challenges. Leaders within critical sub-
groups of women and girls could also be identified as a conduit for engaging the wider 
group. 
▪ 
Working with community leaders and men’s leaders to help them understand the 
rationale for engaging women in the planning of facilities and initiatives, and to build their 
support for that, thereby avoiding any backlash. 
▪ 
Holding consultation meetings at times and at venues which are convenient to the women 
and girls being targeted, considering how the direct and indirect costs of attending can be 
off-set, particularly for the chronically poor and for women and girls with disabilities. 
Taking this approach to engaging with women and girls has the potential to bring real insights into 
their needs and experiences, but these insights will only lead to gender responsive facilities and 
initiatives if those employed in designing them are sensitive to the importance of benefitting women 
and girls, and most crucially, decision-making gives due attention to such issues. Enabling this will 
require those leading the design to set the tone in this regard, clearly communicating expectations 
and taking action to ensure those expectations are met.  
If women are to influence the management of WASH facilities and oceans ecosystem protection 
initiatives involving community led committees, as is sometimes intended, strategic consideration of 
how to create the space for women’s voices to be heard will similarly be needed. The challenge is the 
same: how to counter social norms and power differentials which tend to silence women. The 
approach is likely to be context specific, but could involve:  
▪ 
Identifying and recruiting to the committee women in the community who are perceived 
by men and other women to have legitimacy in speaking out on behalf of other women, 
including women from different sub-groups.  
▪ 
Building the skills of the women representatives on the committee to consult with a 
diverse range of women and girls in the community to get their feedback on the WASH 
facilities or oceans ecosystem protection initiative and to represent these views in 
committee meetings and decision-making. 
▪ 
Building male committee members’ understanding of the need for management to be 
informed by women and girls’ experiences and developing the skills to ensure women’s 
voices inform committee decision-making. 
 
 
 
 
Page 171

=== PAGE 175 ===
Page 64 of 143 
 
8.3 Opportunity Area 3  
Providing women with formal employment opportunities 
Low levels of secondary education completion amongst girls in several of the focal countries can make 
the formal employment of women in the WASH sector challenging. There is, however, positive 
experience emerging in South and South East Asia of women being successfully employed in WASH 
enterprises e.g. as sanitation sales agents, in meter reading and in rainwater harvesting tank 
construction. 
Opportunities for promoting women’s employment in low-skill positions in the WASH sector warrant 
exploration in the design of CI2 supported projects. This strategy is not well documented in available 
literature and further investigation into available experience would be beneficial. Understanding how 
employers successfully engaged these women and how men’s concerns about women’s 
independence, mobility and safety were allayed are important aspects to explore. 
Challenges in employing women in the technical design and development of WASH facilities are 
particularly acute, with much smaller numbers of women going into tertiary education and even fewer 
focusing on STEM subjects such as engineering, although data on this is hard to find. These challenges 
will not be resolved quickly and will require medium to long-term support to encourage women to 
remain in education and to pursue careers in STEM. Possible support might involve scholarships for 
women to study STEM subjects in demand in WASH and work experience placements for women STEM 
students to gain practical experience in the workplace.  
The literature review suggests that if cleaners or caretakers are not in post to maintain WASH facilities 
in schools and health centres, this work can often fall to female staff members. Any efforts to improve 
WASH facilities in schools and health centres should therefore include a resourced plan for the on-
going cleaning and maintenance of the facilities.  
As regards the protection and management of wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems, relevant 
livelihoods initiatives for women have tended to accommodate, but failed to address, social norms 
which perpetuate gendered inequalities within industries and value chains. Initiatives to support 
sustainable practices in oceans-based industries should therefore not only take into account such 
restrictions – on women’s time of mobility, for instance – but actively seek to tackle discriminatory 
norms which limit women’s livelihoods opportunities. 
The development of new climate-resilient ports offers opportunities to recruit women as employees.  
Attracting women recruits, and supporting their meaningful integration and progression means 
providing a combination of initiatives to build their skills and confidence, and provide a supportive 
work environment. These include training incentives, mentorship programmes to connect women to 
those in senior level roles, as well as family-friendly HR policies and safe (separate) sanitation facilities 
for women. Initiatives should include a focus on areas from which women tend to be most excluded, 
most notably port operations and management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 172

=== PAGE 176 ===
Page 65 of 143 
 
8.4 Opportunity Area 4  
Understanding the gender equality benefits of gender-responsive facilities and initiatives  
Our review has suggested that there is a limited body of experience of interventions working at the 
nexus between gender, climate change and each of WASH, protection and management of wetlands, 
coastal and marine ecosystems, and port infrastructure. There is then an enormous opportunity for 
CFM to contribute to building the evidence base on how gender equality can be promoted through, 
climate-smart WASH, ocean ecosystems protection initiatives and port infrastructure, using CI2 as the 
vehicle.  
If CFM wishes to capitalise on this opportunity, it will need to operationalise robust monitoring, 
evaluation and learning frameworks for its new investments. This would involve: 
▪ 
Having clear objectives for how gender equality is to be promoted through the investment 
and the intended outcomes. 
▪ 
Specifying indicators with which to measure changes in gender equality and the 
achievement of intended outcomes. 
▪ 
A methodology, which ideally makes use of quantitative and qualitative approaches to 
measuring change, and which collects data at different time points to understand the pace 
of change and offer opportunities to adapt interventions. Of particular interest would be 
conducting an impact assessment post project completion, when communities have had 
some time to enjoy the benefits of the investment. 
▪ 
A skilled team to design and operationalise the monitoring, evaluation and learning, 
including team members with gender expertise.   
▪ 
Financial resources to cover the cost of operationalising a robust monitoring, evaluation 
and learning framework. 
Such an investment would contribute to CFM’s internal learning, but if results could be published, they 
would be a public good, offering others working in the gender, climate change, WASH, ocean 
ecosystems and port infrastructure spaces the opportunity to learn from CFM’s experience. 
It is worth noting that data captured on initiatives to protect ocean ecosystems should include relevant 
informal economies (where women tend to be concentrated) as well as specific parts of value chains 
women in which they are represented disproportionately. 
 
 
Page 173

=== PAGE 177 ===
Page 66 of 143 
 
 
Understanding the results and impact of gender mainstreaming   
Monitoring and reporting will be undertaken in accordance with the principles set out in CFM’s 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS). CFM will monitor and evaluate the actions 
taken to promote gender equality, their results and impact in two ways. Firstly, by monitoring and 
evaluating key impact indicators at the Fund level. Secondly, by implementing monitoring plans for 
individual projects.  
Fund Level Monitoring and Evaluation 
The KPIs established for individual programmes will supplement the key impact indicators that have 
been adopted for the CI2 funds and against which CI2 is committed to monitor performance in all 
projects. These indicators are linked to selected UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 
impact indicators that are relevant to gender are shown in Table 5 below.  
Table 5 CI2 Impact Indicators  
UN SDG 
Gender-Relevant CI Two Impact Indicators 
SDG 5 - Gender Equality 
• Number of full-time, equivalent female employees 
• Number of females in management positions 
SDG 6 - Clean Water and Sanitation 
• Total number of people (gender disaggregated) with improved 
access to clean drinking water and sanitation 
SDG 8 – Decent Work and Economic 
Growth 
• Number of new direct jobs created; gender disaggregated  
• Catalytic effect (EUR million) (total DFI and commercial financing) 
 
Project level monitoring and evaluation 
Project companies will implement a monitoring and evaluation plan, which sets out: 
• 
The indicators to be used to monitor how women and girls, as well as other priority social 
groups e.g., indigenous women, women from chronically poor households and women with 
disabilities, are being affected - both positively and negatively - by project interventions, and 
the impact these projects are having on their lives.  
• 
The methodology for gathering and analysing monitoring data, as well as reporting and using 
the findings. 
Each monitoring and evaluation plan will be bespoke to individual projects. However, they will contain 
comparable quantitative and qualitative indicators and data collection methodologies where 
appropriate. Depending on a project’s life cycle, monitoring data will be collected where possible at 
regular intervals to understand progress during project implementation. The aim of project 
monitoring will be to provide timely information to make project adjustments and address any 
negative effects.  
Relevant components of the monitoring and evaluation plan may be incorporated into contracts for 
EPCs or other sub-contractors, with reviews of the plan’s implementation forming part of the 
contractor’s normal review process. 
There is a need for more evidence on effective approaches to promoting gender equality through 
WASH investments. In response to this, CFM may publish some of the results and learnings from its 
CI2 investments. 
Page 174

=== PAGE 178 ===
Page 67 of 143 
 
Annex 1: Bibliography for the literature review 
1. 
Adams, Ellis Adjei, Yenupini Joyce Adams, and Christa Koki. "Water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) insecurity will 
exacerbate the toll of COVID-19 on women and girls in low-income countries." Sustainability: Science, Practice and 
Policy 17.1 (2021): 86-90. 
2. 
Adam RI, McDougall C, Bevitt K, Freed S, Gomese C, Johnson A, Lau J, Mudege N, Muzungaire L, Rajaratnam S et al. 
2021. Four pathways to achieve gender equality and women’s empowerment in small-scale fisheries and aquaculture: 
Insights from FISH research. FISH Gender Report. Penang, Malaysia: WorldFish. Program Report: FISH-2021-28. 
https://digitalarchive.worldfishcenter.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12348/5108/ffc7d7304d9cd554d929d4684839b9
79.pdf?sequence2= 
3. 
Assefa, Geteneh Moges, et al. "Gender Equality and Social Inclusion in Relation to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the 
Oromia Region of Ethiopia." International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18.8 (2021): 4281. 
https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/18/8/4281  
4. 
Bijaya et al (2015) Open defecation is associated with raised risk of preterm birth among Indian women: 
https://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h4020  
5. 
BIMCO/ICS (2021). Seafarer Workforce report. The Global Supply and Demand for Seafarers in 2021. Available at 
https://www.ics-shipping.org/publication/seafarer-workforce-report-2021-edition/.  
6. 
Boileau P, Ekins P, Gupta J (2019). Global Environmental Outlook 6.https://www.unep.org/resources/global-
environment-outlook-
6#:~:text=GEO%2D6%3A%20Healthy%20Planet%2C,meet%20the%20Sustainable%20Development%20Goals.. 
7. 
Brewis, A., Roba, K. T., Wutich, A., Manning, M., & Yousuf, J. (2021). Household water insecurity and psychological 
distress in Eastern Ethiopia: Unfairness and water sharing as undertheorized factors. SSM-Mental Health, 1, 100008. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666560321000086  
8. 
Caruso, Bethany A., et al. "Water, Sanitation, and Women's Empowerment: A systematic review and qualitative 
metasynthesis." medRxiv (2021). https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.26.21265535v1  
9. 
Cawood, S., & Rabby, M. F. (2021). ‘People don’t like the ultra-poor like me’: an intersectional approach to gender and 
participation in urban water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) projects in Dhaka’s bostis. International Development 
Planning Review. 
https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/174153/3/Cawood_Rabby_Revised%20Manuscript%20%28Incl.%20Title%20%26%20Ac
knowledgements%29%20.pdf 
10. Chambers, R. & Myers, J. (2016) 'Norms, Knowledge and Usage', Frontiers of CLTS: Innovations and Insights Issue 7, 
Brighton: IDS. https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/20.500.12413/8960  
11. Charles, Katrina, Kathy Pond, Steve Pedley, Rifat Hossain and Frédéric Jacot-Guillarmod  (2009) Vision 2030 The 
resilience of water supply and sanitation in the face of climate change Technology projection study: 
https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/vision_2030_technology_projection_report.pdf  
12. Chard, Anna N., et al. "Impact of a school-based water, sanitation, and hygiene intervention on school absence, 
diarrhea, respiratory infection, and soil-transmitted helminths: results from the WASH HELPS cluster-randomized trial." 
Journal of global health 9.2 (2019). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6657003/  
13. Daly, S. W., Lowe, J., Hornsby, G. M., & Harris, A. R. (2021). Multiple water source use in low-and middle-income 
countries: a systematic review. Journal of Water and Health, 19(3), 370-392. 
14. Dery, F., Bisung, E., Dicdkin, S., & Dyer, M. (2020). Understanding empowerment in water, sanitation, and hygiene 
(WASH): a scoping review. Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development, 10(1), 5-15. 
https://iwaponline.com/washdev/article/10/1/5/71150/Understanding-empowerment-in-water-sanitation-and  
15. Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., Parienté, W., & Pons, V. (2012). Happiness on tap: Piped water adoption in urban 
Morocco. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4), 68-99. 
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w16933/w16933.pdf 
16. Dickin, Sarah. Lisa Segnestam & Mariam Sou Dakouré (2021) Women’s vulnerability to climate-related risks to 
household water security in Centre-East, Burkina Faso, Climate and Development, 13:5, 443-453, DOI: 
10.1080/17565529.2020.1790335  
17. Elliott, M., Foster, T., MacDonald, M. C., Harris, A. R., Schwab, K. J., & Hadwen, W. L. (2019). Addressing how multiple 
household water sources and uses build water resilience and support sustainable development. NPJ Clean Water, 2(1), 
1-5.  https://www.nature.com/articles/s41545-019-0031-4  
18. Fisher, J., 2008. Women in water supply, sanitation and hygiene programmes. Proceedings of the ICE: Municipal 
Engineer, 161 (4), pp. 223 - 229. 
https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/journal_contribution/Women_in_water_supply_sanitation_and_hygiene_progra
mmes/9443684  
Page 175

=== PAGE 179 ===
Page 68 of 143 
 
19. Grant, M., Soeters, S., Megaw, T., & Willetts, J. (2017). Female Water Entrepreneurs in Cambodia: Considering enablers 
and barriers to women’s empowerment. Enterprise in WASH–Research Report 9. Institute for Sustainable Futures, 
University of Technology Sydney, 3. https://emwwoba.info/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/ISF-UTS_2018_Research-
report_Womens-empowerment-in-Cambodia-WASH-enterprises.pdf  
20. Grant, Melita, et al. "Rural piped-water enterprises in Cambodia: a pathway to women’s empowerment?." Water 11.12 
(2019): 2541. https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/11/12/2541  
21. Geere, Jo-Anne Lee, et al. "Is water carriage associated with the water carrier’s health? A systematic review of 
quantitative and qualitative evidence." BMJ Global Health 3.3 (2018): e000764. 
https://gh.bmj.com/content/3/3/e000764  
22. Heller, L. (2016)  Gender equality and the human rights to water and sanitation: report by the special rapporteur on the 
human rights to water and sanitation. https://www.ohchr.org/en/special-procedures/sr-water-and-sanitation/gender-
equality-report  
23. House, S. Cavill, S., Sommer, M and Ferron, S (2014) Violence, gender and WASH toolkit. https://violence-
wash.lboro.ac.uk/  
24. Hughes, James, et al. "Impacts and implications of climate change on wastewater systems: A New Zealand perspective." 
Climate Risk Management 31 (2021): 100262. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096320300528  
25. Humphreys, Martin, Aiga Stokenberga, Matias Herrera Dappe, Atsushi Iimi, and Olivier Hartmann. (2019). Port 
Development and Competition in East and Southern Africa: Prospects and Challenges. International Development in 
Focus. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1410-5 License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 
3.0 IGO: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/31897/9781464814105.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed
=y 
26. Hunter et al (2015) Impact of the Provision of Safe Drinking Water on School Absence Rates in Cambodia: A Quasi-
Experimental Study. https://www.karger.com/Article/PDF/381244  
27. Indarti, N., Rostiani, R., Megaw, T. and Willetts, J (2018) Summary Brief: Women’s involvement in economic 
opportunities in water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in Indonesia: Examining personal experiences and potential for 
empowerment. Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney. http://enterpriseinwish.info  
28. Indarti, N., Rostiani, R., Megaw, T., & Willetts, J. (2019). Women’s involvement in economic opportunities in water, 
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in Indonesia: Examining personal experiences and potential for empowerment. 
Development Studies Research, 6(1), 76-91. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/21665095.2019.1604149 
29. IWA (2013) Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector Country briefing note Sri 
Lanka. https://iwa-network.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/1422744575-Briefing-Note-Sri-Lanka-final.pdf  
30. IWA (2015) Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector Country briefing note 
Bangladesh.  https://iwa-network.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/1422744387-Briefing-Note-Bangladesh-Final.pdf  
31. IWDA (2015) Do No Harm: Understanding interactions between women’s economic security and violence against 
women in the pacific to inform policy and practice that advances human security. 
https://iwda.org.au/assets/files/2015-Do-No-Harm-Policy-Brief-IWDA-1.pdf  
32. IWDA (2016) The double burden: the impact of economic empowerment initiatives on women's workload. 
https://pacificwomen.org/research/the-double-burden-impact-of-economic-empowerment-initiatives-on-womens-
workload/  
33. KEWASNET (2020) Sex for water project. Promoting Safe Space for Girls and Young Women in Kibera Project. Final 
baseline survey report. https://www.susana.org/_resources/documents/default/3-3965-270-1606746371.pdf  
34. Jones PJS, Murray RH, and Vestergaard O (2019). Enabling Effective and Equitable Marine Protect Areas: Guidance on 
Combining Governance 
Approaches. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/27790/MPA.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
35. Kohlitz, J., Chong, J., & Willetts, J. (2020). Rural drinking water safety under climate change: the importance of 
addressing physical, social, and environmental dimensions. Resources, 9(6), 77. https://www.mdpi.com/2079-
9276/9/6/77  
36. Kohlitz, J., Megaw, T., Chong, J., Sugi, F., Palaipeni, P., Emanual, Y., Brikman, H., Joman, Y., Landa, S., Talan, J., Leong, L., 
Kelleher, J. & Gero A., 2020, Climate Change Response for Inclusive WASH: A guidance note for Plan International 
Indonesia. Prepared by ISF-UTS for Plan International Indonesia. https://waterforwomen.uts.edu.au/climate-change-
response/  
37. Kohlitz,J,  J. Chong & J Willetts (2019) Analysing the capacity to respond to climate change: a framework for community-
managed water services, Climate and Development, 11:9, 775-785, DOI: 10.1080/17565529.2018.1562867  
Page 176

=== PAGE 180 ===
Page 69 of 143 
 
38. Kulkarni, S., O’Reilly, K., & Bhat, S. (2017). No relief: Lived experiences of inadequate sanitation access of poor urban 
women in India. Gender & Development, 25(2), 167-183. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13552074.2017.1331531  
39. Leahy, C., Kohlitz, J., Chong, J. (2020). Socially-inclusive Responses to Climate Change Impacts on WASH: Case Study in 
Asumanu, Liquiçá , Timor-Leste. Prepared for WaterAid Timor-Leste by ISF-UTS. 
https://waterforwomen.uts.edu.au/climate-change-response/  
40. Leahy, C., Lunel, J., Grant, M., & Willetts, J. R. (2017). Women in WASH Enterprises: Learning from female 
entrepreneurship in Cambodia, Indonesia and Lao PDR. 
https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/122061/1/Working-Paper-6_Women-in-WASH-Enterprises.pdf 
41. Lemery, Emmanuelle, et al. "Surfactants have multi-fold effects on skin barrier function." European Journal of 
Dermatology 25.5 (2015): 424-435. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Stephanie-
Briancon/publication/279304070_Surfactants_have_multi-
fold_effects_on_skin_barrier_function/links/5735dd6a08ae298602e09316/Surfactants-have-multi-fold-effects-on-skin-
barrier-function.pdf 
42. Lennon, S. (2011) Fear and anger: Perceptions of risks related to sexual violence against women linked to water and 
sanitation in Delhi, India - Briefing Note. https://www.susana.org/en/knowledge-hub/resources-and-
publications/library/details/1758  
43. McCormick, B.J.J., Lang, D.R. Diarrheal disease and enteric infections in LMIC communities: how big is the 
problem?. Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines 2, 11 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40794-016-0028-7  
44. McGill, B. M., Altchenko, Y., Hamilton, S. K., Kenabatho, P. K., Sylvester, S. R., and Villholth, K. G. (2019). Complex 
interactions between climate change, sanitation, and groundwater quality: a case study from Ramotswa, Botswana. 
Hydrogeol. J. 27, 997–1015. doi: 10.1007/s10040-018-1901-4   
45. Megaw, T., Kohlitz, J., Chong, J. (2020). Socially-inclusive Responses to Climate Change Impacts on WASH: Case Study in 
Manggarai, Flores, Indonesia. Prepared for Plan International Indonesia by ISF-UTS. 
https://waterforwomen.uts.edu.au/climate-change-response/  
46. Megaw, T., Kohlitz, J., Gero, A. & Chong, J. (2020). Understanding and responding to climate change impacts in inclusive 
WASH programs – a conceptual framework – Learning Paper. Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology 
Sydney.  https://waterforwomen.uts.edu.au/climate-change-response/  
47. Mills F, Willetts J, Evans B, Carrard N and Kohlitz J (2020) Costs, Climate and Contamination: Three Drivers for Citywide 
Sanitation Investment Decisions. Front. Environ. Sci. 8:130. doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2020.00130 
48. Oates, N., Ross, I., Calow, R., Carter, R., & Doczi, J. (2014). Adaptation to climate change in water, sanitation and 
hygiene. London: Overseas Development Institute. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a089b9ed915d622c000381/61463-
ODI_Adaptation_to_Climate_Change_in_WASH_Final.pdf  
49. OECD (2016), The Ocean Economy in 2030, OECD Publishing, Paris. https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/the-
ocean-economy-in-2030_9789264251724-en#page93 
50. Österblom, H., C.C.C. Wabnitz, D. Tladi et al. (2020). Towards Ocean Equity. Washington, DC: World Resources 
Institute. Available online at www.oceanpanel.org/how-distribute-benefits-ocean-equitably. 
51. Participatory Research in Asia (2019) Lived Realities of Women Sanitation Workers in India. 
https://www.pria.org/knowledge_resource/1571820425_Lived_Realities_of_Women_Sanitation_Workers_in_India_20
-10-19.pdf  
52. Pouramin, P., Nagabhatla, N., & Miletto, M. (2020). A systematic review of water and gender interlinkages: Assessing 
the intersection with health. Frontiers in Water, 2, 6. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frwa.2020.00006/full  
53. Pross, C., Han, J Y-C., Kim, D. and Vigil, S. (2020). Climate change, gender equality and human rights in Asia: regional 
review and promising practices. UN Women-Asia and the Pacific. https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/digital-
library/publications/2021/01/climate-change-gender-equality-and-human-rights-in-asia 
54. Rosinger, A. Y., Brewis, A., Wutich, A., Jepson, W., Staddon, C., Stoler, J., & Young, S. L. (2020). Water borrowing is 
consistently practiced globally and is associated with water-related system failures across diverse environments. Global 
Environmental Change, 64, 102148. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378020307317  
55. Ross, I., Cumming, O., Dreibelbis, R., Adriano, Z., Nala, R., & Greco, G. (2021). How does sanitation influence people's 
quality of life? Qualitative research in low-income areas of Maputo, Mozambique. Social Science & Medicine, 272, 
113709. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953621000411  
56. Routray, P., Torondel, B., Clasen, T., & Schmidt, W. P. (2017). Women's role in sanitation decision making in rural 
coastal Odisha, India. PloS one, 12(5), e0178042. 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0178042  
Page 177

=== PAGE 181 ===
Page 70 of 143 
 
57. SaciWaters (2010) Women Managing Water: Inspiring Stories from South Asia. 
http://www.saciwaters.org/CB/images/pdfs/WMW-Stories_Krishna&De_Eds3.pdf 
58. C. Schipper, S Vergouwen, M. de Jong, H. Vreugdenhil, M. de Bel, F. Schasfoort, S. Minderhoud (2015): Port of the 
future: exploratory study. WWF & Deltares. https://www.deltares.nl/app/uploads/2015/12/Port-of-the-Future-
report.pdf 
59. Scott, Pippa, M. Sohail, and Sue Cavill. (2017).  "Urination needs and practices away from home: where do women go?." 
https://wedc-knowledge.lboro.ac.uk/resources/conference/40/Scott-2596.pdf  
60. Simiyu, S., Bagayoko, M. and Gyasi, R.M. (2021) ‘Associations between water, sanitation, and depression among older 
people in Ghana: Empirical evidence from WHO-SAGE Wave 2 survey’, Aging & Mental Health 1-8, 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/issues/waterandsanitation/srwater/pages/annualreports.aspx  
61. Soeters, S., Carrard, N., Grant, M. and Willetts, J., (2019a) “Leadership and voice: more than add women and stir”. 
Water for Women: Gender in WASH - Conversational article 3, Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of 
Technology Sydney. https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/ISF-
UTS_2019-LeadershipandVoiceArticle3_GenderinWASH_WaterforWomen.pdf 
62. Soeters, S., Carrard, N., Grant, M. and Willetts, J., (2019b) “Women’s empowerment: sharpening our focus”. Water for 
Women: Gender in WASH -Conversational article 1, Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney. 
https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/ISF-
UTS_2019_WomensEmpowermentArticle1_GenderinWASH_WaterforWomen.pdf  
63. Sorenson, Susan B., Christiaan Morssink, and Paola Abril Campos. "Safe access to safe water in low income countries: 
water fetching in current times." Social science & medicine 72.9 (2011): 1522-1526. 
https://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1192&context=spp_papers  
64. Stuchtey, M., A. Vincent, A. Merkl, M. Bucher et al. (2020). “Ocean Solutions That Benefit People, Nature and the 
Economy.” Washington, DC: World Resources Institute. www.oceanpanel.org/ocean-solutions. 
65. UN Environment (2019): Enabling Effective and Equitable Marine Protected Areas – guidance on combining 
governance approaches. Authors - Jones PJS, Murray RH and Vestergaard O. 
66. UN Water (2019). Climate change and water: UN-water policy brief. Geneva: UN Water. 
67. USAID (2020) Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in WASH. 
https://www.globalwaters.org/sites/default/files/usaid_water_gender_tech_brief_5_508_2.pdf  
68. USAID, IDE (2019) Understanding how sanitation sale agent gender affects key sanitation behaviours in Nepal. 
https://www.globalwaters.org/resources/assets/washpals/understanding-how-sanitation-sales-agent-gender-affects-
key-sanitation-behaviors  
69. Verbyla, Matthew E., et al. "Safely managed hygiene: a risk-based assessment of handwashing water quality." 
Environmental science & technology 53.5 (2019): 2852-2861. 
70. Verhoeven, Patrick (2020): “World Ports Sustainability Report”. https://sustainableworldports.org/wp-
content/uploads/WORLD-PORTS-SUSTAINABILITY-REPORT-2020-FIN.pdf 
71. Water and Sanitation for the Urban Poor (2021) Protect the infrastructure: climate proofing water and sanitation 
systems: https://www.wsup.com/blog/protect-the-infrastructure-climate-proofing-water-and-sanitation-systems/  
72. Water and Sanitation for the Urban Poor (WSUP) (2021) The missing link in climate adaptation. How improved access to 
water and sanitation is helping cities adapt to climate change: https://www.wsup.com/insights/the-missing-link-in-
climate-adaptation-how-improved-access-to-water-and-sanitation-is-helping-cities-adapt-to-climate-change/  
73. Water for Women (2019a) ‘Do No Harm’ for inclusive WASH: working towards a shared understanding Reflections from 
the Water for Women Fund’s South Asia Regional Learning Event. https://www.waterforwomenfund.org/en/learning-
and-resources/resources/GSI/WfW-SNV-Learning-Brief_Systems-Strengthening_Do-No-Harm_FINAL.pdf 
74. Water for Women (2019b) Do No Harm for Women’s empowerment in WASH. 
https://www.waterforwomenfund.org/en/learning-and-resources/resources/GSI/WfW-DNH-learning-brief-final.pdf  
75. Water.org (2020) Women’s Empowerment in WASH: An Analysis of the Link Between WSS Financing and Women’s 
Empowerment. A review of the evidence. https://water.org/documents/202/2020-08-
07_Womens_Empowerment_in_WASH_final.pdf  
76. Water.org (2020) Women's Empowerment in WASH: An Analysis of the Link Between WSS Financing and Women's 
Empowerment. Recommendations. https://water.org/documents/202/2020-08-
07_Womens_Empowerment_in_WASH_final.pdf  
77. WaterAid, WSUP and Unicef (2018) Female-friendly public and community toilets: a guide for planners and decision 
makers. https://washmatters.wateraid.org/publications/female-friendly-public-and-community-toilets-a-guide-for-
planners-and-decision-makers  
Page 178

=== PAGE 182 ===
Page 71 of 143 
 
78. WaterShed (2019) New perspectives on women in WASH: Integrating Women’s Empowerment Programming into a 
Market-Based Sanitation Intervention in Rural. https://watershedasia.org/wp-content/uploads/WEwork-Research-
Design_v21.pdf  
79. Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) (2010) Global Scaling Up Handwashing Project. Involving Men in Handwashing 
Behavior Change Interventions in Senegal,  
https://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp/files/publications/WSP_InvolvingMen_HWWS.pdf  
80. White Ribbon Alliance (2019) Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, its what women want. 
https://www.whiteribbonalliance.org/2019/06/24/water-sanitation-and-hygiene-its-what-women-want/  
81. Workman, C. L., Cairns, M. R., de los Reyes III, F. L., & Verbyla, M. E. (2021). Global water, sanitation, and hygiene 
approaches: Anthropological contributions and future directions for engineering. Environmental Engineering Science, 
38(5), 402-417. https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1089/ees.2020.0321  
82. World Economic Forum (2020): Gender parity in the ocean. 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOA_2pp_Gender_JAN2020.pdf 
83. World Health Organization. Vision 2030: the resilience of water supply and sanitation in the face of climate change. 
World Health Organization, 2009. 
84. Wutich, Amber, and Kathleen Ragsdale. "Water insecurity and emotional distress: coping with supply, access, and 
seasonal variability of water in a Bolivian squatter settlement." Social science & medicine 67.12 (2008): 2116-2125.  
85. Young, Sera L., et al. "Validity of a four-item household water insecurity experiences scale for assessing water issues 
related to health and well-being." The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene 104.1 (2021): 391. 
 
 
 
Page 179

=== PAGE 183 ===
Page 72 of 143 
 
Annex 2: Bibliography for the Policy Review 
Bangladesh 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh (2010). National Sustainable Development Plan 2010-2021. 
http://nda.erd.gov.bd/files/1/Publications/CC%20Policy%20Documents/National-Sustainable-Development-Strategy.pdf.  
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, Division of Local 
Government (2014). National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation 2014-2025. 
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/bgd197577.pdf 
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Environment and Forestry (2008). Climate Change Stragety and Action Plan 
2008. file:///C:/Users/Victoria/Downloads/bangladesh_climate_change_actiona_plan%20(3).pdf 
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, Division of Local 
Government (2012). National Hygiene Promotion Stragety for Water Supply and Sanitation 2014. https://www.share-
netbangladesh.org/national-hygiene-promotion-strategy-for-water-supply-and-sanitation-sector-in-bangladesh-2012/.  
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Women and Children Affair’s (2011). National Women Development Policy 
2011. 
https://mowca.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/mowca.portal.gov.bd/policies/64238d39_0ecd_4a56_b00c_b834cc54f
88d/National-Women%20Development%20Policy-2011English.pdf 
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Environment and Forests (2016). Gender Policy 2016. 
http://bangladesh.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/bangladesh.gov.bd/policy/cb9b5425_e215_4681_a74f_1baa9b117627/50.
%20%E0%A6%9C%E0%A7%87%E0%A6%A8%E0%A7%8D%E0%A6%A1%E0%A6%BE%E0%A6%B0%20%E0%A6%AA%E0%A6%
B2%E0%A6%BF%E0%A6%B8%E0%A6%BF%20(1).pdf 
 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Education (2010). National Education Policy 2010. 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/02.National-Education-Policy-2010-English.pdf 
Botswana 
Republic of Botswana (2012). Botswana National Water Policy.  
https://www.water.gov.bw/images/Water%20Pitso/Water_Policy__November_2012.pdf   
  
Republic of Botswana (2016). National Development Plan 11, April 2017 – March 2023.  
https://botswana.un.org/sites/default/files/2020-10/NDP%2011%20full%202017.pdf  
  
Republic of Botswana, Ministry of Health (2011). National Health Policy ‘Towards a Healthier Botswana’.   
https://www.moh.gov.bw/Publications/policies/revised_National_Health_Policy.pdf   
  
Republic of Botswana & UNDP (2016). Draft Climate Change Response Policy.  
  
Republic of Botswana & UNDP (2018). A National Climate Change Strategy for Botswana.   
https://drmims.sadc.int/sites/default/files/document/2020-03/2018_Botswana%20Climate%20Change%20Strategy.pdf   
  
Brazil 
General Secretary (2019). National Policy for Regional Development II. http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2019-
2022/2019/decreto/D9810.htm  
Ministry of National Integration and Secretary of Regional Development Policies (2007). National Policy for Regional 
Development (Executive Summary).   
Casa Civil (1981, with most recent update in 2013). National Environmental Policy. 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l6938.htm  
Page 180

=== PAGE 184 ===
Page 73 of 143 
 
Secretary for Politics for Women (2013). National Plan of Politics for Women. 
https://oig.cepal.org/sites/default/files/brasil_2013_pnpm.pdf  
Ministry of Health (2017). National Policy for Health. 
https://bvsms.saude.gov.br/bvs/publicacoes/politica_nacional_promocao_saude.pdf  
Ministry of Regional Development (2019). National Plan for Basic Sanitation. 
https://antigo.mdr.gov.br/images/stories/ArquivosSDRU/ArquivosPDF/Versao_Conselhos_Resolu%C3%A7%C3%A3o_Alta_
-_Capa_Atualizada.pdf  
Ministry of Regional Development (2022). National Plan for Water Resources. https://www.gov.br/mdr/pt-
br/assuntos/seguranca-hidrica/plano-nacional-de-recursos-hidricos-
1/Plano%20de%20Acao%20e%20Anexo%20Normativo%20para%20apreciacao%20do%20CNRH/plano-de-
acao_pnrhv2022_cnrh-  
Ministry of Education (2014). National Education Plan. https://pne.mec.gov.br/18-planos-subnacionais-de-educacao/543-
plano-nacional-de-educacao-lei-n-13-005-2014  
Ministry of Environment (2010). National Policy for Climate Change. http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2007-
2010/2010/Decreto/D7390.htm  
 
Djibouti 
Republic of Djibouti (2010) Vision Djibouti 2035. https://djiboutiembassykuwait.net/assets/files/djibouti-2035-en.pdf  
 
Republic of Djibouti (2010) Development Plan for the Primary Sector 2010-2020 
 
Republic of Djibouti (2015) Strategy of Accelerated Growth and Promotion of Employment (SCAPE). 
https://planipolis.iiep.unesco.org/sites/default/files/ressources/djibouti_scape-_anglais.pdf  
 
Republic of Djibouti, Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity (2018) National Strategy for Social Protection 2018-2022. 
https://sociales.gouv.dj/uploads/Categorie/9b486a2fb64f519b7cbf155e82bf1c67.pdf  
 
Republic of Djibouti, Ministere de la Sante (2008) Plan National de développement Sanitaire de Djibouti 2008-2012. 
https://www.mindbank.info/item/5431  
 
Republic of Djibouti, Ministère de la Promotion de la Femme et du Planning Familial, Chargé des Relations avec le Parlement 
(2011) Politique Nationale Genre 2011-2021. http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/dji166445.pdf  
 
Indonesia 
State Ministry of National Development Planning and National Development Planning Agency (2005). Long-Term National 
Development Plan. https://policy.asiapacificenergy.org/sites/default/files/LONG-
TERM%20NATIONAL%20DEVELOPMENT%20PLAN%20OF%202005-2025%20%28EN%29.pdf.   
Ministery for Environment and Forestry (2021). Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and Climate Resilience 2050. 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Indonesia_LTS-LCCR_2021.pdf  
Ministry of Health (2008). National Strategy for Community-Based Sanitation. 
https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/NATIONAL_STRATEGY_CBTS.p
df  
Office of the President (2000). Presidential Instructions on Gender Mainstreaming. 
https://www.kemenpppa.go.id/lib/uploads/list/eb8d4-0ffb0-1.-gender-mainstreaming.pdf  
State Ministry of National Development Planning (2020). The National Medium—Term Development Plan (2020-2024). 
https://old.bappenas.go.id/files/rpjmn/Narasi-RPJMN-2020-2024-versi-Bahasa-Inggris.pdf.   
 
 
Page 181

=== PAGE 185 ===
Page 74 of 143 
 
Ivory Coast 
International Monetary Fund (2016) IMF Country Report No. 16/388, Cote d’Ivoire Economic Development Documents – 
National Developent Plan 2016-20. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2016/cr16388.pdf  
 
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire (2016) Plan National de Développement (PND) 2016-2020. https://www.cabri-
sbo.org/en/documents/national-development-plan-2016-2020-1  
 
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministere de l’Environnement, de la Salubrite Urbaine et du Développement Durable (2015) 
Document de Strategie Nationale de Lutte Contre les Changements Climatiques 2015-2020. 
https://chm.cbd.int/api/v2013/documents/02BD4D5F-376D-457C-0F61-
4370D0BCE50E/attachments/207104/STRATEGIE_NATIONALE_CHANGEMENT_CLIMATIQUE.pdf  
 
Republic of Cote d’Ivoire, Ministere de la Construction, du Logement, de l’assainissement et de l’Urbanisme (2012) Lettre de 
politique sectorielle (Assainissement et Drainage) Décrets de creation et d’organisation de l’ONAD. 
https://finances.gouv.ci/publications?download=427:table-ronde-schema-directeur-assainissement-lettre-de-politique-
sectorielle-1  
Kenya 
Republic of Kenya (2018) Kenya’s Third Mid-Term Plan 2018-2022. http://vision2030.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/THIRD-MEDIUM-TERM-PLAN-2018-2022.pdf  
 
Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Environment and Forestry (2018). National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 2018-2022. 
http://www.environment.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/NCCAP_2018-2022_ExecutiveSummary-Compressed-1.pdf 
 
Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Health (2016). Kenya Environmental Sanitation and Hygiene Policy (KESP) 2016-2030. 
https://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp/files/publications/Kenya%20Environmental%20Sanitation%20and%20Hygiene%20Policy.pdf 
 
Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Water and Sanitation (2016). Stragetic Plan 2018-2022. 
https://kewasnet.co.ke/download/ministry-of-water-and-sanitation-strategic-plan-2018-
2022/?wpdmdl=2040&refresh=62408240bd0061648394816 
 
Republic of Kenya (2019). National Policy on Gender and Development. http://psyg.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/NATIONAL-POLICY-ON-GENDER-AND-DEVELOPMENT.pdf 
 
Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Education (2018). National Education Sector Strategic Plan (NESSP) 2018-2022. 
https://assets.globalpartnership.org/s3fs-public/document/file/kenya-nessp-2018-
2002.pdf?VersionId=tdCPzVW5gwJ1DODlRJsOWkwpP7BDDrKv 
 
Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Health (2014). Kenya Health Policy 2014-2030. 
http://publications.universalhealth2030.org/uploads/kenya_health_policy_2014_to_2030.pdf 
Morocco 
The Kingdom of Morocco (2017). National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS) Executive Summary 2017. 
https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/downloads/policy-database/ENG-SNDD_RESUME%20EXECUTIF-
V24-D%20%281%29.pdf 
Royaume Du Maroc, Conseil Superieur de L’Eau et du Climat (2013). Plan National De L’Eau 2013. 
file:///C:/Users/Victoria/Downloads/Plan_National_de_lEau.pdf 
Kingdom of Morocco (2014). Moroccan Climate Change Policy 2014. 
https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/downloads/policy-
database/Moroccan%20Climate%20Change%20Policy.pdf 
Royaume du Maroc, Ministere de la Sante (2019). Politique Nationale Integree de la Sante de l’enfant a l’horizon 2030. 
https://www.sante.gov.ma/Publications/Guides-
Manuels/Documents/2020/Politique%20nationale%20int%C3%A9gr%C3%A9e%20de%20la%20sant%C3%A9%20de%20l'enfa
nt.pdf 
Page 182

=== PAGE 186 ===
Page 75 of 143 
 
Royaume du Maroc, secretariat d’etat charge de la famille, de l’enfance et des personnes handicapees (2006). Strategie 
nationale pour l’equite et l’egalite entre les sexes par l’integration de l’approche genre dans les politiques et les programmes 
de developpement.  
http://www.ogfp.ma/uploads/documents/Strategie%20nationale%20pour%20l'%C3%A9quit%C3%A9%20et%20l'%C3%A9gal
it%C3%A9%20entre%20les%20sexes.pdf 
Namibia 
Republic of Namibia (2017) Namibia’s 5th National Development Plan (NDP5) 2017/18 – 2021/22. 
https://www.npc.gov.na/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/NDP5.pdf 
 
Republic of Namibia (2020). Fourth National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/SubmissionsStaging/NationalReports/Documents/5823401_Namibia-NC4-1-
Namibia%20-%20NC4%20-%20Final%20signed.pdf  
 
Republic of Namibia, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (2008). Water Supply and Sanitation Policy. 
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/nam176574.pdf 
Republic of Namibia, Ministry of Environment & Tourism (2011). National Policy on Climate Change for Namibia. 
https://drmims.sadc.int/sites/default/files/document/2020-
03/2011_National%20Policy%20on%20Climate%20Change%20for%20Namibia.pdf  
 
Republic of Namibia, Ministry of Gender Eqquality and Child Welfare (MGECW) (2010) National Gender Policy (2010 – 2020). 
http://www.africanchildforum.org/clr/policy%20per%20country/namibia/namibia_gender_2010-2020_en.pdf 
Nigeria 
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Finance, Budget and National Planning (2021). National Development Plan 
(NDP) 2021-2025. https://pwcnigeria.typepad.com/files/ndp-2021-2025.pdf 
 
USAID. Nigeria Water and Sanitation Profile. https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADO937.pdf 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Environment, Department of Climate Change (2021). National Climate 
Change Policy for Nigeria 2021-2030. https://climatechange.gov.ng/wp-
content/uploads/2021/08/NCCP_NIGERIA_REVISED_2-JUNE-2021.pdf 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development (2006). National Gender Policy. 
https://nigerianwomentrustfund.org/wp-content/uploads/National-Gender-PolicySituation-Analysis.pdf 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2013). National Policy on Education, 6th Edition. https://education.gov.ng/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/NATIONAL-POLICY-ON-EDUCATION.pdf 
 
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Health (2016). National Health Policy 2016. https://naca.gov.ng/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/National-Health-Policy-Final-copy.pdf 
Uganda 
Republic of Uganda, National Planning Authority (2020). Third Natioinal Development Plan (NDPIII) 2020/2021 - 2024/2025. 
http://www.npa.go.ug/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/NDPIII-Finale_Compressed.pdf 
 
Republic of Uganda (2007). The Uganda Gender Policy 2007. http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/uga163564.pdf 
 
Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Water and Environment (2015). Uganda National Climate Change Policy 2015. 
https://www.mwe.go.ug/sites/default/files/library/National%20Climate%20Change%20Policy%20April%202015%20final.pdf 
 
Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Health (2010). The Second National Health Policy 2010. 
file:///C:/Users/Victoria/Downloads/Second%20National%20Health%20Policy%202010.pdf 
 
Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Water and Sanitation (2018). Water and Santiatioin Gender Strategy 2018-2022. 
https://www.mwe.go.ug/sites/default/files/library/Water%20and%20Sanitation%20Gender%20Strategy.pdf 
Page 183

=== PAGE 187 ===
Page 76 of 143 
 
 
Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Education and Sports (2017). Education and Sport Sector Strategic Plan 2017/2018 - 
2019/2020. https://assets.globalpartnership.org/s3fs-public/document/file/2020-7-Uganda-
ESP.pdf?VersionId=GEZha2tPhcUDub6J6Bpa5JVg2aO5yhNz  
 
 
 
 
Page 184

=== PAGE 188 ===
Page 77 of 143 
 
Annex 3: Stakeholder mapping interview guide 
 
Climate Investor 2 Gender Assessment Stakeholder Engagement 
Interview Guide 
 
Introduction 
Interviewer introduces her/himself and asks respondent to introduce her/himself. Note down: 
• 
Name 
• 
Organisation 
• 
Role 
We are working with Climate Fund Managers and the Green Climate Fund on a project proposal to 
leverage private sector investment into the development of climate resilient water and sanitation 
infrastructure. [Country X] is one of the countries where funding will be made available to leverage 
large scale private sector investment.  As part of the proposal development process, we are seeking 
to understand how future private sector investments in WASH infrastructure development can help 
promote gender equality, for example, by improving access to quality water and sanitation services, 
enabling women’s participation in the design and management of water and sanitation services and 
enabling women to benefit from the infrastructure development, including through formal and 
informal employment opportunities. We are keen to learn from the experience of experts in this 
field and would like to ask you a few questions. Your feedback will be anonymous. It will be used to 
inform the proposal to be submitted to the Green Climate Fund for financial support and the design 
of private sector investment leveraged through Climate Fund Managers. The interview will take 
approximately 45 minutes. Are you happy to proceed? 
Interview Questions 
1. In [Country X], what work is being done to promote gender equality in water and sanitation 
infrastructure development? Explore: 
a. Expansion of WASH services to reduce domestic and health burden on women and 
girls; 
b. Involvement of women in the design and management of water and sanitation 
services; 
c. Employment of women in the development of water and sanitation infrastructure 
and services? 
 
2. Which organisations are involved in this work, and what are their roles?  
 
3. From your perspective, which organisations are most involved in promoting gender equality 
in water and sanitation infrastructure and services? What do they do to promote gender 
equality in water and sanitation infrastructure and service development? At what level(s) do 
they operate (national, sub-national, community)?  
 
4. The assessment we are in the process of conducting identified four opportunities for 
promoting gender equality in water and sanitation infrastructure and services, which we 
shared with you in advance of this interview. We would like to discuss two of them in more 
detail with you.  
 
Page 185

=== PAGE 189 ===
Page 78 of 143 
 
a. The first opportunity we’d like to discuss with you is giving women voice in the 
planning, design and management of WASH facilities. How do you think the project 
companies leading the infrastructure design and development can do this? Who do 
they need to work with and what do they need to do to ensure women have a voice 
in the planning, design and management of WASH facilities? 
b. The second opportunity we’d like to discuss with you is providing women with 
formal employment opportunities in the WASH sector. What do you think private 
sector investors and project management companies can do to provide women with 
formal employment opportunities in the WASH sector?  
 
5. Before we close, are there any recommendations you would like to give us to consider as we 
develop the proposal for private sector investment in WASH infrastructure?  
 
Thank the respondent for their time and helpful feedback. 
 
 
Page 186

=== PAGE 190 ===
Page 79 of 143 
 
Annex 4: Stakeholders interviewed 
 
Type of contact (Select) 
Organisation 
Uganda 
Government 
MoW & E 
Government 
MoW & E 
Government 
MoW & E 
Other 
UNICEF -Uganda 
Other 
AfDB 
Civil Society 
UWASNET 
Civil Society 
KWDT 
Civil Society 
Katosi Women  
Kenya 
Government 
 PMU Coordinator 
Civil Society 
KEWASNET 
Civil Society 
Centre for Social Planning and Administratice Development 
(CESPAD) 
Other 
Kenya Water for Health Organization (KWAHO) 
Civil Society 
SIMAVI 
Civil Society 
SNV 
Government 
Ministry of Health 
Bangladesh 
Civil Society 
WASH Alliance/SIMAVI 
Civil Society 
Independent  
Civil Society 
Care Bangladesh  
Namibia 
Other 
UNICEF - Namibia 
Other 
Independent  
Nigeria 
Civil Society 
Women Empowerment Initiative in Nigeria (WEIN) 
Civil Society 
Women Development Association for Self Sustenance 
Civil Society 
UNICEF-Nigeria 
Djibouti 
Civil Society 
Ecologie de Village Association (EVA) 
Civil Society 
Association for future and development of Obok( AADO) 
Civil Society 
  
Civil Society 
Union Nationale des Femmes Djiboutiennes (UNFD) 
Ivory Coast 
Government 
Ministry of Hydraulics 
Civil Society 
 Génération Femme du 3ième Millénaire (GFM3) 
 
 
Page 187

=== PAGE 191 ===
Page 80 of 143 
 
Annex 5: Full Country Analyses 
9.1 
Bangladesh 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Bangladesh at a glance 
 
Access to Drinking Water: 98.9% of the population has access to an improved source for drinking 
water, of which 58.5% has access to safely managed drinking water and 39.2% has access to basic 
drinking water.143 Women are the main collectors of water144 with the majority of women (76.6%) 
spending about 30 minutes to collect water.145 
 
Access to Sanitation: 78% of the population has access to an improved facility, of which 38.7% has 
access to safely managed sanitation services, 15.5% has access to basic sanitation services and 
23.8% has access to limited sanitation services. None of the population is reported to practice open 
defecation. The remaining proportion of the population uses unimproved sanitation services.146  
 
Hygiene: 58.4% of the population has access to handwashing facilities with soap and water.147 
 
WASH in schools: Nationally, 82.2% of schools have access to basic service for drinking water, 56.3% 
of schools have access to basic service for sanitation and 50.7% of schools have access to basic 
service for hygiene.148  
 
WASH in health facilities: 64.4% of health care facilities have basic service for drinking water, 31.3% 
have basic service for sanitation and 37.6% have basic service for hygiene.149 
 
Policy context 
Improving water, sanitation and hygiene is a key part of Bangladesh’s national policy framework, as 
identified in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2010). Recognising the increasing 
impacts of climate change, rapid urbanisation and water contamination, including salinity intrusion in 
fresh water and severe reduction on available groundwater, the National Sustainable Development 
Strategy addresses water, sanitation and hygiene under strategic priorities 7 on environment, natural 
resources and disaster management, and strategic priority 5 on the urban environment. To address 
the challenges faced, the policy aims to: 
• 
Diversify water supply, with a shift to surface water and encourage rainwater harvesting; 
• 
Encourage water recycling.  
• 
Expand the use of technology to improve the efficient use of scare resources, including water. 
• 
Enhance investment in safe drinking water.  
 
143 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
144 MICS (2019) 
145 MICS (2019) 
146 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
147 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
148 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2019) 
149 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2019) 
Page 188

=== PAGE 192 ===
Page 81 of 143 
 
Two other policies, the National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation (NSWSS) of 2014 and the 
National Hygiene Promotion Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (NHPSWSS) of 2012, 
flesh out further policy intentions in the sector. The NSWSS identifies challenges around climate 
change adaption, rapid urbanisation, need for improved water resource and sanitation (both solid 
waste and faecal sludge) management and continued advancement up the sanitation ladder. It lays 
out 17 strategic objectives to combat these challenges, including ensuring safe drinking water, 
undertaking specific approaches for vulnerable people, gender mainstreaming, improving hygiene 
promotion, adapting to climate change and undertaking integrated and accountable development 
approaches.  
 
The NHPSWSS seeks to promote the sustainable use of improved water supply and sanitation 
infrastructures, ensuring the creation of an environment for hygiene promotion and practice to reduce 
water and sanitation related diseases. It recognises challenges associated with increases in vulnerable 
water sources from weather extremities, including droughts and saline intrusion; continued open 
defecation in wetlands leading to a rise in water-borne illnesses; and continued, inequitable access to 
safe water and sanitation facilities, especially for women and people with disabilities. The policy 
aspires to overcome these challenges through 10 strategic objectives, including: exploring and 
replicating successful hygiene promotion models, gender mainstreaming, ensuring the potential use 
of the social organisations, ensuring hygiene promotion for hard-to-reach areas.  
 
Strategy 10 seeks to include gender mainstreaming in all the service planning, implementation and 
monitoring by shifting organisational culture and ways of thinking and by developing procedures 
relating to gender responsibility, accountability, coordination and personnel policy and the 
consideration of women’s role in hygiene promotion, both as a token role (such as gender advisor or 
officer) and also as an empowered advocate.   
 
Improving hygiene awareness in schools is addressed in the National Education policy. This includes 
hand washing and installing modernized toilets for both girls and boys to decrease the spread of 
water-borne and vector-borne diseases.  
 
Bangladesh’s location makes it highly susceptible to the adverse effects of climate change, hindering 
its development, including access to safe and economic opportunities for women and other vulnerable 
groups. The Bangladesh Climate Change and Action Plan (BCCSAP) of 2008 looks further into the 
negative impacts caused by increased weather extremities, with climate-related impacts leading to a 
decrease in water availability and an increase in water contamination from rapid urbanisation, saline 
intrusion, poor sewerage management and riverbank erosion. It also looks at the impact this has on 
women and children, especially since women are responsible for water management in their families, 
bear the burden of collecting water from further distances due to degradation of water and are 
vulnerable to health risks associated with drinking saline water. It seeks to tackle these challenges 
through action under 6 pillars:  
 
1. Food security, social protection and health;  
2. Comprehensive disaster management;  
3. Infrastructure;  
4. Research and knowledge management;  
5. Mitigation and low-carbon development;  
6. Capacity building and institutional strengthening.  
Page 189

=== PAGE 193 ===
Page 82 of 143 
 
Pillar 1 places an importance on women and girls by increasing community involvement in planning 
and increasing resilience of vulnerable groups, including women and children, through development 
of community-level adaptation, livelihood diversification and better access to basic services and social 
protection. Programme T1P9 also seeks to complete a comprehensive study on the impact of climate 
change on women and gender relations and to develop recommendations to address these in all 
actions under the BCCSAP.  
 
None of the policies reviewed explicitly considered advancing women’s formal roles in the WASH 
sector, but many discussed the need for community involvement in the planning, implementation, 
operation and management of water and sanitation facilities. Alongside this, some policies also 
consider the advancement of women’s involvement in entrepreneurial activities, with a focus on the 
non-farming sector in rural areas; training and use of technologies suitable for women of various 
socioeconomic status; creating initiatives for entrepreneurs for proper waste treatment before 
industrial waste disposal; and gender mainstreaming in all aspects of water, sanitation and hygiene 
supply chain, including WASH related committees and employment. Within the National Women 
Development Policy, there is a broader emphasis, within all sectors, on career development 
opportunities for women employees and equal participation of women in decision-making and 
governance at all levels. Additionally, due to only 21.1% of women completing upper secondary 
schooling150 and 19.8% enrolment in tertiary education,151 women are limited in the careers prospects 
within the WASH sector, and a focus on policies is placed on opportunities in low-skilled jobs.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Bangladesh, the Policy Support branch of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development 
and Cooperatives has primary responsibility for Water and Sanitation Supply and Strategy. Other 
national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
for hygiene, and Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), covering irrigation, flooding, and climate-
related water protection. There are a range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at 
the sub-national levels, including government agencies at the city, district, upazila, union, and ward 
level, as well as the private sector, national and international CSOs, and community-based 
committees. A wide range of development partners are involved in supporting government, private 
sector and CSO engagement in WASH. Figure A provides a visual mapping of the actors involved.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150 UNIS (2019) 
151 UNIS (2020) 
Page 190

=== PAGE 194 ===
Page 83 of 143 
 
Figure A: WASH stakeholders in Bangladesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 191

=== PAGE 195 ===
Page 84 of 143 
 
 
9.2 Botswana 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Botswana at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 92.2% of the population has access to a basic level of drinking water and 
4.7% of the population has access to a limited level of drinking water.  1.7% of the population 
relies on unimproved drinking water whilst 1.3% of the population has access only to surface 
drinking water. There is no data available for the proportion of the population with access to 
safely managed drinking water.152 
 
Access to sanitation: 80% of the population has access to basic sanitation services and 5.6% of the 
population has access to a limited level of sanitation services. 4.6% of the population relies on 
unimproved sanitation services whilst 9.8% of the population practices open defecation in 
sanitation services. There is no data available on the proportion of the population with access to 
safely managed sanitation services.153 
 
Data on hygiene, WASH in schools and WASH in health facilities is not available. 
 
 
Policy context 
Botswana’s 11th National Development Plan covers the period April 2017 – March 2023. It was 
adopted in December 2016 and followed the country’s celebration of the fifty years anniversary of 
Independence and the launching of Botswana’s Vision 2036. The Vision 2036 provided an opportunity 
for the country to define its roadmap for the next twenty years. With an all-encompassing theme of 
“Achieving Prosperity for All”, the Vision provides an inclusive development path to be achieved 
through the expansion of the domestic economy while empowering Botswanans to meaningfully 
participate in the development of their country. Achieving the goals and objectives of Vision 2036 will 
require a refocus of Botswana’s current development model towards an export-oriented, labour-
intensive, and private sector driven model. 
 
Chapter two of the 11th National Development Plan looks at Botswana’s population situation and 
development prospects, with sub-sections on the key development challenges facing Botswana’s 
population. This includes a subsection on population and water resources and a subsection on 
migration, population distribution and urbanisation. In these subsections, some of Botswana’s key 
WASH sector challenges are outlined. These challenges include water shortages and droughts in the 
water sector, and the inadequate capacity of sanitation infrastructure, and pressure on sanitation 
services because of increasing levels of urbanisation.  
 
The plan outlines the negative health consequences of poor sanitation and waste management issues 
such as pollution, littering and illegal dumping. It also outlines the negative health consequences of 
water shortages and droughts, which cause food insecurity leading to malnutrition. The plan states 
 
152 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (2020) 
 
153 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (2020) 
 
Page 192

=== PAGE 196 ===
Page 85 of 143 
 
that the Government will continue with measures to address environmental health risks associated 
with poor sanitation, hygiene and waste management, and pollution throughout the value chain from 
the source of environmental contaminants to the affected populations. To combat water scarcity and 
its impact on the agricultural sector leading to food insecurity and malnutrition, the plan states that 
considerations will be made to adopt ‘smart agriculture’. This approach will help Botswana to 
transform its agricultural systems towards more productive, efficient, resilient and sustainable 
systems.  
 
The plan largely ignores specific gender considerations in the water and sanitation sectors. The plan 
does however state that the Government recognises the need for equal participation and 
representation of women and men in all development processes, and that NDP 11 provides an 
opportunity for all sectors to articulate gender issues that they will address in the execution of their 
respective mandates.  
 
Although the policy largely ignores gender issues related to employment in the water and sanitation 
sectors, NDP11 does discuss the low participation of females in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM) subjects as a key challenge facing the education sector, despite women having 
an upper secondary completion rate of 66.3% (compared to 62.6% for men) (UNIS), and a tertiary 
enrolment rate of 31.95% (compared to 26.09% for men) (UNIS). The policy fails to articulate how this 
challenge impacts women’s employment in the water and sanitation sectors.  
 
While the National Development Plan discusses the water and sanitation sectors, it does so in general 
terms within the broader context of Botswana’s development as a whole. Botswana’s National Water 
Policy however discusses the sectors in specific detail and provides a national framework that will 
facilitate access to water of suitable quality and standards for the citizenry and provide the 
foundations for sustainable development of water resources in support of economic growth, 
diversification and poverty eradication. The policy therefore aims to provide a strategic framework for 
the following goals:  
• 
Protection, conservation and restoration of the nation’s water resources  
• 
Promotion of effective, sustainable management of water resources  
• 
Promotion of the equitable and efficient use of water resources  
• 
Reduction of the subsidies associated with water supply  
• 
Assurance of access and affordability of water for all  
• 
Protection and restoration of the environment  
• 
Promotion of productive uses of water 
Like the National Development Plan, the National Water Policy (2012) identifies water shortages and 
droughts and water supply for agriculture and industry as key challenges facing the sector. The policy 
also raises water use efficiency and the protection of water resources as important issues. The policy 
offers policy statements and objectives in a variety of thematic areas across the sector including Water 
for Growth, Water Demand Management and Conservation, Domestic Water Supply and Sanitation, 
Water for Environment and Tourism, Water for Agriculture, Water for Mining and Industry, Water for 
Energy, Information Management and Dissemination, Research and Development, International 
Cooperation and Monitoring & Evaluation.  
 
However, also like the National Development Plan, women’s roles in the water and sanitation sectors 
are largely ignored. The policy does state that gender and social equity in accessing water resources 
will be ensured and, in particular, women shall be empowered to participate fully in issues and 
Page 193

=== PAGE 197 ===
Page 86 of 143 
 
decisions relating to sustainable development and management of water resources but does not go 
into specifics on how this will be achieved.  
 
As the National Water Policy offers a strategic policy framework for Botswana’s water and sanitation 
sectors, the National Health Policy (2011) offers the same for the health sector. The National Health 
Policy offers valuable insight into the consequences of the challenges facing the water and sanitation 
sectors on public health. The National Health Policy discusses the impact of water shortages and their 
potential for causing malnutrition, and also identifies the negative public health consequences of a 
lack of access to adequate sanitation facilities and access to safe drinking water.  
 
The National Health Policy also discusses the interplay between climate change, the water sector and 
public health. The policy discusses water scarcity and fluctuating rainfall patterns caused by climate 
change, asserting that the prevalence of malaria is expected to increase as temperatures rise and 
conditions are more conducive for mosquitoes to breed during rainy seasons. Cholera is also likely to 
increase during the same period. With a reduction in rainfall, food production is likely to decrease and 
may lead to malnutrition in the longer term. The policy does not however discuss the gender dynamics 
of these issues.  
 
Botswana’s draft Climate Change Response Policy (2016) and the National Climate Change Strategy 
for Botswana (2018) continue to look at the effects of climate change on the water and sanitation 
sectors. The draft Climate Change Response Policy is a statement of intent and vision of what 
Botswana aims to achieve on climate change, and is complemented by the National Climate Change 
Strategy, which aims to help operationalise the tenets of the draft policy and provide necessary 
guidance on how the policy objectives will be achieved.  
 
The draft Climate Change Response Policy discusses several issues related to the water and sanitation 
sectors, including water availability, exacerbated water stress leading to food insecurity and water and 
sanitation management strategies. Like the National Health Policy, the draft Climate Change Response 
Policy also discusses how climate change is likely to negatively affect human health directly through 
increased temperatures, drought and floods, and also through the spread of water borne, water-
related and vector borne diseases.  
 
The policy recognises the need to mainstream gender considerations into development planning to 
ensure that climate change response measures are gender sensitive. It states that this shall be 
achieved through empowering women and youth to actively participate in the implementation of 
climate response measures, adopting strategies that are targeted at increasing women and youth’s 
resilience to climate change, and including gender and climate change into academic curriculum at all 
levels.  
 
The National Climate Change Strategy for Botswana helps to operationalise the draft Climate Change 
Response Policy’s discussion of the water and sanitation sectors through the below policy goals to be 
realised for the sectors:  
• 
Utilisation of shared water courses for the benefit of Botswana 
• 
Integrating climate change response measures in the water planning processes across all 
economic sectors 
• 
Consideration of defining potential water aquifers and adopting appropriate measures of 
protection for water security and sustainability 
Page 194

=== PAGE 198 ===
Page 87 of 143 
 
• 
Promotion of rainwater harvesting, water re-use, and recycling for domestic, agricultural, 
industrial, and commercial purposes 
• 
Promotion of integrated watering systems for livestock, particularly in rural areas 
• 
Employing accounting and valuation tools to support water management decision systems 
These specific policy goals for the water and sanitation sectors feed into the broader policy objectives 
of the strategy, which are:  
• 
To ensure climate change adaptation and mitigation action supports the achievement of 
Botswana’s Vision 2030 of prosperity for all. 
• 
To ensure climate change adaptation and mitigation action supports the achievement of 
current and future Botswana’s National Development Plans (NDPs). 
• 
To ensure climate change adaptation and mitigation action supports the achievement of the 
global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in Botswana. 
• 
To ensure climate change adaptation and mitigation action supports the achievement of 
Botswana’s NDC, including the GHG emissions reduction target of 15% by 2030 
• 
To ensure Botswana has a clear strategic agenda on climate change adaptation and mitigation 
actions, allowing for a spectrum of actors to be involved in implementation. 
The National Climate Change Strategy devotes special attention to gender equality and ensuring that 
it serves the needs of women. There is a much more thorough review of gender as a cross-cutting 
issue than in the draft Climate Change Response Policy, and actionable Gender Based Strategies with 
strategic interventions including:  
• 
Develop a national Climate Change Gender Action Plan (CC GAP), with an emphasis on women 
as drivers of climate resilience, and women’s role in water and energy and healthcare 
provision in households. 
• 
Promote equitable participation of women farmers and female-headed households in Climate 
Smart Agriculture (CSA) programmes, agritourism, and access to conservation agriculture 
technologies. 
• 
Ensure equitable gender access to the proposed endowment fund providing low-cost finance 
to climate change adaptation projects, aligned to existing similar projects. 
• 
Ensure that women’s voices are included in natural resources management through their 
equitable participation in CBNRM processes. 
• 
Ensure that gendered differences of climate change are mainstreamed into climate change 
education. 
• 
Ensure the full participation of women and female-headed households in disaster 
management public gatherings, to address both the higher vulnerability of women and 
children, and to plan for the higher post-disaster burden placed on women due to their dual 
roles as producers and carers. 
9.3 Brazil 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Ivory Coast at a glance 
Access to drinking water: 99.3% of the population has access to an improved water source for 
drinking water, of which 85.8% has access to safely managed drinking water, 13.5% has access to 
Page 195

=== PAGE 199 ===
Page 88 of 143 
 
a basic level of drinking water, and 0.1% has access to a limited level of drinking water. The 
remainder of the population uses unimproved sources for drinking water1.  
Access to sanitation: 90.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
48.7% has access to safely managed sanitation service, 41.4% has access to a basic level of 
sanitation service, whilst 0.1% has access to a limited level of sanitation service. 9.8% of the 
population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 0.3% who practice open defecation2.   
Data on hygiene is not available.   
WASH in health facilities: Nationally, 80.2% had a basic service in drinking water, data on access to 
hygiene and sanitation is insufficient3.   
WASH in schools: Nationally, 61% has a basic service in hygiene, data on access to drinking water 
and sanitation is insufficient4.  
 
Policy context 
The National Policy for Water Resources (2022) and the National Policy for Basic Sanitation (2019) 
both discuss in-depth the importance of WASH in daily life and lay out clear objectives to ensure the 
impact on human livelihoods and activities, such as business, is limited. The National Policy for Water 
Resources reviews the lack of subterrain water resource development, and waters use in agriculture, 
tourism, industry, and domestic use. It examines the negative impacts that water scarcity creates in 
vulnerable communities, including increase in conflict, siltation of water, water pollution, and changes 
in natural characteristics from high degradation. It adds the impact of climate change leaders to 
further alterations to available water resources and impacts both the energy and agricultural sector. 
It seeks to increase environmental education and capacity building in technology and science for water 
resource management, establish a formal and sustainable water management system, utilize 
knowledge and experience of indigenous people and communities, promote post-graduate courses in 
water resources and environmentalism, support the increase in knowledge of ICT in climate change, 
and encourage the involvement of the population in identifying problems and finding solutions. It also 
seeks to incorporate gender equality in all actions and develop ongoing training that promotes female 
leadership and empowerment in the management of water resources but does not provide any detail 
on practical implications of this intention.   
The National Policy of Basic Sanitation identifies issues with parts of the population continuing to lack 
access to basic sanitation facilities and/or proper disposal of solid waste as well as a burden on the 
current resources that are available, to not keep up the demand in solid waste disposal. Due to this 
there continues to be increases in health risks and the proliferation of parasites and infectious diseases 
caused by poor or inadequate sanitation. The policy lays out clear objectives and programmes to 
overcome these issues, such as increasing infrastructure, management, and monitoring of sanitation 
facilities, improve infrastructure to capture and store water resources, and create access to water in 
non-conventional ways such as the use of cisterns. It also sees a value in the utilization of the circular 
economy for solid waste disposal. It does not explicitly mention gender in the policy objectives.    
The National Environmental Policy (1981, with several amendments, with the most recent being 
issued in 2013) and the National Policy for Climate Change (2010) elaborates on the importance of 
mitigating and adapting policies, programmes, and actions to prevent the impact on climate change 
for humans and economic activity but remains gender blind in both the challenges and objectives of 
the policy. The National Environmental Policy and its associated updates consider the degradation of 
sanitary conditions and the adverse effects that climate change has on the biota. It seeks to overcome 
Page 196

=== PAGE 200 ===
Page 89 of 143 
 
these challenges through rationing the use of water, expanding the use of environmental licensing for 
activities that utilise environmental resources, increase education on climate change and the 
environment, and incentivise studies and research related to technologies to use for the rationing and 
protection of the environment. The National Policy on Climate Change discusses the impacts extreme 
weather has on the health and livelihoods of people, which includes the effect it has on water reserves 
in the country. It reviews the idea of reusing water in urban planning and calls for action to protect 
water resources in the National Policy for Water Resources and National Policy for Basic Sanitation. It 
places civil responsibility on reducing the impact to climate change, as a key manner to achieve climate 
change actions, such as the reduction of green house gases (GHG).    
The National Plan of Politics for Women (2013) explores the importance of including a gender lens in 
the sustainable use and handling of water, promotion of public policies to defend water as a public 
good, ensure access to water by building cisterns, ensuring agricultural security, and utilization of 
environmental technologies. It emphasises the importance of valuing women’s contribution to farm 
work and equal participation in leadership and decision making. Finally, the Plan seeks to amplify 
access for women in the labour market, including within the agricultural sector and formal education 
in science and technology.   
Though neither the National Education Plan (2014) nor the National Policy for Health (2017) discuss 
WASH specific issues or objectives, they both outline important factors related to gender equality and 
access to basic services. In Brazil 67.32% of the population has completed Upper Secondary school, of 
which 72.73% are female and 62.18% are male.5 While only 55.14% of the population is enrolled in 
tertiary education, a larger proportion are female, 64.35% compared to 46.26% males.6 The National 
Education Plan seeks to reduce discrimination and inequality, of all forms while also promoting socio-
environmentalism in the education system. The National Policy for Health seeks to create equal access 
to heathcare and teach on the intersection of health, sustainable development, and the 
environment.   
Several of the policies reviewed touch on employment opportunities e.g., the National Sanitation 
Policy promotion of employment within the sector, and the National Water Resource Policy promoting 
education in the ICT sector, but none of them explicitly consider employment opportunities for 
women in WASH related sectors. Brazil has a high percentage of entrepreneurship activity, with about 
21% of the population in early stages of entrepreneurial activity, and 10% in established businesses7, 
and 8 to 10 ratio of female to male entrepreneurs8 in the country. The National Plan of Politics for 
Women (2013) wishes to promote economic and financial autonomy of women seeking 
entrepreneurial activities.  
As a federal state, Brazil’s lower tiers of government play an important role in the provision of 
sustainable WASH services, and most federal policies are created with broad objectives leaving each 
regional government responsible to expand on the objectives based on their needs.  The first National 
Policy for Regional Development (2007) placed greater importance on climate resilience measures and 
gender equality, the current National Policy for Regional Development II (2019) emphasises achieving 
equality, within regions and between regions, strengthening science, technology, and innovation 
sectors, and climate action. The policy outlines 8 main principles to focus on in regional development, 
including sustainable development and the valorization of the environment. It also seeks to ensure 
equal access to economic opportunities within all the regions, both from a socio-economic and gender 
perspective. However, there is no specific discussion of WASH-related challenges and objectives in the 
policy, nor are there are gender specific strategies within outlined climate action measures.   
9.4 Djibouti 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Djibouti at a glance 
Page 197

=== PAGE 201 ===
Page 90 of 143 
 
 
Access to drinking water: 90.8% of the population has access to an improved source of drinking 
water, although for the majority (76%), this is basic access.154 None of the population has access to 
drinking water classified as safely managed. The remaining 9.2% of the population has access to 
either unimproved drinking water or surface water only.155 Women are the main collectors of 
water.156 88.6% of the population has improved water available on the premises, while for 3%, it 
takes 30 minutes or less to get to an improved drinking source.157 
 
Access to sanitation: 73.8% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
37.1% has access to safely managed sanitation services, 29.6% has access to basic sanitation 
services and 7.1% has access to limited sanitation services. 10% of the population uses unimproved 
sanitation services whilst 16.2% practices open defecation.158 
 
Data on hygiene, WASH in schools and WASH in health facilities is not available.  
 
Policy context 
After several decades of implementing various developmental policies that focused on the short and 
medium term, the Djibouti 2035 Vision (2010–2035) presents a long-term developmental vision for 
sustained growth. The vision has a strong focus on economic growth and private sector development, 
and water, sanitation and hygiene, as well as other social development factors, remain a secondary 
goal to support the achievement of this vision. Water, sanitation and hygiene remain a strong area of 
focus within the 2035 vision, specifically given the climate challenges Djibouti is starting to face. The 
vision sets out an overall strategy within which various ministries are tasked with setting up a more 
detailed action. The vision focuses on the following policy objectives for water, sanitation and hygiene: 
• 
Providing good sanitation for the urban environments to have clean cities. 
• 
Identifying more water sources and improving access to existing water sources.             
• 
Modernization of infrastructure (sanitation, water access and port development) and 
increased quality of education.   
• 
Simplifying the irrigation systems to ration water use.            
The vision focuses primarily on water supply throughout the country and its implications for other 
areas of the primary sector, with a lesser focus on sanitation and hygiene. This is complemented by 
the climate section of the vision, which includes sustainable water management as an area of priority, 
amongst other strategy objectives unrelated to WASH. Furthermore, Vision 2035 identifies the link 
between climate change and WASH, specifically in terms of how they will experience increased 
instances of droughts and flooding which will impact food production and supplies throughout the 
country.  
The 2010 Development Plan for the Primary Sector and the 2015 Strategy of Accelerated Growth and 
Promotion of Employment echo the focus on access to water for agriculture and livestock, as well as 
 
154 A basic level of access to drinking water means that the water is from an improved source and that the time for collection is not more 
than 30 mins for a roundtrip including queuing, Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene . 
155 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
156 MICS (2006) 
157 MICS (2006) 
158 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 198

=== PAGE 202 ===
Page 91 of 143 
 
the hygiene risks that a lack of sanitation infrastructure poses in cities. The main consequences 
identified in these policies are the spread of disease and further contamination of water sources and 
structural water distress for the population of Djibouti. Although the latter two policies touch on 
gender and the need to address gender inequity throughout the primary sector and for growth, they 
do not directly link WASH issues to gender. The problems identified, such as health consequences and 
hard to reach water points, are known to generally affect women more, but this is not specified in the 
policies. They do acknowledge that various stakeholders, including women and youth, should have a 
larger role in the policy-making process.  
Beyond water and food shortages, Vision 2035 also identifies sanitation and hygiene issues related to 
water insecurity. Liquid and solid waste management is identified as one of the main WASH 
challenges, identifying that few households in Djibouti are connected through a collective waste 
management system. This contributes to the deteriorating health of the population. Although not 
directly linked, the strategy also identifies the disproportionate effects of poverty on women, including 
the provision of health care as evidenced by the growing impacts of the AIDS epidemic on women and 
children. Health consequences of open sewage and poor water management prove more of an 
obstacle for women, while water provision to health infrastructure (e.g., hospitals) also presents a 
challenge as women are the main users of primary health centres. The vision proposes to provide good 
sanitation facilities and modernise water and sanitation infrastructure, with no real specifics on how 
they will achieve this. They also emphasise the importance of identifying more water sources and 
increasing access to these, also by simplifying irrigation systems to ration water use. Lastly, they 
mention that, alongside infrastructure development, comes increased quality of education.  
Education is a strong focus of Djibouti’s 2011–2021 Gender Policy, the policy that most identifies how 
water and sanitation challenges are an extra burden on women. The policy covers accessibility to 
water and sanitation facilities in their communities, remoteness of water points and sanitation deficits 
in their immediate environments. It identifies the woman’s role as mainly within the domestic sphere, 
meaning they carry the burden of walking to water points or suffer the consequences most severely 
when there are shortages within the household. Moreover, women disproportionately suffer the 
effects of desertification, caused by changes in the climate, in accessing water. The gender policy 
primarily advocates for education on hygiene practices, such as washing hands with soap, ways to 
preserve quality of drinking water at home and proper use of latrines in schools and in communities. 
The Gender Policy also most clearly outlines the informal role that women play in the household, and 
consequently, the informal role they might be able to play in reinforcing new sanitation practices in 
their household. This informal role can be supported through capacity building programmes for 
women and by relieving the time-poverty than women experience due to the burden of other 
housework. 
The section on gender in Vision 2035 also acknowledges women’s role in enforcing new behaviours 
and practices; however, it emphasises how ’in order to improve women's situations, men should be 
included in the project. It is important to work with men to push them into changing their approaches 
towards women and their approach with themselves’ (Djibouti 2035 Vision, 2010, p. 98). Both policies 
further outline informal and formal roles to promote change, which can be seen as opportunities 
moving forward. Local authorities are mentioned as needing to play a decisive role in the planning, 
programming and budgeting of development actions to ensure gender mainstreaming. Tribal chiefs 
and traditional systems play an important role in community influence. Both policies discuss the 
inclusion of women in budgeting processes as an important starting point to establish their role in 
Page 199

=== PAGE 203 ===
Page 92 of 143 
 
managing resources, both within households as well as at higher community or government levels. 
Lastly, the political, economic and social introduction of youth and teenagers to equality and equity 
concerns is highlighted in order to allow them to contribute to the country’s development. 
Currently, the completion rate for upper secondary is higher for women than for men; this presents a 
great opportunity to incorporate women into the workforce due to the higher levels of education they 
can take into the workforce. The 2018—2022 National Strategy for Social Protection identifies a role 
for women in the country’s goal to increase primary sector employment, specifically in fishing and 
agriculture. The social protection strategy does not further specify jobs for women, but states that it 
aims to extend protection to more workers by (i) helping to strengthen the role of the private sector 
in creating jobs and (ii) seeking to integrate the maximum of informal sector assets into the formal 
sector, a women-dominated sector. Moreover, they suggest that the issue of water and food scarcity 
can be best managed in the short-term by immediate cash transfers to households. Overall, as with 
all other policies, they identify that the awareness of all the institutional, private and associative 
actors, the seriousness of the situation and how their contribution is most important. Djibouti’s 
2020—2024 Sanitation policy further echoes this and emphasizes that rural households should be 
taken care of specifically as their access issues are especially severe. The Sanitation policy does not 
further identify any issues or opportunities specific to women or men, making the policy gender blind.   
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Djibouti, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries, Livestock and Fisheries Resources and the 
National Office of Water and Sanitation have primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, the leading ministry in 
implementing sanitation and hygiene programmes at national level, and the Ministry of Housing, 
Urbanism, Environment and Territorial Development, who monitor WASH service delivery. There are 
a range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, including 
regional water directorates, the private sector, national and international CSOs. A wide range of 
development partners are involved in supporting government, and international and national CSO 
engagement in WASH. Figure B provides a visual mapping of the actors involved.   
Page 200

=== PAGE 204 ===
Page 93 of 143 
 
Figure B: WASH stakeholders in Djibouti 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 201

=== PAGE 205 ===
Page 94 of 143 
 
9.5 Indonesia 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Ivory Coast at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 93.3% of the population has access to an improved water source for 
drinking water, of which 92.4% has access to a basic level of drinking water, and 0.9% has access to 
a limited level of drinking water. The remainder of the population uses unimproved sources for 
drinking water159. 
 
Access to sanitation: 92.6% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
86.5% has access to a basic level of sanitation service, whilst 6.1% has access to a limited level of 
sanitation service. 7.5% of the population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 6.1% who 
practice open defecation160.  
 
Access to hygiene: 94.1% of the population has access to basic hygiene while 5.9% has limited 
access161.  
WASH in health facilities: Nationally, 80.2% has a basic service in drinking water, data on access to 
hygiene and sanitation is insufficient162.  
 
WASH in schools: Nationally, 72.7%% has a basic service in drinking water, 40.4% has a basic service 
in sanitation, and 58.9% has basic access to hygiene.163 
 
 
As a country with over 200 million spread out over 6,000 islands, and a major reliance on raw water 
supply to provide for their water resource, Indonesia has placed natural resource promotion and 
recovery as a priority in its Long-Term National Development Plan (2005). With the growing effects of 
climate change impacting the water cycle, rapid urbanization, and contamination of water supply it 
sees water supply and increasing sanitation facilities as a key component to ensuring self-reliance and 
development for all people. Whilst it recognises the need for gender mainstreaming in policies to 
reach the country’s long-term goals, the specific gender dimensions of WASH are not explored.   
 
National Medium-Term Development Plans serve to identify policy priorities in a given period, within 
the overarching framework of the Long-Term National Development Plan.  The most recent National 
Medium-Term Development Plan (2020) elaborates further the importance of maintaining natural 
resources, improving sanitation, and mitigating the impacts of climate change to economic growth. 
The plan lays out 5 directives: human resource development, infrastructure development, regulatory 
simplification, bureaucratic simplification, and economic transformation. The Plan foresees the use of 
the 3R approach - Reduce, Reuse, Recycle - and the circular economy to increase effective waste 
disposal. It aims for 90% of the population to have access to safe and proper sanitation, including 
wastewater management. As for water resources, it seeks to improve infrastructure, including dam 
capacity and forest restoration, to meet the goal of 100% of the population having access to safe 
drinking water. The policy also sees community involvement as a main way to ensure implementation 
 
159 JMP 2020 
 
160 JMP 2020 
161 JMP 2020 
162 JMP 2019 
163 JMP 2019 
Page 202

=== PAGE 206 ===
Page 95 of 143 
 
and management of safe and adequate water and sanitation facilities and practices. This includes 
increasing women’s role in development and decision-making, especially within health, education, 
labour market, economy, and public sectors.  
 
While the Long-Term National Development Plan establishes the importance of improving water and 
sanitation access and infrastructure, the Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and Climate Resilience 
2050 (2021) explores further the impacts that climate change has on the country’s development, 
especially when it comes to WASH-related sectors. It notes that more extreme weather patterns are 
causing increased flooding and longer dry seasons, resulting in reduced availability of raw water 
supply, something which is exacerbated by rapid urbanisation and mass deforestation to increase 
economic activity. The Strategy identifies the limited access to channelled wastewater sewage for 
treatment of grey water as a high risk. It sees climate-related challenges as something that 
disproportionally impacts women due to limited access to water supplies for domestic and economic 
use, limited access to safe sanitation facilities, and an imbalance in capacity for understanding the 
importance of safe water and sanitation practices.  It outlines objectives for both mitigation and 
adaptation to overcome these growing challenges while ensuring an equal balance to continue 
economic growth, including improving infrastructure and increasing community knowledge and 
capacity on water and sanitation management. 
 
Along-side the Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and Climate Resilience, the National Strategy for 
Community-Based Total Sanitation (2008) touches on on-going sanitation challenges in Indonesia, 
with socio-cultural issues, continued health concerns due to poor handwashing and water 
contamination, and lack of progress by local governments being the main reasons given for the 
persistence of poor sanitation practices. The Strategy suggests Government will partner with NGOs 
and the private sector, subsidise communal sanitation facilities, and encourage community 
engagement to ensure every household has safe drinking water treatment and access to handwashing 
stations in public facilities. The Strategy does not consider gender-related issues in community-based 
sanitation and there is no consideration to the specific sanitation needs of women.  
 
All the policies discuss increasing the capacity of communities and workers to lead to increased 
community engagement and awareness of these issues, but there is limited or no discussion about 
providing women specifically with career opportunities in the WASH sector. The Long-Term Strategy 
foresees supporting sanitation entrepreneurship in areas with potential, facilitating entrepreneurship 
to create products that comply with standards and the Long-Term Strategy for Low Carbon and 
Climate Resilience seeks to improve job activities with the consideration of gender equality. Based on 
available education data, women seem relatively well placed to take on roles in the WASH sector. Of 
the 62.7% of women complete upper secondary education, compared to 58.4% of men.164 Whilst 
enrolment at tertiary levels of education remains relatively low at 36.3%, 38.9% of women enrol in 
tertiary education, compared to 33.7% of men.165  
 
The Presidential Instructions on Gender Mainstreaming (2000) emphasise the need to mainstream 
gender considerations in all policies and programmes. Most policies do recognise this but do not map 
out the implications or consistently differentiate how strategies will specifically target the different 
needs of women and men.   
9.6 Ivory Coast 
 
164 UIS 2020 
165 UIS 2018 
Page 203

=== PAGE 207 ===
Page 96 of 143 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Ivory Coast at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 79.8% of the population has access to an improved water source, of which 
35.2% has access to safely managed drinking water, 35.7% has access to basic drinking water and 
8.9% has access to limited drinking water. The remaining 20.2% of the population access 
unimproved drinking water, including 6% who only access surface water.166 Women are the main 
collectors of water.167 Those with safely managed drinking water have water access on premises. 
Those with a basic level of access to drinking water spend less than 30 minutes collecting water 
whilst those with a limited level of access to drinking water spend more than 30 minutes collecting 
water.168 
 
Access to sanitation: 57.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of whom 
34.6% has access to basic sanitation services and 22.5% has access to limited sanitation services. 
25.3% of the population practices open defecation whilst the remaining 17.6% of the population 
uses unimproved sanitation services.169  
 
Hygiene: 21.6% of the population has access to handwashing facilities with soap and water.170 
 
There is insufficient data on WASH in schools and health facilities available. 
 
Policy context 
In line with its 2040 Vision, the overall aim of Ivory Coast’s 2016—2020 National Development Plan is 
to create a state in which the population as a whole is better off, translating into a significant reduction 
of poverty and a rise of the middle class to ensure economic growth. This development plan is more 
proactive than previous plans, and as such is a reflection of the country’s relative stability and the 
increased levels of productivity the country has enjoyed in recent years. The 2016—2020 National 
Development Plan has five strategic areas that focus on: 
1. Quality institutions and governance;  
2. The preparedness and capacities needed for women and men to forge an emergent and 
prosperous Côte d’Ivoire;  
3. Changes in production and consumption patterns so as to bring Ivory Coast onto the global 
stage;  
4. Development of strategic infrastructure acting as a lever for Ivory Coast to move onto the 
global stage while abiding by environmental sustainability principles;  
5. Beneficial integration into regional and global trade and other networks. 
 
Although the plan has a strong focus on structural economic reforms, this is balanced with an 
understanding that these go hand in hand with the development of human capital. Water and 
sanitation is a cross-cutting issue that is identified under several of these five pillars of the plan, most 
 
166 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
167 MICS (2016) 
168 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2016) 
169 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
170 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 204

=== PAGE 208 ===
Page 97 of 143 
 
prominently, under pillars 1, 2 and 5. This highlights the challenges that Ivory Coast faces in water and 
sanitation, ranging from governance of resources, quality of health services and the population’s 
health, and lastly, lacking infrastructure, especially in light of worsening climatic change. Beyond the 
general lack of access to water and sustainable sanitation systems, the national plan clearly 
acknowledges the heavier burden on populations in cities that are rapidly urbanizing and the lack of 
social safety nets to secure livelihoods for more vulnerable populations, including women amongst 
others. Consequences, such as the rapid spread of diseases like cholera, and food shortages due to 
water scarcity often impacts women more severely.  
The 2015—2020 National Climate Change programme further discusses the health consequences of 
water scarcity and cleanliness. They have identified a positive correlation between variations in 
rainfall, temperature and the incidence rate of malaria, respiratory infections and diarrheal diseases. 
They have also demonstrated that urban populations are more vulnerable, particularly during the 
rainy season, due to inadequate wastewater drainage infrastructure. These challenges stem from the 
differences in rainfall between wet and dry seasons increasing, a drop in surface water availability and 
further effects of climate change on temperature and rainfall leading to extreme weather events. 
There is no mention of the differentiating impact between women and men, but the significant health 
consequences they identify present a clear challenge for the female population who are already at a 
disadvantage in this area. The programme promoted the introduction of climate change adaptation in 
all new legislation and policy instruments, identifying the importance of including diverse actors in 
their creation, including women’s associations and NGOs who have localised knowledge of challenges 
and opportunities. 
The National Development Plan broadly outlines that Ivory Coast should aim to increase accessibility 
to drinking water, build new water pumps and transfer the responsibility and ownership of adopting 
laws and regulations to local communities. Local communities should also include women’s 
associations and further diversified representation. The wider goal in sanitation and drainage is to 
create a larger and more interconnected network through infrastructural development as well as 
improving the hygiene and sanitation conditions in the most vulnerable communities. Ivory Coast’s 
Sector Policy Note on Sanitation (2012—2025) goes into more detail on improving sanitation in the 
country. Close to 5.5 million people do not have access to a latrine and practice defecation outdoors, 
mainly in rural areas, and many schools and health centres do not have improved sanitation facilities. 
Where there are improved sanitation facilities, this note identifies that these systems are not financed 
in a sustainable way, therefore upkeep is difficult. In terms of sanitation, there is a strong focus on 
eradicating open defecation, which has many negative impacts on women in terms of insecurity as 
well as hygiene and long-term, sustainable infrastructure improvements. The infrastructure 
development programme proposed raises the following considerations: 
• 
Create demand for sanitation and create competition between communities’ territories to 
promote on-site sanitation. 
• 
Strengthen coordination with public and private actors. 
• 
Strengthen the implementation and operating capacities of public and private actors and create a 
culture of social responsibility for these actors. 
• 
Strengthen the sector's financial resources. 
These suggested strategies focus on more than just the construction of new facilities and assure 
uptake of these new facilities to ensure their effectiveness. These strategies do not specifically 
Page 205

=== PAGE 209 ===
Page 98 of 143 
 
mention the inclusion of women or men in different ways. The National Development Plan does, 
however, identify how improved governance will result from better consideration of gender and the 
environment in public policies. With regard to gender, the strengthening of the institutional and 
regulatory framework will be necessary, as will the development of the skills of actors who apply it in 
plans, programs and projects. Furthermore, the plan proposes increased vocational training for 
women to include them in the employment sector, boosted by the improvements in water and 
sanitation infrastructure. Women and girl’s education levels are low, however, with only 14% of girls 
completing upper secondary171 and 8.5% of women enrolling in tertiary education.172         
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Ivory Coast, the Ministry of Hydraulics, Sanitation and Hygiene has primary responsibility for WASH. 
Other national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of the Environment of 
Urban Sanitation and Sustainable Development, who have a key role in the adaptation to climate 
change, and the Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene, leading on hygiene policy and programmes. 
There are a range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, 
including regional and municipal government bodies and national and international CSOs. A wide 
range of development partners are involved in supporting government, private sector and CSO 
engagement in WASH. Figure C provides a visual mapping of the actors involved.   
Figure C: WASH stakeholders in Ivory Coast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
171 UNIS (2016) 
172 UNIS (2019) 
Page 206

=== PAGE 210 ===
Page 99 of 143 
 
 
 
 
9.7 Kenya 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Kenya at a glance 
 
Access to water: 71.1% of the population has access to an improved water source, of which 61.6% 
has access to basic drinking water and 9.5% has access to drinking water categorised as ‘limited.’ 
The remaining 28.8% of the population uses unimproved water sources for drinking water, of 
which 19% only have access to surface water.173  
 
Access to sanitation: 58.2% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
32.7%% has access to basic sanitation services and 25.5% has access to limited sanitation services. 
The remaining 41.8% of the population uses unimproved sanitation services, with 8.5% practicing 
open defecation.174   
 
Hygiene: 26.8% of the population has access to handwashing facilities with soap and water.175 
 
WASH in health facilities: 78% of health care facilities have basic service for drinking water. Data is 
not available on sanitation and hygiene facilities in health facilities.176 
 
Data is not available for WASH in schools. 
 
173 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
174 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
175 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
176 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2019) 
Page 207

=== PAGE 211 ===
Page 100 of 143 
 
 
 
Policy context 
The drive to advance livelihoods in Kenya is laid out through the four key areas, dubbed the Big Four 
Agenda, within the National Development plan, named the Kenya Vision 2030 (2008–2030). These 
include achieving food security, affordable housing, manufacturing and affordable healthcare. Water, 
sanitation and hygiene continues to be a key sub-focus area within the Social Pillar outlined in the 
Third Medium Term Plan (MTP III), 2018—2022, the midterm plan within the National Development 
Plan of 2030. Within the plan it sees environmental degradation, climate change, inadequate 
infrastructure and lack of water conservation strategies as hindrances to the development of a clean, 
safe environment and access to water and sanitation services. It explains that approaches to combat 
these challenges come from capacity building, public participation, adoption of innovative technical 
approaches, multi-sectoral collaboration and adequate water and sanitation facilities. Within this 
policy, there is no discussion on how inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene facilities and practices 
impact women, but it does touch on the under-valuation of women’s contribution to the economy, 
under-employment and skills mismatch, and the implementation of the two-thirds gender rule that 
ensures that no more than 66% of one gender is represented in the national assembly and senate.  
 
The Kenya Environmental Sanitation & Hygiene Policy (KESHP) 2016, launched two years before the 
MTP III, recognises the importance of water, sanitation and hygiene in achieving Kenya Vision 2030 
and lays the foundation to include a people-centred approach to sanitation. The policy highlights key 
issues such as rapid urbanisation, the mortality and morbidity burden associated with unsafe water 
and sanitation and the risk of rape and domestic violence for women and girls due to inadequate 
sanitation facilities. To address these issues, the Policy intends to scale up access to improved rural 
and urban sanitation (Strategy 1) and build governance and leadership capacity for sanitation 
(Strategy 5). The policy discusses an increase in education, training and skill development for 
sanitation, including increasing the availability of skilled personnel in the planning and management 
of sanitation facilities, though it does not suggest these efforts are focused on any one gender/sex.  
 
While the Policy discusses the importance of improved facilities, it does not discuss the negative 
impacts inflicted by climate change. However, the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MOWS) Strategic 
Plan 2018 brings to light the impacts climate change has on the quality, quantity, timing, form and 
intensity of precipitation leading to an increase in natural disasters It also highlights the decrease in 
available safe water supply. In addition, it touches on the importance of developing water 
infrastructure over focusing on water resources and management, and the impact that inadequate 
water and sanitation infrastructure and management have on the health of the population. In order 
to combat these challenges, the MOWS Strategic Plan lays out eight Key Result Areas (KRA), with 
Water and Sanitation Coverage (KRA 4 and 5), Human Resource Capacity (KRA 6), and Research and 
Technology (KRA 7) playing major roles in enhancing infrastructure, capacity building, employment 
opportunities and handling the adverse effects of climate change, though there is no clear discussion 
on a focus of women and girls.  
 
The National Policy on Gender and Development (NPGD) elaborates on the burden women and girls 
face due to clean water deficits, with the need to travel long distances to collect water for domestic 
use, which affects girls’ attendance at school and women’s opportunities for income generating 
activities. The NPGD seeks to reduce these burdens by ensuring the availability of water for multiple 
Page 208

=== PAGE 212 ===
Page 101 of 143 
 
uses to women and to develop and review the environment management laws to ensure gender and 
equity compliance.  
 
With climate change being a major discussion in most of the policies, the National Climate Change 
Policy examines how increases in weather extremities, including droughts, floods and water 
salinisation greatly impacts the water, sanitation and hygiene sector, with the biggest focus being on 
inadequate sanitation systems which lead to clogged drains and water contamination. The Ministry of 
Water and Sanitation Strategic Plan similarly addresses reversing degradation and climate change to 
ensure safe water and sanitation by strengthening capacity building in vulnerable communities.   
 
Interwoven throughout these policies is the continual discussion on the inclusion of equal 
opportunities for stakeholder participation throughout the planning, implementation and 
management of water and sanitation projects/programmes and the push for participation of female 
leaders on community-led committees through gender mainstreaming. While most policies include 
opportunities for job creation, many do not discuss career opportunities for women specifically. With 
only 9.73% enrolment of women in tertiary education,177 there continues to be a gap in highly skilled 
job opportunities within WASH. Policies focus more on low-skilled jobs, such as the KESHP, which 
includes training programmes for artisans and operators in sanitation and job creation in areas such 
as labour-intensive construction, sustainable livelihoods and long-term entrepreneurial activities. 
Finally, the NGDP seeks to encourage women’s participation in the technologies and sciences and 
STEM based courses.  
 
Whilst the KESHP and MOWS Strategic plan discuss the impact of inadequate water, sanitation and 
health in daily life, the National Education Sector Strategic Plan and the National Health Policy examine 
the importance of safe water, sanitation and hygiene within school and health facilities. Within 
schools, girls tend to be more affected by inadequate WASH facilities, and this impacts their 
attendance, especially when they are menstruating, and can expose them to increased risks of gender-
based violence. To limit the impact on children’s schooling, the National Education Sector Strategic 
Plan includes, among its objectives, the construction of facilities for safe and clean drinking water in 
schools and separate sanitation facilities for boys and girls.  
 
As the main users of primary health centres, poor WASH facilities in health centres disproportionately 
affects women and girls. The National Health Policy seeks to improve their WASH facilities to limit 
water-borne disease. The Policy also foresees mainstreaming gender issues in planning and 
implementation of programmes to minimise impacts on women and girls.  
 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Kenya, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, responsible for sanitation 
and Hygiene provision and policy, and the Ministry of Environments and Forestry, who set 
environmental standards, and the Ministry of Housing, who handle WASH infrastructure. There are a 
range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, including local 
water- and public health departments, the private sector, national and international CSOs. A wide 
range of development partners are involved in supporting government, private sector and CSO 
engagement in WASH. Figure D provides a visual mapping of the actors involved.   
 
177 UNIS (2017) 
Page 209

=== PAGE 213 ===
Page 102 of 143 
 
 
Figure D: WASH stakeholders in Kenya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 210

=== PAGE 214 ===
Page 103 of 143 
 
 
9.8 Namibia 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Namibia at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 91.4% of the population has access to an improved source of drinking 
water, of which 84.3% has access to basic drinking water and 7.1% has access to limited drinking 
water. The remainder of the population relies on unimproved water sources, with 4.9% of the 
population having access to surface water only.178 Data on the proportion of the population with 
access to a safely managed water source is not available. 
 
Access to sanitation: 48.1% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
35.3% has access to basic sanitation services and 12.8% has access to limited sanitation services. 
47.2% of the population continues to practice open defecation whilst 4.8% of the population uses 
unimproved sanitation services.179 Data on the proportion of the population with access to safely 
managed sanitation services is not available.  
 
Data on hygiene, WASH in schools and WASH in health facilities is not available.  
 
Policy context 
Namibia’s 5th National Development Plan (NDP5) focuses on the period 2017/18–2021/22 and charts 
a course toward the cumulative targets outlined in Namibia’s Vision 2030. The plan is organised 
around four key pillars for achieving sustainable development, namely Economic Progression, Social 
Transformation, Environmental Sustainability and Good Governance. NDP5 also identifies five ‘game 
changers’ that will move Namibia from a reactive, input-based economy towards a proactive, high-
performing economy.  
The plan looks at water and sanitation as two separate sectors, rather than looking at water and 
sanitation through a combined WASH lens. As such, analysis of the challenges faced in the water and 
sanitation sectors fall within two separate pillars of NDP5. Discussion of the water sector falls under 
the Economic Progression pillar of the plan, under the game changer subsection ‘increase investment 
in infrastructure development.’ The plan highlights key issues around safe water access in the water 
sector, including:  
• 
Availability of water and reliable water supply.  
• 
Increasing water demand for economic activities and urban consumption.  
• 
Water demand from the agriculture sector for irrigation.  
• 
Provision and financing of water infrastructure such as desalination plants in coastal areas.  
• 
Improving management of existing water sources.  
 
178 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
179 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 211

=== PAGE 215 ===
Page 104 of 143 
 
Discussion of issues related to sanitation and hygiene fall under the Social Transformation pilar of the 
policy, under the ‘social development’ subsection. The key issues in the sanitation sector that the 5th 
NDP highlights includes:  
• 
Access to improved sanitation systems in rural areas. 
• 
Promoting coordinated investment on sanitation infrastructure. 
• 
Strengthening advocacy to tackle sanitation challenges. 
While NDP5 summarises the key challenges of safe water supply and sanitation services access, 
particularly in rural areas, Namibia’s Water Supply and Sanitation Policy (2008) goes into much more 
detail on the challenges themselves, the context, the health consequences and Namibia’s policy 
objectives in response to these challenges.  
The Water Supply and Sanitation Policy states that essential water supply and sanitation services 
should be available to all Namibians, that the improvement of water and sanitation services should be 
achieved equitably, that communities should have the right to determine which water and sanitation 
services are acceptable to them, and that utilisation of water resources should be environmentally 
sustainable. NDP5 then translates these broad policy objectives into actionable strategies as part of 
NDP5’s results framework.  
As with the NDP5, the Water and Sanitation Policy deals with water supply and sanitation in isolation, 
concentrating on supply for domestic use, supply for economic activities and rural water supply in the 
water sector, as well as provision of rural and urban sanitation services in the sanitation sector.  
Namibia has indicated its commitment to responding to climate change challenges through its 
National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC). The NPCC, adopted in 2011, is implemented through the 
National Climate Change Strategy Action Plan (NCCSAP) that was finalised in 2015 for the period 2013–
2020.  
Like the NDP5 and the Water and Sanitation Policy, Namibia’s 2011 National Policy on Climate Change 
also analyses the issues of water supply and provision of sanitation services but focuses much more 
heavily on the impact of climate change on both sectors, as well as the potential health consequences. 
The policy highlights the climate sensitivity of the two sectors, with Namibia’s already variable and 
unpredictable rainfall patterns being worsened by climate change. The policy argues that this in turn 
will have a significant impact on water supply and sanitation.  
Namibia ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1995 and 
thus became obligated to prepare and submit national communications, completing national 
communications in 2002, 2011 and 2015. Namibia’s Fourth National Communication to the UNFCCC, 
submitted in 2020, covers the policy framework of the NPCC and summarises progress against the 
NCCSAP. The communication acknowledges the vulnerability of water supply to climate change, as 
Namibia relies on rainfall as it’s natural water source as well as dams, ephemeral rivers and aquifers 
in the absence of perennial rivers. The communication also highlights how high evaporation rates 
coupled with the country’s semi-arid climate means that Namibia is now at a water deficit.  
While NDP5, the Water and Sanitation Policy, NPCC, the National Policy on Climate Change and the 
Fourth Communication to the UNFCCC all reference gender as a cross-cutting issue in the water and 
sanitation sectors, none explore in any great detail how women, youths and marginalised groups are 
impacted nor the roles that these groups can play in these sectors. In contrast, Namibia’s National 
Page 212

=== PAGE 216 ===
Page 105 of 143 
 
Gender Policy explicitly tackles the gender issues affecting the water and sanitation sectors. The policy 
argues that women continue to be under-represented in policy and decision-making forums on the 
utilisation of natural resources, environmental development and water management. The policy also 
explores the roles that women play within the water and sanitation sectors. For example, in most rural 
communities, women and girls constitute 75% of the workforce responsible for fetching water. 
Fetching water is primarily a female task with 36% of rural households having daughters fetch water 
compared to 15% which have sons fetch water. 
In addition, the policy explores the health inequalities related to water and sanitation. As outlined in 
the other policies discussed, Namibia has a limited infrastructure with which to provide people, 
especially rural populations, with access to water and sanitation facilities. A lack of these basic 
amenities has a detrimental effect on the health of rural communities, with diseases linked to water 
and sanitation such as tuberculosis and malaria more prevalent in rural areas. Because more women 
than men live in rural areas and female-headed households tend to be poorer than male-headed 
households, a lack of rural water and sanitation infrastructure disproportionately affects women and 
female-headed households.  
There is some discussion of women’s education on water and sanitation sector issues in the National 
Policy on Climate Change for Namibia. The policy states that the government will include gender and 
climate change, including issues such as water supply, in the curriculum of education and training 
programmes. However, the policy stops short of discussing women’s positioning for formal 
employment in the water and sanitation sectors. Currently, the completion rate for upper secondary 
education for women is relatively high, which implies that there is opportunity for WASH education 
policies that position women for employment in the sector to be successful.   
All of the above policies are very limited in their consideration of women’s employment levels in the 
water and sanitation sectors and in terms of opportunities for women to access employment in these 
sectors. However, the National Gender Policy (2010–2020) does put forward that, as a strategy for 
gender mainstreaming, women should be involved in interventions to achieve the objectives of 
environmental sustainability, including in the water and sanitation sectors. The policy stops short of 
discussing how this engagement could take place.  
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Namibia, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Land Reform has primary responsibility for WASH. 
Other national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include Ministry of Urban and Rural 
Development, ensuring implementation of national WASH strategy for urban settlements, and the 
Ministry of Health and Social Services, implementing and enforcing hygiene practices. There are a 
range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, including 
district-level government agencies and traditional bodies, the private sector, national and 
international CSOs. A wide range of development partners are involved in supporting government, 
private sector and CSO engagement in WASH. Figure E provides a visual mapping of the actors 
involved.   
Figure E: WASH stakeholders in Namibia 
Page 213

=== PAGE 217 ===
Page 106 of 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.9 Nigeria 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Nigeria at a glance 
Page 214

=== PAGE 218 ===
Page 107 of 143 
 
  
Access to drinking water: 78% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which 21.7% has access to safely managed drinking water, 55.9% has access to a basic 
level of drinking water and 5% has access to a limited level of drinking water. The remainder of the 
population uses unimproved sources for drinking water, including 5.6% who only have access to 
surface water.180 40% of the population are women who are the main collectors of water. It takes 
32.7% of the population, with improved drinking sources, 30 mins or less to collect water.181 
  
Access to sanitation: 43% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
30.5% has access to safely managed sanitation service, 12.2% has access to a basic level of 
sanitation service whilst 19.5% has access to a limited level of sanitation service. 19.1% of the 
population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 18.7% who practice open defecation.182 
  
Hygiene: 33.2% of the population has access to handwashing facilities with soap and water.183 
  
WASH in schools: Nationally, 36.4% of schools have a basic service for drinking water, 37.8% have 
a basic service for sanitation and 27.6% have a basic service in hygiene.184 
  
WASH in health facilities: 46.4% of health care facilities have a basic service for drinking water, 
17.2% of health care facilities have basic service for sanitation and 65.8% of health care facilities 
have basic service for hygiene.185 
  
Policy context 
As Nigeria continues to experience rapid urbanisation and growth, it seeks to improve infrastructure 
throughout the country to promote development opportunities, establish a strong foundation for a 
diversified economy and alleviate poverty. One of the main ways they aspire to achieve this is through 
social development, which covers water resources and sanitation, water and gender equity and 
employment and job creation, as outlined in the Mid Report of the National Development Plan (2021). 
The Mid Report points to the progress in improving water service delivery over the years, while also 
reviewing continued challenges. Challenges identified include ensuring economic diversification, 
private sector investment in WASH services, lack of coordination and communal disputes, negative 
impacts of climate change, contamination of water sources and it’s impacts on health and poor 
operation and maintenance culture. The report also touches on the importance of WASH in light of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of the main ways it seeks to overcome these challenges is by continuing 
to improve sanitation services, extending water supply access and adopting an integrated planning 
and policy formulation approach, while also increasing training, developing the bioeconomy and 
circular economy, and increasing access to finance and technical support for businesses and projects 
in environmentally sustainable sectors.  
 
 
180 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
181 MICS (2017) 
182 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
183 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
184 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
185 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 215

=== PAGE 219 ===
Page 108 of 143 
 
One recurring theme in the National Development Plan is the increase in negative impacts on Nigeria’s 
development brought about by climate change. In order to address this increasing threat, the National 
Climate Change Policy for Nigeria was launched in 2021. The Climate Change Policy addresses these 
challenges through 10 strategic objectives, including implementing adaptation and mitigation 
measures that promote low-carbon development (Strategy 1); mainstreaming gender, youth and 
other vulnerable groups into all climate change interventions (Strategy 5); and promoting climate-
proofing of construction and infrastructural development (Strategy 6). This policy examines the impact 
that extreme weather places on an already strained water, sanitation and hygiene sector due to an 
increase in droughts and floods. Nigeria seeks to overcome issues related to climate change and 
inadequate water and waste infrastructure through the implementation of a circular economy, as well 
as increasing infrastructure for wastewater management and reforms in the establishment, 
management, operation and maintenance of water supply and sanitation schemes and services. The 
policy recognises the importance of including women in the planning, implementation and 
management of related programmes, and seeks to integrate a gender perspective in the adoption of 
environmentally friendly and gender responsive technologies, and the development of gender-
responsive, socially inclusive and resilient water and sanitation infrastructure.  
 
One of the biggest challenges that Nigeria faces with implementing these policies and ensuring the 
adequate implementation of WASH facilities and infrastructure is the 3-tiered government structure 
which leads to a lack of coordination in policy and programme implementation as discussed in Nigeria 
Water and Sanitation Profile.186  
 
In all the policies reviewed, there was a clear theme around capacity building and job creation. Within 
the Climate Change Policy, there is discussion on collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Women 
Affairs to ensure equitable policies and programmes. This discussion seeks to encourage women’s 
participation in the planning and management of climate change programmes. This includes 
investment to promote water security and climate change resilient growth and development to 
sustain jobs, employment, economic growth and social stability. With 66.8% of women completing 
upper secondary school187 and no data available on those enrolled in tertiary education, there 
continues to be discrepancies in access to some highly skilled careers in WASH.  
 
While most policies reviewed discussed the importance of WASH and ensuring water security in the 
country, the National Gender Policy of 2006 looks at the importance of including women in the work 
force and actively participating in decision making. The policy calls for equal inclusion in the design, 
implementation and management of all projects/programmes implemented. It also highlights the key 
role women play in water, sanitation and hygiene as women are usually the collectors of water and 
are in charge of maintenance of facilities, including water, within the family. However, they are usually 
the ones greatly impacted by the consequences of unsafe drinking water. This health risk is highlighted 
further in the National Health Policy which recognises that women and children face higher mortality 
and morbidity rates due to an increase in communicable diseases stemming from poor water and 
sanitation. Although not specifically related to WASH, both policies emphasize the importance of the 
equal participation of women and increased education and awareness. They also encourage 
community engagement in best practices.   
 
186 Nigeria’s National Water Supply and Sanitation Policy was unavailable to locate online. 
187 UNIS (2017) 
Page 216

=== PAGE 220 ===
Page 109 of 143 
 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Nigeria, the Ministry of Water Resources has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national 
Ministries with some WASH responsibility include The National Council on Water Resources, a water 
resources policy formulating body, and the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education, who have 
roles formulating community sanitation and hygiene. There are a range of agencies involved in the 
delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, including state-level government agencies, 
national and international CSOs. A wide range of development partners are involved in supporting 
government, private sector and CSO engagement in WASH. Figure F provides a visual mapping of the 
actors involved.   
Figure F: WASH stakeholders in Nigeria 
Page 217

=== PAGE 221 ===
Page 110 of 143 
 
 
9.10 Morocco 
 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Morocco at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 90% of the population has access to an improved water source for drinking 
water, of which 79.9% has access to safely managed drinking water, 10.5% has access to a basic 
level of drinking water and 5.3% has access to a limited level of drinking water. The remainder of 
the population uses unimproved sources for drinking water, including 1.5% who only have access 
to surface water.188 
  
Access to sanitation: 87% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
39.3% has access to safely managed sanitation service, 47.9% has access to a basic level of 
sanitation service whilst 1.5% has access to a limited level of sanitation service. 9.5% of the 
population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 1.7% who practice open defecation.189  
  
Data on hygiene and WASH in health facilities is not available.  
  
WASH in schools: Nationally, 83.6% of schools have a basic service for drinking water, 69.9% has a 
basic service for sanitation and 89% has a basic service for hygiene.190 
  
Policy context 
Due to continued threats to available water resources throughout the country, the National 
Sustainable Development Policy 2017 (NSDP) recognises the importance of water, sanitation and 
hygiene improvements for the development of the country, as outlined in Strategic Focus 6: ensure 
the conservation and rational management of water resources, Strategic Focus 14: promotion of 
integrated waste management to implement a circular economy, and Strategic Focus 16: securitize 
the needs (by ensuring needs are meet) and strengthen water resources integrated management. Not 
only does it seek to improve facilities, access and programmes around water, sanitation and hygiene, 
it identifies the opportunities available for transitioning to a circular economy through recycling water 
usage. It also examines the need for human development and combat social inequalities within Stake 
6: promote human development and reduce social and territorial inequalities. While the 6th Stake 
touches briefly on the importance of equality for all, it remains quite gender blind with regard to the 
incorporation of gender in policies. The NSDP further connects the importance of fighting climate 
change as a factor to ensure the advancement of water, sanitation and hygiene within the country, 
especially in regard to discrepancies between regions within the country.  
 
Moroccan Climate Change Policy 2014 highlights the impact of climate change on health and water 
access in the country. The increase in temperatures and extreme weathers is leading to salinisation of 
water, desertification and an increase in water-borne diseases which impact women and girls more 
than men as women are typically responsible for managing water. It also points to the importance of 
 
188 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
189 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
190 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
Page 218

=== PAGE 222 ===
Page 111 of 143 
 
increasing financing and programmes focused on combating climate change, including education and 
awareness on alternative solutions and the re-use of water resources.  
 
While the Climate Change Policy touches on the importance of tackling climate change to ensure 
equitable access to water, sanitation and hygiene, the National Water Plan (2013) examines the 
current situation within Morocco, with the Moroccan climate being regulated by the Saharan 
depression and the anticyclones of the Azores leading to greater extremities when weather patterns 
change. With 20% of all water resources coming from ground water, a continued degradation of 
surface water, negative impacts from climate change and water contamination, Morocco has placed 
water as an important factor in its development. It outlines the importance of mobilising water 
resources, desalting ocean water, increasing the re-use of water for irrigation, enhancing water 
treatment and reusing wastewater. It also sets out the need to protect communities against floods, 
especially for sanitation facilities and agricultural drainage systems. Within the health policy that was 
reviewed, there was no mention of WASH specific strategies, though it does discuss the increase in 
water-borne diseases and the need to ensure adequate facilities.  
 
Within all these policies, there is no clear examination of how to increase job opportunities for women. 
However, the National Sustainable Development Plan discusses increasing employment opportunities 
more generally. This includes strategic planning of the building usage as an economic opportunity with 
resource consumption (such as organizing the flow of water and waste) and adapting training to meet 
the transition to green-based trades as well as ensuring equitable representation of women and men 
within all sectors as outlined in the National Strategy for Gender Equality & Equity 2006. The Strategy 
sees the value of ensuring there is equal participation of women and men in communities, especially 
around decision-making, and identifies the impact that inadequate water and sanitation facilities 
place on women, such as leaving them more vulnerable to illness, it also discusses the importance of 
equal access to education. With only 29% of females completing upper secondary191 and 41.7% of 
women completing tertiary education,192 there continues to be a disproportion of women having the 
skills needed for certain WASH-related careers. The Climate Change Policy discusses the importance 
of capacity building and training for individuals, communities, interest groups and public and private 
enterprises to better adapt to and mitigate climate change. It seeks to do so by strengthening human 
and technical capacities of stakeholders, training public actors to take ownership of the vision, 
concepts and integrated approach, organizing workshops for capacity building on issues related to 
climate change and strengthening STEM and climate-related education and training. Additionally, the 
Water Plan discusses the strengthening of capacity building, including skill building for highly skilled 
positions, through building efficient water planning and management, and advancement of 
techniques, construction and management adapted to a national context.  
 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Morocco, the Ministry of Interior has primary responsibility for WASH. Other national Ministries 
with some WASH responsibility include The General Directorate of Hydraulics, the lead agency for 
water resource planning, and The Ministry of Health, responsible for drinking water quality control 
and water-related laws. There are a range of agencies involved in the delivery of WASH services at the 
 
191 UNIS (2020) 
192 UNIS (2020) 
Page 219

=== PAGE 223 ===
Page 112 of 143 
 
sub-national levels, including district-level government agencies, the private sector, national and 
international CSOs. A wide range of development partners are involved in supporting government, 
private sector and CSO engagement in WASH. Figure G provides a visual mapping of the actors 
involved.   
Figure G: WASH stakeholders in Morocco 
Page 220

=== PAGE 224 ===
Page 113 of 143 
 
 
9.11 Uganda 
Water, sanitation and hygiene in Uganda at a glance 
 
Access to drinking water: 83.1% of the population has access to an improved water source for 
drinking water, of which 16.6% has access to safely managed drinking water, 39.2% has access to a 
basic level of drinking water and 27.3% has access to a limited level of drinking water. The remainder 
of the population uses unimproved sources for drinking water, including 4.7% who only have access 
to surface water.193    
 
Access to sanitation: 37.4% of the population has access to improved sanitation services, of which 
19.8% has access to a basic level of sanitation service whilst 17.6% has access to a limited level of 
sanitation service. 62.6% of the population uses unimproved sanitation services, including 4.7% 
who practice open defecation.194  
 
Hygiene: 22.6% of the population has access to handwashing facilities with soap and water.195 
 
WASH in schools: Nationally, 68.4% of schools have a basic service for drinking water, 79.6% has a 
basic service for sanitation and 30.1% has a basic service for hygiene.196  
 
WASH in health facilities: 44.3% of health care facilities have a basic service for drinking water. Data 
is not available on sanitation and hygiene facilities in health facilities.197 
 
Policy context 
The shift away from a focus on poverty reduction to one of wealth creation through industrial 
development in Uganda’s National Development Plan III (2020—2025) has resulted in decreased 
attention to water, sanitation and hygiene in national policy. Nevertheless, water, sanitation and 
hygiene remain a core area of Uganda’s Human Development Programme, a sub-programme in the 
NDP III, and one which seeks to improve labour productivity for increased competitiveness and better 
quality of life for all, with the following targets having been set: 
• 
Increased access to safe water supply from 70 to 85% (rural) and from 74 percent to 100% 
(urban). 
• 
Increased access to basic sanitation from (improved toilet) 19 to 40% and hand washing from 
34 to 50%. 
In addition, the NDP III also foresees investing in the effective management of the entire WASH value 
chain segments, including containment, emptying, transportation, treatment, safe reuse and disposal. 
The NDP III recognises that achievement of these, and other development targets, will be more 
challenging due to the effects of climate change, with more extreme weather patterns leading to 
 
193 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
194 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
195 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2020) 
196 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2019) 
197 Joint Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene  (2019) 
Page 221

=== PAGE 225 ===
Page 114 of 143 
 
increased water stress, impacting water availability and quality for both domestic and commercial 
uses as well as the water and sanitation infrastructure already in place. The Uganda National Climate 
Change Policy (2015—2020) articulates the challenges further and highlights that, given their domestic 
role, women are likely to experience the effects of climate change on water and sanitation facilities 
most keenly. It commits to mainstream gender issues across climate change adaptation and mitigation 
actions including ensuring climate change related policies and activities are gender sensitive and 
developing a gender-sensitive approach in monitoring and evaluating systems.  
The National Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy,198 launched in 2018 (two years earlier than the 
National Development Plan III) retains a focus on poverty reduction and seeks to ‘empower men, 
women, boys, girls and vulnerable groups through ensuring equity in access to and control of 
resources in the water and sanitation sub-sector’. The Strategy highlights the burden and risks for 
women and girls that come with poor access to water, sanitation and hygiene. It reports that, on 
average, women and girls spend up to six hours a day fetching water, limiting their time for economic 
activities and attending school; that women and girls face shame and risk of attack as a result of 
inadequate sanitation facilities; and that women and girls are more at risk of health conditions such 
as diarrhoea, dysentery and cholera as a result of their domestic responsibilities. It does not, however, 
recognise the negative implications climate change is likely to have on the burden and risks women 
and girls face. 
The Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy has five strategic objectives: 
1. Integrate gender into all government policy, guidelines, plans and budgets; 
2. Build the capacity of the Ministry of Water and Environment as well as other stakeholders to 
be aware of and to address gender differentials in water, sanitation and hygiene sectors and 
to promote a gender-sensitive work environment at the Ministry of Water and Environment; 
3. Economically empower men, women, boys, girls and vulnerable groups, especially those with 
disabilities, through equitable access to and control of water resources, supply, sanitation and 
hygiene; 
4. Collection and reporting of gender disaggregated data, with attention to gender issues in 
monitoring and reporting; 
5. Building partnerships within the Sub-sector, Line Ministries, Civil Society, districts and Local 
Governments to move forward the gender agenda; 
6. Gender coordination, partnership and networking. 
 
The most direct benefits to women and girls are likely to come through strategic objective 3, which 
foresees the rehabilitation and expansion of water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban locations, 
as well as support so women and girls can take advantage of employment or income-generating 
opportunities associated with development of water and sanitation facilities.  
This policy and other policies express a commitment to stakeholder participation in the planning, 
implementation and maintenance of water and sanitation projects, with the National Water Policy 
(1999) setting a minimum of at least half of Water and Sanitation Committees members being women. 
Whilst this commitment provides opportunities for women and girls to influence the development of 
water and sanitation infrastructure in their communities, they bring an additional time burden which 
 
198 Uganda’s Water and Sanitation Policy has not been accessible online and so has not formed part of our review. Interestingly, Uganda’s 
Gender Policy gives very little attention to gender issues in the areas of water and sanitation. 
Page 222

=== PAGE 226 ===
Page 115 of 143 
 
women and girls may struggle to take on. Social traditions which encourage women and girls to defer 
to men may inhibit women and girls’ abilities to participate further.  
Whilst the Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy does not identify inadequate water, sanitation and 
hygiene facilities within schools, health centres and hospitals as an issue, the Second National Health 
Policy and the National Education and Sports Strategic Plan do. As the main users of primary health 
centres, women and girls can be severely affected by inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene 
practices in these centres. Similarly, inadequate toilet facilities are often a barrier to girls’ attendance 
at school, especially during menstruation. With this in mind, the Education and Sports Sector Plan 
includes, amongst its objectives, the expansion and improvement of safe water supply infrastructure 
to government supported primary schools as well as the construction of sanitation facilities primarily 
in primary schools. The National Health Policy also foresees improvements in health infrastructure 
and in waste disposal but does not provide specifics. 
The Water and Sanitation Gender Strategy recognises the importance of building the capacity of 
Ministry of Water and Education staff on gender and of encouraging a gender-sensitive work 
environment, but stops short from promoting actions to increase women’s participation in formal 
roles in the planning, development, management and maintenance of water and sanitation facilities. 
Interestingly, the National Development Plan III outlines clear plans for expanding education provision 
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics and increasing the number of graduates in these 
areas, but places no emphasis on encouraging women specifically into education and careers in these 
areas. Currently the proportion of women who have completed upper secondary school or enrolled 
in tertiary education remains low, with 20.2% and 4.33% respectively. 
Stakeholder Mapping 
In Uganda, the Ministry of Water and Environment has primary responsibility for WASH. Other 
national Ministries with some WASH responsibility include the Ministry of Health, responsible for 
sanitation and hygiene, as well as WASH in health care facilities, and the Ministry of Education and 
Sports, which has responsibility for WASH in schools. There are a range of agencies involved in the 
delivery of WASH services at the sub-national levels, including district-level government agencies, the 
private sector, national and international CSOs. A wide range of development partners are involved in 
supporting government, private sector and CSO engagement in WASH. Figure H provides a visual 
mapping of the actors involved.   
Figure H: WASH stakeholders in Uganda 
Page 223

=== PAGE 227 ===
Page 116 of 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 224

=== PAGE 228 ===
Page 117 of 143 
 
Annex 6: Gender Action Plan 
Introduction 
This document sets out Climate Fund Managers (CFM) action plan for promoting gender equality in 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), protection and management of wetlands, coastal and marine 
ecosystems, and climate resilient port infrastructure through investments by the Climate Investor Two 
(CI2) fund. By adopting a gender mainstreaming approach to CI2 and the projects it supports, CFM 
expects not only to mitigate the risks for women and men associated with funded projects, but also 
to benefit women and men equally, reducing gender differentials associated with vulnerabilities that 
are exacerbated by climate change, and promoting sustainable and equitable development.   
 
CFM is committed to promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment externally (in countries 
and communities where CFM’s Managed Vehicles are invested) and internally, within CFM itself.199 It 
does so through a twin-track approach; firstly, by mainstreaming gender considerations into its 
investments,200 and secondly, by putting in place organisational systems to promote gender equality 
within CFM. Procedures relating to the former are described in CFM’s Environmental and Social 
Management System.  
 
The development of this Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been guided by the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
approach to gender mainstreaming (Figure 1). It has been informed by a Gender Assessment which 
comprised:  
i) 
A review of global evidence in the areas of WASH, the protection of wetlands, coastal and 
marine ecosystems and climate resilient port infrastructure;  
ii) 
A review of national policies, strategies, plans and contexts, relating to WASH, gender and 
climate change for 11 CI2 focal countries: Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Djibouti, Indonesia, 
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Uganda;  
iii) 
Stakeholder analysis for eight out of the 11 countries;201  
iv) 
A problem tree analysis for each of the three areas, which, following GCF guidance, drew on 
the Gender Assessment findings to unpack the causes and effects of the core problem 
identified; and  
v) 
Identification of opportunities for promoting gender equality through CI2 investments, based 
on the evidence reviewed. 
The GAP presents how CFM will use CI2 to take forward the opportunities for promoting gender 
equality identified in the Gender Assessment and provides a performance measurement framework 
which will be used to monitor CFM’s implementation progress.  As CI2 is expected to cover up to 25 
countries, and financing investments which have yet to be identified, the actions included in the GAP 
are, by necessity, high level. Project specific GAPs, which will be developed during the project design 
phase, will allow this high-level framework to be tailored more directly.  
 
199 CFM Gender Policy 2021 
200 Gender mainstreaming is the systematic process of ensuring that women and men have equal access and control over resources, 
development benefits and decision-making at all stages of the development process through ensuring that the respective needs, interests 
and priorities of women and men are integrated into in all policies, programmes and projects. CFM Gender Policy 2021 
201 It was not possible to conduct stakeholder analysis for the remaining 3 countries as No Objection Letters were received too late in the 
process. 
Page 225

=== PAGE 229 ===
Page 118 of 143 
 
Figure 1: GCF’s gender mainstreaming approach202  
 
 
Overview of CI2 Gender Assessment  
The CI2 Gender Assessment covered a broad set of issues relating to how men and women, girls and 
boys interact with WASH, wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems and port infrastructure (see Table 
1). 
 
Table 1: Issues covered in the Gender Assessment, by area 
Sector 
Issues covered 
Water and Sanitation 
• 
Women’s and men’s, girls’ and boys’ access to and use of WASH services, the barriers 
they encounter, including gender-based violence, and how climate change is affecting 
these barriers.  
• 
How women and men, girls and boys are affected by challenges in accessing quality 
WASH.  
• 
The roles that men and women, boys and girls play in the WASH sector, including formal 
employment opportunities.  
• 
Women and girls’ participation and leadership in the design, planning and management 
of WASH infrastructure and services.  
• 
National policy in relation to gender, water and sanitation.  
 
202 Source: guidelines-gcf-toolkit-mainstreaming-gender_0.pdf (greenclimate.fund) 
Page 226

=== PAGE 230 ===
Page 119 of 143 
 
• 
Stakeholders involved in WASH.  
Wetland, 
coastal and 
marine 
ecosystems 
• 
Women’s and men’s use of and interaction with wetland, coastal and marine areas.  
• 
How climate change is affecting these different uses and interactions, and the impact 
on the populations concerned.  
• 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not, and could be involved in the 
protection and management of wetland, coastal and marine areas.  
Port 
infrastruct
ure 
• 
The different ways in which men and women use and benefit from available port 
infrastructure.  
• 
The different ways in which men and women are, are not, and could be involved in and 
can benefit from the development of climate resilient port infrastructure.  
 
In the WASH sector, the Gender Assessment found that women’s and girls’ domestic and care-giving 
roles mean that they are disproportionately affected by inadequate access to WASH infrastructure 
and services, a situation which is being exacerbated by volatilities associated with climate change. 
Whilst national policies often recognise this and make commitments to addressing gender issues 
across their policy implementation, there is very little detail as to how this will be done in practice. 
The causes and effects of this situation are multiple and are summarised in the Problem Tree Analysis 
below (Figure 2). 
Figure 2: WASH Problem Tree Analysis 
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments 
have been slow to 
take action to 
mitigate effects of 
climate change 
and build 
resilience 
A weak state-
citizen social 
contract inhibits 
policy 
implementation 
and investment in 
essential public 
services 
Gender norms relegate women 
and girls to the domestic space, 
undermine investment in girls’ 
education and exclude women and 
girls from formal and informal 
decision-making fora  
Women and 
girls’ 
physiology 
Weak public 
health 
systems  
CAUSES 
Climate change 
depletes available 
WASH 
infrastructure and 
resources 
Insufficient 
investment into 
WASH 
infrastructure, 
maintenance and 
service 
management 
Women and 
girls are 
responsible for 
household 
chores, 
including water 
collection, and 
caring for family 
members 
Women and 
girls do not 
influence the 
design, 
planning and 
management 
of WASH 
services 
Women and 
girls’ have 
increased and 
specific WASH 
needs 
Men and 
women, boys 
and girls have 
insufficient 
knowledge 
about the 
need to 
prioritise 
good hygiene 
practices 
 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
INADEQUATE WASH INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES PLACE A HIGH BURDEN ON WOMEN AND 
GIRLS 
 
Page 227

=== PAGE 231 ===
Page 120 of 143 
 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS
Women and girls spend more time on household chores and family care giving 
Women and girls face increased risk of sexual harassment and gender-based violence 
Families, especially men, are unwilling to spend scare resources on WASH services 
Girls, especially adolescent girls, do not attend school consistently 
Families, but especially women and girls, face an increased risk of ill-health and low levels of well-being, including 
mental well-being 
Available WASH infrastructure and services do not respond to women and girls’ needs or priorities 
Women and girls are not able to attend to their physical needs 
EFFECTS 
Women and girls are not able to invest in empowering activities such as going to school, income generating 
activities, community leadership 
People, especially women and girls, have a poorer physical and mental health status 
Girls are not able to complete basic levels of education 
Few women have the education and skills to work in the WASH sector  
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained 
 
As regards wetland, coastal and marine ecosystems, the Gender Assessment found that women are 
mostly excluded from the formal sector and most profitable parts of value chains in oceans-based 
economies, as well as from dialogue and decision making around community-based protection and 
management initiatives. At the same time, and in spite of gaps in the evidence base on climate-related 
impacts, they are likely to be disproportionately affected by damage to ecosystems. The causes and 
effects of this situation are summarized in the Problem Tree Analysis below (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Wetland, coastal, and marine ecosystem Problem Tree Analysis  
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments have been 
slow to take action to 
mitigate effects of 
climate change and build 
resilience 
Gender norms relegate women to the domestic 
space: limiting the amount of time they can spend 
outside, and distance they can stray from, the home; 
and constraining women’s access to credit and 
specialised equipment  
Design of community 
protection and 
management initiatives 
does not take into 
account restrictions on 
women’s participation  
CAUSES 
Climate change damages 
wetland, coastal and 
marine ecosystems  
 
Women are mostly 
excluded from the formal 
sector in oceans-based 
industries, and are 
disproportionately 
represented in informal 
and unregulated 
economies 
Women are 
concentrated in less 
profitable parts of value 
chains 
Low female participation 
in community protection 
and management 
initiatives across relevant 
sectors 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
WOMEN ARE MARGINALISED IN THE USE, PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF WETLAND, 
COASTAL AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS 
There is limited evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of damage to ecosystems 
At the same time, rising sea temperatures, levels and acidity are all expected to disproportionately affect 
women’s livelihoods, with women facing disproportionate and additional barriers to adaptation 
Women working in oceans-based industries earn less than men for carrying out the same work 
Women working in informal or unregulated economies are vulnerable to exploitation, including unsanitary 
work environments 
EFFECTS 
Policy- and decision-making are gender-blind, overlooking women’s needs, interests and potential roles in 
protection and management 
Women and their families have poorer economic status and food security 
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained or exacerbated 
 
In spite of particularly limited evidence on the intersect between gender, climate and port 
infrastructure, the Gender Assessment likewise identified widespread exclusion of women from the 
Page 228

=== PAGE 232 ===
Page 121 of 143 
 
development and operation of port infrastructure, particularly from employment in operations and 
management. The Problem Tree Analysis below summarises the causes and effects of this situation 
(Figure 4). 
Figure 4: Resilient Port Infrastructure Problem Tree Analysis  
ROOT CAUSES 
Governments have 
been slow to take 
action to mitigate 
effects of climate 
change and build 
resilience 
Gender norms dictate that port employment is overwhelmingly dominated by men 
CAUSES 
Operation of 
traditional port 
infrastructure  
damages 
ecosystems  
 
Women comprise 
only a fraction of 
recruits and 
trainees to the port 
industry 
Female employees 
are particularly 
underrepresented 
in port operations 
and management 
There is a lack of 
support to the 
integration and 
progression of 
female employees 
(for example, 
through 
mentorship 
programmes) 
Working 
environments are 
insufficient to 
enable retention of 
female 
recruitments (e.g. 
by providing 
separate sanitation 
facilities and 
family-friendly HR 
policies) 
PURPOSE STATEMENT 
WOMEN ARE EXCLUDED FROM THE DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION OF (CLIMATE-RESILIENT) 
PORT INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
IMMEDIATE 
EFFECTS 
There is a lack of evidence on the gender-differentiated effects of ports’ negative impacts on ecosystems, as 
well as of optimised infrastructure and energy efficiency 
Women do not benefit equally from the employment benefits of port infrastructure 
Women are excluded from discussions around new approaches such as no-impact port development, despite 
tending to be more willing to engage in sustainable or environmentally friendly practices  
EFFECTS 
Policy- and decision-making are gender-blind, overlooking women’s needs, interests and potential roles in the 
development of climate resilient port infrastructure 
Women have poorer economic status 
Gender norms and inequalities are sustained  
 
Overview of Gender Actions 
Responding to the causes identified in the problem tree analyses, the Gender Assessment identified 
opportunities for promoting gender equality through CI2 investments in four main areas (Figure 3). 
These opportunities directly underpin the action areas presented below and in the action plan in Table 
2, with a fifth action area being added to address the organisational environment needed within CFM 
Project Companies and contractors, to facilitate the Gender Action Plan’s full implementation.  
Page 229

=== PAGE 233 ===
Page 122 of 143 
 
 
Figure 5: Opportunities for promoting gender equality identified in the Gender Assessment 
 
 
Gender Action Areas for CI2 
Improving women and girls’ access to WASH  
As far as possible, CFM and its Project Companies will use its investment projects and community 
development projects to address the physical, financial, attitudinal and safety barriers that may limit 
women’s and girls’ access to WASH.  
Using normal project development processes e.g., the Environment and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA), the Community Needs Assessment and Local Gender Assessment etc., CFM will explicitly 
consider the barriers which affect women’s and girls’ access to WASH, and how the investment design 
can address these. It will incorporate appropriate actions into the design of investment projects, 
where possible, to address these barriers, and include relevant indicators in the results frameworks 
to monitor progress. As part of this, CFM will consider the barriers faced by different groups of women 
and girls, such as those from chronically poor households, from indigenous households and women 
and girls with disabilities. CFM will also consider the specific needs some of these groups might have 
in accessing WASH facilities.  
Page 230

=== PAGE 234 ===
Page 123 of 143 
 
CFM will seek to use community development projects to increase the direct benefits for women and 
girls resulting from investments, by addressing identified barriers which cannot be addressed through 
the main investment. Examples of potential projects include: 
• 
Working with families and communities to build their understanding of and support for good 
WASH practices, including during menstruation, so that families are willing to invest scarce 
resources into WASH services, and communities are proactive in encouraging all members to 
observe good hygiene practices. Targeting men is critical in such interventions as they often 
control the use of financial resources in households.     
• 
Modifying water points and toilet facilities so they can be used by women and girls with 
disabilities. 
• 
Providing good lighting in places used as shared water points or sanitation facilities.  
It is recognised that improving WASH facilities in schools and health centres often brings significant 
benefits to women and girls. Opportunities for doing this will be considered as part of the investment 
project and community development project design process.   
Agreed objectives and actions to improve women’s and girls’ access to WASH, either through the 
investment project itself and/or through community development projects, will be set out in the 
project design, with relevant indicators to track progress and outcomes incorporated into the project’s 
results framework (see Action 4 below). For the investment projects, these objectives will also be 
reflected in contracts with the Engineering Procurement Contractor (EPC) and will be reviewed as part 
of normal EPC performance review processes.  
2. Giving women a voice in the planning, design and management of facilities and 
initiatives 
As a priority beneficiary group for CI2 investments, it is essential that stakeholder engagement and 
consultation processes service the needs and experiences of women and girls. This is to ensure that 
investment projects and community development projects can be responsive, as far as possible, to 
the needs of women and girls.  
Social norms in CI2 focal countries often devalue and silence women’s voices, even when public 
consultation mechanisms are in place. To counter this and to ensure women’s and girls’ needs inform 
investment design, CFM and its Project Companies will adopt a stakeholder engagement approach 
that provides conducive spaces for women and girls to voices their needs and experiences. This 
process will involve: 
• 
Identifying women and girls as a distinct stakeholder group with whom to engage directly, 
whilst recognising that, within this broad category, there are intersecting sub-groups with 
diverse needs and experiences who also need to be involved, e.g., indigenous women, women 
with disabilities and chronically poor women. 
• 
At the community level, identifying women’s leaders to work with to convene appropriate 
fora to hear a range of women’s and girls’ voices about their needs and challenges. 
• 
Working with community and male leaders to help them understand the rationale for 
engaging women in the planning of facilities and initiatives and build their support for that to 
avoid domestic arguments or backlash. 
• 
Holding consultation meetings at times and at venues which are convenient to the women 
and girls being targeted and considering how the direct and indirect costs of attending can be 
offset, particularly for the chronically poor, and for women and girls with disabilities. 
Page 231

=== PAGE 235 ===
Page 124 of 143 
 
• 
Using consultation sessions with women and girls as an opportunity to inform the design of 
the grievance mechanism so that it is accessible and so that women and girls have confidence 
in it as a system of redress and accountability. As part of this, a zero tolerance to all forms of 
gender-based violence and sexual harassment perpetrated by any staff or contractor from 
CFM, its Project Companies or contractors will be communicated.   
In some projects, community-led management committees may play a role in the management of 
WASH facilities and ocean ecosystem protection initiatives. Where this is the case, CFM and its Project 
Companies will support committees to operate in a way that provides space for women’s voices to be 
heard. The approach is likely to be context specific, but might involve:  
• 
Identifying and recruiting to the committee local women who are perceived (by men and 
other women) to have some legitimacy in speaking out on behalf of the community. These 
women are likely to have other leadership roles in the community and have experience of 
publicly expressing their views. 
• 
Building the skills of the women representatives on the committee so that they can consult 
with a diverse range of women and girls in the community to get their feedback on the WASH 
facilities, and to represent these views in committee meetings and decision-making. 
• 
Building male committee members’ understanding of the need for management to be 
informed by women’s and girls’ experiences, and to develop the skills to ensure women’s 
voices inform committee decision-making. 
Planned actions to provide a safe space for women’s voices in the planning, design and management 
of facilities and initiatives will be set out in the investment’s stakeholder engagement plan. Routine 
monitoring of the plan’s implementation will give particular attention to actions taken to capture 
women’s voices and to how project design and management is responding to the feedback received. 
3. Providing women with formal employment opportunities  
Low levels of secondary education completion amongst girls in several of the CI2 focal countries, 
combined with gender norms around acceptable productive roles for women and men, can make the 
formal employment of women in the WASH sector, as well as ocean-based industries and operation 
of port operations, challenging.  
Project Companies will be proactive in hiring a gender-balanced team, making adjustments to working 
practices where this could level the playing field between male and female candidates. It is, however, 
recognised that in several focal countries there are systemic issues beyond CFM’s control which are 
likely to limit the Project Companies’ ability to recruit senior female project staff. In an effort to 
ameliorate this situation, CFM will scope out, in some focal countries, opportunities to encourage 
more women to enter the WASH sector. Options might include: providing scholarships for women 
embarking on tertiary education in relevant Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
(STEM) fields, providing work placements on projects for current female STEM students, or supporting 
women involved in the WASH sector to visit secondary and tertiary education facilities to encourage 
women to consider a career in the sector. Viable opportunities that can be accommodated within the 
overall investment will be pursued as pilot projects. 
At the project level, Project Companies will identify employment opportunities for women in WASH 
enterprises and put in place appropriate mechanisms to recruit, train and support women in these 
roles. Opportunities might include roles as sanitation sale agents, in meter reading, water tank 
construction or cleaning, amongst others. It is recognised that there is limited experience of such 
approaches, and work done in this area through CI2 will be done on a pilot basis with the intention of 
Page 232

=== PAGE 236 ===
Page 125 of 143 
 
increasing knowledge about effective approaches. Figure 4 provides an example of how CFM has 
promoted women’s employment opportunities in Sierra Leone. Where investments include improving 
WASH facilities in schools and health centres, Project Companies will seek to work with service 
managers to put in place a resourced plan for the on-going cleaning and maintenance of the facilities, 
and which does not default to traditional gender roles.   
 
As regards the protection and management of wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems, projects 
supporting sustainable practices in oceans-based industries should not only take into account such 
restrictions – on women’s time of mobility, for instance – but actively seek to tackle discriminatory 
norms which limit women’s livelihoods opportunities. 
Project Companies will seek to attract women recruits to climate-resilient port operations, and 
support their integration and progression, by providing a combination of initiatives to build their skills 
and confidence and provide a supportive work environment.  
Understanding the results and impact of gender mainstreaming  
Monitoring and reporting will be undertaken in accordance with the principles set out in CFM’s 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS). CFM will monitor and evaluate the actions 
taken to promote gender equality, their results and impact, in two ways. Firstly, by monitoring and 
evaluating key impact indicators at the Fund level. Secondly, by implementing monitoring plans for 
individual projects.  
Fund Level Monitoring and Evaluation 
The KPIs established for individual programmes will supplement the key impact indicators that have 
been adopted for the CI2 funds, and against which CI2 is committed to monitor performance in all 
Box 1. 
Supporting women business leaders and women’s employment in Sierra Leone 
CFM’s investment concerns the development of a waste to value portfolio in the city of Freetown, 
Sierra Leone. The assets comprise modular units which process organic waste and generate clean 
energy and digestate that can be used as fertiliser, thus contributing to the circular economy and 
providing a much-needed solution to the problem of waste management in the city. Currently 
most of the waste ends up in the city’s waterways and in the marine environment. 
 
The waste is collected by waste collection micro-enterprises (“youth groups”), which were 
established, trained and equipped by Freetown City Council to conduct door-to-door household 
waste collection in the city, and are jointly responsible for collecting up to 50% of the waste in 
city. The modules can be installed at a wide variety of premises and existing customers include a 
women’s maternal health centre in Freetown.   
 
The company in which CI2 is investing is a woman-led business as is its partner organisation. 
Female operators are actively sought, and the youth groups are approximately 30% female. With 
CI2’s investment, a local gender action plan has been established, along with a programme of 
community development that includes a focus on women as well as youth groups.  
 
Page 233

=== PAGE 237 ===
Page 126 of 143 
 
projects. These indicators are linked to select UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The impact 
indicators that are relevant to gender are shown in Table 3 below.  
 
Table 2 CI2 Impact Indicators  
UN SDG 
Gender-Relevant CI Two Impact Indicators 
SDG 5 – Gender Equality 
• Number of full-time, equivalent female employees. 
• Number of females in management positions. 
SDG 6 – Clean Water and Sanitation 
• Total number of people (gender disaggregated) with improved 
access to clean drinking water and sanitation. 
SDG 8 – Decent Work and Economic 
Growth 
• Number of new direct jobs created; gender disaggregated.  
• Catalytic effect (EUR million) (total DFI and commercial financing). 
Project level monitoring and evaluation 
Project companies will implement a monitoring and evaluation plan, which sets out: 
• 
The indicators to be used to monitor how women and girls, as well as other priority social 
groups e.g., indigenous women, women from chronically poor households and women with 
disabilities, are being affected – both positively and negatively – by project interventions, and 
the impact these projects are having on their lives.  
• 
The methodology for gathering and analysing monitoring data, as well as reporting and using 
the findings. 
Each monitoring and evaluation plan will be bespoke to individual projects. However, they will contain 
comparable quantitative and qualitative indicators and data collection methodologies where 
appropriate. Depending on a project’s life cycle, monitoring data will be collected where possible at 
regular intervals to understand progress made during project implementation. The aim of project 
monitoring will be to provide timely information to make project adjustments and address any 
negative effects.  
Relevant components of the monitoring and evaluation plan may be incorporated into contracts for 
EPCs or other sub-contractors, with reviews of the plan’s implementation forming part of the 
contractor’s normal review process. 
There is a need for more evidence on effective approaches to promoting gender equality through 
investments in WASH, protection of ocean ecosystems and climate-resilient port infrastructure. In 
response to this, CFM may publish some of the results and learnings from its CI2 investments. 
 
Creating an enabling environment for gender mainstreaming in the CI2 Fund 
and the Project Companies  
CFM recognises the need to draw on specialist skills and advice to guide the company’s leadership on 
how to operationalise its gender commitments across the business and within the investments it 
manages. This is expected to be achieved through a network of gender and inclusion specialists who 
can be hired on an as-needed basis to provide both fund and project specific support. This network 
will benefit from contacts with local organisations with a strong track record in addressing gender 
issues in WASH, protection and management of wetlands, coastal and marine ecosystems, and climate 
resilient port infrastructure. It is anticipated that these specialists and local organisations could 
Page 234

=== PAGE 238 ===
Page 127 of 143 
 
potentially partner with Project Companies as a delivery agent e.g., in managing the stakeholder 
consultation with women or in community development activities. 
CFM will support Project Companies to put in place essential internal systems and capacities that will 
facilitate gender mainstreaming through the project and its operations, thereby operationalising this 
CI2 Fund Gender Action Plan. Arrangements will include:  
• 
Developing a local (project-specific) gender action plan based on an analysis of gender-related 
challenges and opportunities within the local context. This will integrate project-specific and 
organisational intentions for promoting gender equality. 
• 
Agreeing and implementing a project-specific Gender Equality Policy which sets out the 
company’s commitments to gender equality in their own internal operations and through the 
investment. This policy will set out the Project Company’s position on gender mainstreaming 
and on specific topics such as Gender Based Violence and Harassment (GBVH) and the 
mechanisms in place to safeguard staff from it. 
• 
Taking proactive measures to recruit a gender-balanced project team, seeking, where 
possible, to recruit qualified women into Project Company roles traditionally held by men. 
• 
Building the understanding and support of company staff to promote gender equality, both 
within their organisational context and in the project itself.  
• 
Integrating expectations of gender equal behaviours into staff job specifications and 
performance appraisal systems, with company leadership actively demonstrating a 
commitment to gender equality and setting Project Company expectations in this regard.   
• 
Providing the project team responsible for health, safety, social and environmental 
management with the necessary training and skills to guide the Project Company in the 
effective implementation of its gender equality commitments.  
• 
Implementing and managing a grievance mechanism for staff to report complaints, including 
cases of GBVH in the workplace.  
• 
Monitoring and reporting progress against agreed indicators, tracking the impacts of the 
project on women and girls. 
Project Companies will also take steps to require its principal contractors203 to give due attention 
to gender issues in their own operations. Requirements to be imposed on contractors are likely to 
include: 
• 
An operational Gender Equality Policy. 
• 
Proactive measures to recruit a gender-balanced team, seeking, where possible, to recruit 
qualified women into roles traditionally held by men. 
• 
A grievance mechanism for the contractor (and sub-contractor) workforce to report 
complaints, including cases of GBVH.  
These requirements would form part of the contract. Progress on delivering against these 
requirements would form part of the normal contractor performance review process. 
 
 
203 In many cases the project is built by one principal contracting company – referred to as the Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) contractor. In other cases a split contract may be awarded to different principal contracting parties. In such cases, each 
party would be required to follow the same requirements, with the actions coordinated by the Project Company. 
Page 235

=== PAGE 239 ===
Page 128 of 143 
 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
The action plan on the following page summarises the actions to be taken by CFM, and at Fund level, 
in order to mainstream gender issues in the investment lifecycle of the CI2 fund.  
CFM will monitor progress against this Gender Action Plan once a year using the indicators provided. 
Indicators may be updated over the life of CI2 to ensure they align well with CI2 investments and 
procedures.  
 
 
Page 236

=== PAGE 240 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
129 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Table 3 CI2 Gender Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
Opportunity 1: Improve women and girls’ access to WASH 
1.1 
Design and 
implement 
investment projects 
and community 
development 
projects which 
address physical, 
financial, attitudinal 
and safety barriers to 
women and girls’ 
WASH access.  
 
X 
 
 
Use ESIA and other 
associated 
assessments 
(including rapid 
gender 
analyses/assessment
s where applicable) 
to identify 
opportunities for 
addressing physical, 
financial, attitudinal 
and safety barriers 
for women and girls, 
and incorporate 
relevant actions into 
the project design 
and monitoring 
frameworks. 
Investment projects and/or 
associated community development 
projects have identified and are 
taking forward actions to address at 
least two of the four types of barriers 
for women and girls. 
 
Number of beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by sex, with improved 
access to climate-resilient water.  
 
Number beneficiaries, disaggregated 
by sex, with improved access to 
climate-resilient sanitation services. 
 
Women and girls’ report reduced 
physical, financial, attitudinal and 
safety barriers to climate-resilient 
water and/or sanitation services.   
 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
conduct ESIA, plus 
the community 
needs assessment 
and local gender 
analysis and action 
plan. 
 
Project Company and 
CFM staff to manage 
consultants and use 
the findings and 
inform investment 
design and/or 
associated 
community 
development 
projects. 
 
Project staff to 
manage community 
USD$ 150,000-200,000 
per project (estimate) 
for the ESIA (which will 
include a gender 
expert). 
 
USD$ 25,000 per 
project (estimate) for 
the needs assessment. 
 
USD$ 25,000 per 
project (estimate) for 
the and gender 
analysis and action 
plan. 
 
Reimbursable costs 
(expenses). 
 
CFM staff time  
 
 
Page 237

=== PAGE 241 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
130 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
development 
projects.  
 
CFM staff to support 
investment 
implementation, 
ensuring it addresses 
identified barriers to 
women’s and girls’ 
access to WASH. 
 
 
Opportunity 2: Women’s voice and agency in planning and operations 
2.1 
Plan and 
operationalize 
stakeholder 
engagement so that 
women and girls’ 
voices inform the 
design of investment 
projects and 
community 
development 
projects. 
X 
X 
X 
Stakeholder 
engagement includes 
consultations with 
women-only groups 
involving 
representatives of 
diverse groups of 
women. Stakeholder 
engagement informs 
men about the need 
to consult with 
women and girls. 
Number of women/girls only 
consultation meetings held. 
 
Number of women or girls involved 
in women/girls only consultation 
meetings. 
 
ESIA report documents main issues 
raised by women and girls in 
consultation meetings.  
 
ESIA report documents how men 
were made aware of the need to 
 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
conduct stakeholder 
engagement as part 
of studies described 
in Item 1.1.  
 
Budget is included 
under Item 1.1. 
 
CFM and Project Staff 
time. 
 
 
Page 238

=== PAGE 242 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
131 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
consult directly with women and 
girls.  
2.2 
Design and 
operationalise 
community grievance 
mechanisms that 
provide women and 
girls with confidence 
that the system 
provides redress and 
accountability on any 
form of GBV 
including SEAH. 
X 
X 
X 
Use stakeholder 
engagement with 
women and girls to 
understand how to 
operationalise a 
grievance mechanism 
that women and girls 
are ready to use.  
 
Put in place 
appropriate 
grievance mechanism 
and make women 
and girls aware of it, 
as well as the 
situations they would 
use it in. 
ESIA report documents women and 
girls’ recommendations for grievance 
mechanism.  
 
Number and proportion of 
grievances received from women 
and girls, with indication of type of 
grievance.  
 
Number of grievances received from 
women and girls that have been 
resolved, with an indication of the 
type of grievance.  
External experts 
(consultants) to 
develop grievance 
mechanism as part of 
ESIA (Item 1.1).  
 
Project Company 
staff to implement 
and communicate 
the grievance 
mechanism. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
Budget is included 
under Item 1.1. 
 
CFM and Project staff 
time to .  
2.3 
Support community-
led WASH 
management 
committees, as well 
as community 
governance 
mechanisms for 
X 
X 
X 
Provide training and 
support to male and 
female committee 
members so that 
female members are 
able to represent the 
views of women and 
Percentage of committees taking 
proactive steps to ensure women’s 
voices are heard, with examples of 
how women’s voices inform 
committee decision-making.  
  
External experts 
(consultants) to 
provide training if 
required.   
 
Project Company 
staff to monitor, and 
Budget for external 
experts to be 
determined and 
allocated if required.  
 
CFM and Project staff  
time. 
Page 239

=== PAGE 243 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
132 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
initiatives relating to 
ocean ecosystems 
and port 
infrastructure, to 
operate in a way that 
allows women’s 
experiences to 
influence decision-
making. 
men; provide space 
for women 
representatives to 
have a say in 
committee decision-
making.  
 
Collect data from 
committees on how 
members are 
representing the 
views of women and 
how women’s voices 
have informed 
committee decision-
making.  
collect and report 
data. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
 
 
Opportunity 3: inclusive employment opportunities 
3.1 
Proactively recruit 
women into WASH  
investments and/or 
in community 
development 
programmes. 
X 
 
 
Identify roles in 
WASH enterprises for 
which women can be 
proactively hired. 
Make training and 
support available for 
women and men 
hired. Conduct 
awareness-raising on 
Percentage of positions in WASH 
enterprises held by women, 
disaggregated (where possible) by 
type of position e.g. management 
role, service provider role.  
External experts 
(consultants) to 
develop recruitment 
strategy and provide 
training if required.   
 
Project Company 
staff to implement 
recruitment strategy 
Budget for external 
experts to be 
determined and 
allocated if required.  
 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
 
 
Page 240

=== PAGE 244 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
133 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
the rationale and 
benefits of engaging 
women in WASH 
enterprises, 
especially with men, 
to manage any 
potential backlash. 
and collect and 
report data.  
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
Reimbursable 
costs(expenses). 
 
 
3.2 
Ensure that projects 
to support 
sustainable practices 
in oceans-based 
industries address 
structural barriers to 
women’s livelihoods 
in related industries. 
 
 
 
X 
 
Account for 
gendered norms 
which restrict 
women’s time use 
and mobility in 
project design to 
ensure accessibility 
and meaningful 
participation. 
Actively seek to 
tackle discriminatory 
norms which limit 
women’s livelihoods 
opportunities in 
oceans-based 
industries to support 
their participation in 
the formal economy 
and in more 
Percentage of women participating 
in oceans-related industries, 
disaggregated by formal vs. informal 
economy, and (where possible) by 
value chain portion.  
External experts 
(consultants) to 
develop programme/ 
strategy if required.   
 
Project Company 
staff to implement 
programme/strategy 
and collect and 
report data. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
Budget for external 
experts to be 
determined and 
allocated if required.  
 
CFM and Project staff 
time. Reimbursable 
costs (expenses). 
 
Page 241

=== PAGE 245 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
134 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
profitable parts of 
value chains. 
3.3 
Proactively recruit 
women to the 
operation of climate-
resilient ports and 
support their 
meaningful 
integration and 
progression. 
 
 
X 
Identify roles in port 
operations for which 
women can be 
proactively hired. 
Attract female 
recruits by providing 
training incentives 
and offer mentoring 
to female employees 
to support their 
progression into 
operational and 
management 
positions. Ensure a 
supportive working 
environment, which 
includes family-
friendly HR facilities 
Percentage of positions in climate-
resilient ports held by women, 
disaggregated (where possible) by 
level of seniority and type of 
position. 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
develop recruitment 
strategy and provide 
training if required.   
 
Project Company 
staff to implement 
recruitment strategy 
and collect and 
report data.  
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
Budget for external 
experts to be 
determined and 
allocated if required.  
 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
 
Reimbursable costs  
 
Page 242

=== PAGE 246 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
135 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
and appropriate 
sanitation facilities.   
Opportunity 4: Monitoring and learning 
4.1 
Monitor project level 
progress in 
benefitting women 
and girls. 
X 
X 
X 
Incorporate relevant 
indicators and 
methodologies for 
monitoring progress 
against project 
gender objectives 
into project 
monitoring plans. 
Review progress 
regularly with EPCs. 
All projects include indicators204 in 
project monitoring plans to measure 
the number of women and girls 
benefitting, who these women and 
girls are (chronically poor, 
indigenous, women with disabilities 
etc.) and how they are benefitting.   
 
Qualitative evidence of how different 
types of women and girls (poor, 
chronically poor, indigenous, with 
disabilities etc.) have benefitted from 
improved infrastructure and 
associated employment 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
define indicators as 
part of the local 
gender analysis and 
action plan. 
 
 
Project Company 
staff to implement 
system for the 
collection of data 
against the defined 
indicators. 
 
Budget is included 
under Item 1.1. 
 
CFM and Project staff 
time. 
 
  
 
204 Indicators will capture SDG-related benefits, as described in D3 of the proposal, and especially benefits accruing to women in relation to: employment, working conditions, financial resilience, livelihoods, time 
spent fetching water, incidence of WASH related disease and associated care burden.  
Page 243

=== PAGE 247 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
136 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
opportunities, as well as protection 
of oceans ecosystems.  
 
EPCs demonstrate reasonable 
progress against agreed indicators 
over the reporting timeframe and 
provide qualitative evidence of how 
women and girls have benefitted.  
 
CFM staff to monitor 
Project compliance.   
  
4.2 
Monitor Fund level 
progress in 
benefitting women 
and girls through CI2. 
X 
X 
X 
Incorporate gender-
focused key 
performance 
indicators into the 
Fund’s impact 
framework. Review 
progress against 
indicators regularly. 
Fund impact framework includes 
indicators205 to measure the number 
of women and girls benefitting, who 
these women and girls are 
(chronically poor, indigenous, 
women with disabilities etc.) and 
how they are benefitting.   
 
Data showing how the numbers of 
women and girls the Fund has 
benefitted and how they have 
benefitted available annually. 
 
CFM Head of ESG 
supported by 
Regional ESG 
Managers to 
incorporate relevant 
indicators into Fund 
impact framework, 
prepare reports, and 
monitor the Project 
Companies.   
CFM staff time  
 
 
Cross-cutting issues to create an enabling environment 
 
205 Indicators will capture SDG-related benefits, as described in D3 of the proposal, and especially benefits accruing to women in relation to: employment, working conditions, financial resilience, livelihoods, time 
spent fetching water, incidence of WASH related disease and associated care burden.  
Page 244

=== PAGE 248 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
137 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
5.1 
Proactively hire a 
gender-balanced and 
diverse team into 
Project Companies. 
N/A 
Seek out suitably 
qualified women for 
Project Company 
roles, adjusting 
working practices 
where doing so 
alleviates critical 
barriers to 
employment. 
Number and percentage of Project 
Company team positions held by 
women. 
 
Percentage of interviewees for 
Project Company positions who are 
women. 
 
Evidence of Project Companies 
making adjustments to ‘normal’ 
working practices to enable women 
to take on Project Company 
positions e.g., adjustment to normal 
working hours, to limit time spent in 
the office. 
Project Company to 
develop and 
implement gender 
sensitive recruitment 
strategy. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
compliance. 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
5.2 
Encourage more 
women into senior 
roles in Project 
Companies. 
N/A 
Scope out and 
implement measures 
that will encourage 
women to study 
relevant STEM 
subjects at tertiary 
level and gain 
practical experience 
in the WASH 
industry. 
Project Companies have agreed a set 
of actions to encourage women to 
study relevant STEM subjects at 
tertiary level, with evidence of 
actions being implemented.  
Project Company to 
develop and 
implement gender 
sensitive recruitment 
strategy. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
compliance. 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
 
Page 245

=== PAGE 249 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
138 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
5.3 
Develop and 
implement project-
specific Gender 
Action Plans. 
N/A 
Project level Gender 
Action Plans will set 
out actions to 
promote gender 
equality within the 
Project Company and 
on the project itself. 
Project Company has approved 
Gender Action Plan, with evidence of 
its implementation.  
External experts to 
conduct local gender 
analysis and 
preparation of action 
plan. 
 
 
Project staff to 
implement plan.  
 
CFM staff time to 
monitor compliance. 
 
Budget is included 
under Item 1.1. 
 
CFM and Project staff 
time. 
 
Reimbursable costs 
(expenses).  
5.4 
Develop and 
implement a project-
specific gender 
equality policy. 
N/a 
The project’s gender 
equality policy will 
set out the 
company’s 
commitments to 
gender equality in 
the Project 
Company’s internal 
operations and 
through the 
investment. 
Communicate to staff 
the main points in 
Project Company has an approved 
Gender Equality Policy.  
 
Evidence that Project Company staff 
are aware of the contents of the 
Gender Equality Policy and the 
Company’s associated behavioural 
expectations.  
CFM Head of ESG 
supported by 
Regional ESG 
Managers to develop 
policy; roll out to 
Project Companies, 
and conduct survey 
to assess awareness. 
 
CFM staff to monitor 
and compliance. 
 
CFM and Project staff 
time. 
 
 
Page 246

=== PAGE 250 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
139 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
the policy, 
particularly in 
relation to gender 
discrimination, 
gender-based 
violence and 
harassment. 
Project staff to 
implement policy and 
report relevant data.  
5.5 
Build CFM and 
Project Company 
staff understanding 
of gender equality 
and women’s 
empowerment. 
N/A 
Develop and deliver 
training to build 
gender awareness 
and skills in 
promoting gender 
equality within the 
Company and in the 
project investment.   
Percentage of Project Company staff 
who have completed gender 
awareness and skills training. 
 
Pre- and post-training survey 
demonstrates that the majority of 
staff have an improved 
understanding of i) gender 
differences and their root causes, ii) 
how gender differences affect who 
benefits from WASH/oceans 
infrastructure development, and iii) 
how the Project Company can ensure 
women and girls benefit 
proportionately from WASH/oceans 
infrastructure development.  
 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
develop and deliver 
training. 
 
Budget to be defined 
and allocated based on 
Consultant proposal.   
 
.  
 
CFM and Project staff 
time to attend gender 
awareness and skills 
building training.  
5.6 
Equip the Health, 
Safety, Social and 
Environmental teams 
N/A 
Provide gender 
focused training and 
All ESIA processes designed and 
implemented to: 
External experts 
(consultants) to 
Budget to be defined 
and allocated based on 
Consultant proposal.   
Page 247

=== PAGE 251 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
140 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
within the Project 
Companies with the 
skills necessary to 
promote gender 
equality through 
infrastructure 
investments and 
community 
development 
projects. 
mentoring support to 
the Team. 
• 
Consult with a range of women 
and girls.  
• 
Identify ways in which the needs 
of women and girls can be met 
through the project investment 
or associated community 
development actions.  
develop and deliver 
training. 
 
CFM staff to manage 
external experts 
(consultants).  
 
CFM staff time. 
 
Project staff time to 
participate in training 
and mentoring.  
 
 
5.7 
Incorporate 
considerations of 
gender equality and 
the specific needs of 
women into the staff 
grievance mechanism 
in Project 
Companies. 
N/A 
Make staff aware of 
the staff grievance 
mechanism and the 
circumstances when 
they might call upon 
it.  
Evidence that Project Company staff 
are aware of the staff grievance 
mechanism and how they can use it 
to express concerns relating to 
gender discrimination and/or sexual 
harassment.  
 
Number and percentage of staff 
grievances relating to gender 
discrimination and/or sexual 
harassment.  
 
Number of staff grievances relating 
to gender discrimination and/or 
sexual harassment resolved, with 
indication of any action taken.  
CFM Head of ESG 
supported by 
Regional ESG 
Managers to support 
with design of 
mechanism. 
 
Project staff to 
implement, 
communicate and 
manage the 
grievance 
mechanism.  
 
 
 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
Page 248

=== PAGE 252 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
141 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
5.8 
Hold Project 
Company staff 
accountable for 
demonstrating 
gender equal 
behaviours. 
N/A 
Integrate 
expectations of 
gender equal 
behaviours into staff 
specifications and 
performance 
appraisal systems. 
Appraise staff 
performance against 
these in normal 
appraisal processes. 
All Project Company job descriptions 
set out expectations of gender equal 
staff behaviour.  
 
All staff appraisals reflect on and 
document performance against 
expectations of gender equal staff 
behaviours. 
CFM Head of ESG 
supported by 
Regional ESG 
Managers and 
Project Company 
leadership.  
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
5.9 
Ensure principal 
contractors take 
steps to promote 
gender equality.  
N/A 
Obligations will be 
incorporated into 
contractor contracts 
and monitored 
through normal 
review processes.  
Actions by which Principal 
contractors will promote gender 
equality are incorporated into all 
Project Company contracts with 
relevant indicators incorporated into 
project monitoring frameworks  
 
Principal contractors report 
reasonable progress against agreed 
gender related indicators over 
reporting timeframe and provide 
qualitative evidence of how women 
and girls have benefitted. 
 
 
CFM Head of ESG 
supported by 
Regional ESG 
Managers and 
Project Company 
staff to identify, 
agree and 
incorporate into 
contracts relevant 
actions for Project 
Companies to 
promote gender 
equality.  
 
CFM and Project staff 
time.  
 
Reimbursable costs 
(expenses). 
Page 249

=== PAGE 253 ===
Climate Fund Managers 
142 
Gender Analysis & Integration Action Plan 
 
Components and 
Main Activities 
Sector Relevance 
Description 
Indicators 
Lead Responsibility 
Budget Allocation 
WASH 
Ocean 
ecosystems 
Port 
infrastructure 
Staff time to review 
Project Companies 
progress reports 
against gender 
equality related 
actions..  
Page 250

=== PAGE 254 ===
Page 251
