=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20117
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20117
creationDate: D:20220425174651+09'00'
modDate: D:20220428005157+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP186 
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
25 April 2022 
Meeting of the Board 
16– 19 May 2022 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Provisional Agenda Item 05 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a)
A funding proposal summary titled “India E-Mobility Financing Program” submitted by
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML);
b)
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s);
c)
Environmental and Social report(s) Disclosure;
d)
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “India E-Mobility Financing Program” submitted by 
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML) is being circulated on a limited 
distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of 
certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                           1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s)                 78 
Environmental and Social report(s) Disclosure  
 
 
 
 
            79 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                           81 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s               90 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                   92

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
India E-mobility Financing Program 
Country(ies): 
India 
Accredited Entity: 
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML) 
Date of first submission: 
[2021/09/13]  
Date of current submission 
[2022/04/25]  
Version number 
[V.4]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
Section H 
ANNEXES 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to annexes such as
feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
•
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in the funding
proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all relevant documents.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. Proposals
exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard time.
•
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
•
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be disclosed
on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information
that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure
in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-MAAML-India-[2022/04/25]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒ Low-emission transport 
100.0 % 
100.0 % 
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
9.5 MtCO2 2 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
1,497 million USD  
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
200 million USD 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the 
funding proposal. 
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the investment are 
expected to be effective. This is different from the project / programme implementation period. 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☐ Grant 
Enter number 
 
☐ Loan  
Enter number 
☐ Guarantee 
Enter number 
☒ Equity  
 
  USD 200 million 
☐ Results-based payment  Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
10 years from Funded Activity 
Agreement (FAA) effective 
date. This may be extended 
for a further two consecutive 
two-year periods following 
appropriate approvals which 
will be elaborated in the FAA. 
A.12. Total lifespan 
Electric buses and four wheelers 
have a lifespan of ~15 years. Electric 
Vehicle (EV) charging stations have a 
lifespan of ~25 years. Given the 
nascency of the technology, there is 
wide ranging views on these 
estimates. 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
120 days from GCF Board 
Approval.  
 
  
 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the Accredited Entity’s 
(AE’s) safeguard policy and GCF 
ESS Standards to assess your 
Funding Proposal (FP) category. 
 
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒  No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
As per the envisaged transaction structure, there will be multiple Executing Entities 
across Singapore and India (refer to section B.4 – Implementation arrangements for 
further details). 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges being faced by India. Between 1901-2018, India’s average temperature 
rose by 0.7°C4 primarily led by an increase in Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emissions, which have more than doubled 
from 1.2 GtCO2 in 2005 to 2.6 GtCO2 in 2018.5 This rapid growth in GHG emissions has been driven by multiple factors, 
such as high population growth rate, increasing levels of industrialisation and urbanisation. This increase in average 
temperature has already affected the livelihood of millions of people, with more frequent sporadic climatic events such 
as cloud bursts, flash floods, prolonged droughts, etc. becoming a norm. 
By 2100, it is projected that temperatures will rise by approximately 4.7°C to 5.5°C6 resulting in an exponential increase 
in extreme climatic events, vector borne diseases, food shortage, migration, and loss of livelihoods, all of which will 
have adverse impact on India’s economic development. According to Oxford Economics, India could lose 90% of its 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 2100 if active steps are not taken to mitigate the GHG emissions7 (see mitigation 
profile of India under section B.1, as well as discussions under section B.2 and D.4). 
 
4 https://reliefweb.int/report/india/assessment-climate-change-over-indian-region-report-ministry-earth-sciences-moes 
5 https://www.eurekalert.org/news-releases/914976 
6 https://reliefweb.int/report/india/assessment-climate-change-over-indian-region-report-ministry-earth-sciences-moes 
7 https://www.livemint.com/news/india/india-s-gdp-could-fall-90-by-2100-due-to-climate-change-analysis-11594187614729.html

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 
Whilst the Indian government has been taking proactive steps pursuing various mitigation and adaptation activities in 
the form of strong policy support for renewable energy and electric mobility sectors to reduce GHG emissions, further 
support is required to help India achieve its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) agreed under the Paris 
Agreement and COP26 pledges. According to a recent report by Lifegate,8 India needs investment of approximately 
USD 2.5 trillion between 2015 and 2030, or USD 170 billion / year, to meet its NDCs by 2030. Further, a recent study 
by Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) reports that India is currently mobilising less than 25% of the investment needed to 
reach this target9.  
 
Additionally, since early 2020, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic has pushed the government to change its priorities, 
shifting substantial focus to creating an effective healthcare ecosystem to deliver quality primary care to citizens. Due 
to the recessionary impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with other socio-economic issues, government finances 
remain constrained. In FY21, India’s fiscal deficit was 9.3%.10 This is projected to be 6.8% in FY22,11 significantly above 
its target of 3.0% set under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act 2003 (a law enacted to 
institutionalise financial discipline, strengthen fiscal prudence and improve macroeconomic management).12 This may 
cause a substantial budgetary shortfall, limiting the government’s ability to accelerate and deliver GHG emission 
reducing projects going forwards. 
 
In the above context, the proposed Programme (the Programme) aims to leverage GCF and commercial investor 
capital to accelerate the decarbonisation of the Indian economy by focusing on electrification of India’s transport 
sector. This will be enabled by supporting faster adoption of electric vehicles and growth of associated infrastructure, 
replacing, and limiting the new purchase of, traditional Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles.  
 
The main objectives of the Programme are as follows: 
1. to provide suitable financial solutions (for example, operationally integrated, performance guaranteed leases 
or structured credit instruments) to electric vehicle owners and operators; 
2. to provide tailored financial solutions to ancillary areas to further develop the electric vehicle ecosystem, such 
as charging infrastructure and batteries; 
3. using financial solutions to mitigate current user concerns, including high upfront costs, residual value risk and 
reliability; 
4. to facilitate development of EV ecosystem through investments, partnerships, and capability development of 
market participants; 
5. to set a high benchmark and continually improve the efficiency of services in the Indian EV domain via 
improvement of systems, processes, and resources; 
6. to provide a competitively priced solutions that enhance the long-term Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) 
competitiveness of EVs vis-à-vis ICE vehicles, in alignment with the Indian government’s policy; and 
7. to mobilise significant amount of nascent institutional capital into the electrification of India’s road transport 
sector.  
 
The Programme is seeking USD 200 million from GCF, and an additional USD 205 million from commercial investors, 
to set up an India focused E-mobility Financing Platform (the Platform).13 It will be managed by Macquarie Asset 
Management (MAM), the world’s largest infrastructure asset manager,14 with an established presence in India. If 
successful, it is anticipated that the Platform will access local and international debt markets for ~USD 1.1 billion to 
further grow its operations, and may draw in additional equity capital from commercial investors as EV-ICE cost parity 
approaches transitioning to an unsubsidised enduring commercial enterprise.  
 
The Programme is innovatively structured to a) address some of the key barriers limiting the accelerated growth of the 
EV sector, b) complement existing initiatives of the government and other private players, and c) align with India’s 
NDCs, National Climate Action Plan (NCAP), COP26 pledges, as well various other policy and regulatory initiatives. 
 
 
8 https://www.lifegate.com/india-climate-finance-sdgs 
9 CPI, 2020 
10 https://www.livemint.com/economy/indias-fiscal-deficit-at-9-3-of-gdp-in-fy21-down-from-revised-estimate-of-95-11622459720813.html 
11 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/india-to-breach-fiscal-deficit-target-in-fy22-fitch-
solutions/articleshow/82451801.cms?from=mdr 
12 https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/faqs/budget-faqs/budget-what-is-frbm-act-why-is-it-in-focus-this-
year/articleshow/80454944.cms 
13 Establishment of the Platform is subject to Macquarie Group approvals. 
14 IPE Real Assets 2021 – Top 100 Infrastructure Investment Managers.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
The Programme aims to introduce first of its kind financing solutions (operating and finance leases and other 
structured credit solutions) into, potentially, one of the largest EV markets in the world, to reduce high upfront capex 
associated with EVs, impediments around EV charging infrastructure and uncertainty around commercial EV 
performance. Presently, these are not offered at scale by existing market participants. The constrained availability of 
suitable financial products is primarily due to a limited understanding of the EV ecosystem, the relatively small current 
market size and residual value concerns. The proposed Programme is poised to change that. By enhancing the 
availability of credit and introducing new financial solutions in the EV market that accept operational performance and 
other risks, the Programme seeks to increase the attractiveness of EV ownership, help Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) / sponsors recycle capital faster and cause EVs to become the preferred mode of transport 
among fleet operators.  
 
Initially the Programme will focus on select segments of the EV ecosystem, such as e-buses, shared fleets and electric 
charging infrastructure. It will then slowly diversify its portfolio and potentially expand into retail segment as more sub-
sectors within the EV value chain gain scale and prominence. Over the implementation period, the Programme is 
expected is to mobilise up to USD 2.1 billion15 of capital into the sector, and targets to reduce ~9.5 MtCO2e over its 
lifetime. 
 
Apart from the above, the Programme will assist India to achieve energy security by reducing its dependence on oil 
imports, which forms ~80% of the total import bill of the country.16 It will also help in the creation of new jobs and 
stimulate economic activity, with a corollary of empowering women and reducing gender bias. Any capital investment 
and support for the local economy will be extremely critical during the times of pandemic, where millions of people have 
lost jobs and are pushed to poverty each day. Lastly, it will promote environmental sustainability and increase health 
benefits through the reductionof pollution. It is also noteworthy that the Executing Entities, together with the Accredited 
Entity, will promote strong corporate governance standards and manage fiduciary risks in line with GCF policies and 
requirements (as agreed in GCF’s Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA)) as 
well as international best practices for climate impact planning and monitoring, environmental and social management, 
and gender mainstreamed approach. 
 
15 Includes redeployment of internal accruals  
16 Economic Times Publication on “India’s crude oil import – April 2020”.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
17 https://cdn.odi.org/media/documents/ODI-JR-CostClimateChangeIndia-final.pdf 
18 As above. 
19 As above. 
20 As above. 
21 As above. 
22 As above. 
23 As above. 
24 As above. 
25 As above. 
26 As above. 
27 Water Risk Filter: Launched in 2012, the Water Risk Filter is a practical online tool that helps companies and investors assess and respond 
to water-related risks facing their operations and investments across the globe (https://waterriskfilter.panda.org/). 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Overall climate rationale  
The aim of this Programme is to facilitate the reduction of greenhouse gases and other emissions from the road 
transport sector in India through the accelerated adoption of electric vehicles. This can be enabled through targeted 
investments across the e-mobility value chain, which can help address some of the key issues impeding the sector, 
such as high upfront capex, technology / obsolescence risk, range and operational performance anxiety, inadequate 
availability of charging infrastructure as well as financing solutions through the existing channels. The envisaged 
Programme can help create an enabling environment for local investment and ultimately catalyse the scaling up of the 
nascent market.  
Climate context 
How has India’s climate already changed? 
India has varied weather and climatic patterns across the country, with an average temperature of 2°C17 in Jammu and 
Kashmir (North India) vis-à-vis 29°C18 in southern India. The amount and frequency of rainfall is equally diverse, with 
parts of Meghalaya receiving more than 4,000 mm19 of precipitation annually, compared to parts of Thar Desert in 
north-western India which receive less than 100 mm20 of rainfall every year. The rainfall in each region is primarily 
affected by two weather systems, South-West Monsoon (June to September) which brings the majority of the rainfall 
in the country, and North-East Monsoon (October to December) which plays an important role in southern India. 
Given the size, topography, and climatic diversity across India, the impact of climate change on each region is varied. 
According to a recent Indian government report, the average temperature across the country increased 0.62°C over 
the last 100 years.21 Even though the temperature increase is lower than the global average, severe impacts are already 
being felt.  
Between 1985 and 2009, western and southern India experienced 50% more heatwaves than in the previous 25 
years.22 Between 1950 and 2015, central India experienced a threefold increase in extreme rainfall and flood events, 
leading to death of thousands and displacement of millions.23 This is in contrast to 6% decline in average precipitation 
during monsoon events between 1951 and 2015, which has been primarily been offset by melting glaciers of the Hindu 
Kush region, which have retreated at an average 18 metres per year over the last four decades.24 Further, with rising 
levels of urbanisation, economic activity, and variations in weather patterns across the country, water is becoming more 
scarce with each passing day. Today, one billion people in India experience severe water scarcity for at least one month 
each year, with 180 million facing water scarcity all year round.25  
How will India’s climate change going forward? 
As climate change continues, its impact will be more profound. For India, the intensity of the impact of climate change 
will increase due to rising levels of greenhouse gases, led by rapid population growth, urbanisation, strong industrial 
growth, and a significant increase in average household income. 
According to a recent report, the level of precipitation, especially during monsoons, and glaciers in the Hindu Kush 
region will significantly reduce over the next few decades. Consequently, the flow of water in some of the main river 
systems, such as Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra, will fall by 8.4%, 17.6% and 19.6% respectively by mid-century 
compared to the 2000s. This is expected to result in severe water scarcity and displacement of more than 270 million 
people in the Indus and Brahmaputra basins.26 According to the WWF’s Water Risk Filter Tool,27 by 2050, 30 cities in

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
28 30 Indian cities likely to face acute water risks by 2050: WWF (livemint.com). 
29 https://www.deccanherald.com/science-and-environment/36mn-in-india-to-face-threat-of-annual-floods-by-2050-771934.html  
30 Kahn et al, 2019 
31 https://cdn.odi.org/media/documents/ODI-JR-CostClimateChangeIndia-final.pdf 
32 Ibid. 
33 Nixon (2020) 
34 Ibid. 
35 “Reducing Carbon Emissions from Transport Projects” Evaluation Knowledge Brief, ADB, July 2010. 
India are expected to suffer the largest rise in water risk,28 and nearly 36 million people in India will be threatened by 
flooding annually if greenhouse gas emissions are not reduced.29 Additionally, the level of cyclonic storms in the Bay 
of Bengal region is expected is to double by 2070-2100, compared to the baseline period of 1961-1990, leaving millions 
of low-income households susceptible to food shortage, loss of livelihoods and vector borne diseases.  
The economic impact of the above will be significant. Climate change has already reduced the pace of poverty reduction 
and increased the level of inequality in the country. According to Burke and Tanutama (2019), the districts that have 
warmed the fastest have seen their GDPs grow 56% less on average than those that have warmed the slowest. On an 
overall basis, climate change could result in India’s GDP falling 2.6% by 210030, even if the global temperature increase 
is below 2°C,31 and 13.4% if the temperate increase is 4°C.32 Further, without the current costs of global warming, 
India’s GDP would be 25% higher than it’s current levels33. Additionally, Nixon predicts that, if temperatures increase 
by 3°C,34 India’s GDP will be 90% lower in 2100 that it would have been without climate change.  
These factors put India at a critical inflection point wherein there is a need to balance economic growth, population 
health, recovery from the pandemic and GHG emissions to limit climate change impact. India’s emissions reduction 
pathway is paramount to the fight against climate change both locally and globally.  
India’s fight against climate change 
As a result of increasing GHG emissions and exposure to the effects of climate change, the Indian government has put 
several policies and targets in place to support its contribution to reducing global emissions. This is outlined in India’s 
NDCs  and COP26 pledges. Furthermore, the government is willing to take on a more ambitious target based on 
investment and support from both public and private sectors.35  
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 
 
COP26 pledges 
At the COP26 meeting in Glasglow in November 2021, India pledged itself to five unconditional targets in order to 
improve its commitments to climate change and lead the world’s decarbonisation drive. These include: 
1. increase non-fossil energy capacity to 500 GW (gigawatts) by 2030; 
2. meet 50 percent of energy requirements from renewable energy by 2030;

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
36 Reducing Carbon Emissions from Transport Projects” Evaluation Knowledge Brief, ADB, July 2010 pp 01. 
37 https://www.iea.org/countries/india#overview  
38 International Transport Forum (ITF), “Decarbonising India’s Transport System”, 2021. ITF analysis prepared with the support of the IEA 
Mobility model. 
39 Sources: ITF analysis prepared with the support of the IEA Mobility Model. Results for freight transport exclude domestic aviation. ITF 
analysis based on activity data outlined in earlier figures and energy use (in 2018) of 2 litres of gasoline equivalent (Lge) per 100 km for 
two-wheelers, 3 Lge per 100 km for three-wheelers, 6.4 Lge per 100 km for cars, 36 Lge per 100 km for buses, 7 Lge per 100 km for LCVs, 
26 Lge per 100 km for MFTs and 46 Lge per 100 km for HFTs. Energy intensities are 0.04 MJ/pkm for passenger rail services, 0.2 MJ/tkm 
for freight rail and 1.35 MJ/pkm for passenger aviation. Energy intensities for cars in earlier years reflect variations in energy intensity. Data 
for 2020 rely on estimations that have a higher degree of uncertainty than earlier years. See also the note to Figures 3 and 4 regarding 
other data uncertainties. Data for rail are informed by IEA (2019a); for cars, by IEA (2019b); for medium and heavy road vehicles, by IEA 
(2017) and Delgado et al. (2016); for LCVs, estimates are consistent with data available from Deo (2021); for aviation, data are informed 
by IEA (2020c) and ICAO (2020). 
40 Sources: ITF analysis prepared with the support of the IEA Mobility Model. Results are based on energy use data outlined in earlier figures. 
Emissions related with biofuels are informed by the analysis developed in Prussi et al. (2020) with simplified assumptions about attribution 
to different production pathways. Data for 2020 rely on estimations that have a higher degree of uncertainty than earlier years. See also 
the note to Figure 1 regarding other data uncertainties. CO2 intensities for fossil fuels are from IPCC (2019); carbon intensities of electricity 
generation are from IEA (2020c). 
3. reduce the total projected carbon emissions by 1 billion tonnes by 2030; 
4. reduce the carbon intensity of the economy by less than 45 percent; and 
5. achieve net zero carbon by 2070. 
 
The role of transport sector in emission generation 
Present status 
According to an Asian Development Bank (ADB) report, the transport sector accounts for 23% of all energy-related 
CO2 emissions globally.36 However, in India, it contributes only 13% of total carbon dioxide emissions despite being the 
third largest GHG emitting sector in the country. Further, as per IEA, carbon-dioxide emissions from India’s transport 
sector have more than tripled since 1990,37 of which road transport contributes ~90%. This is driven by: 
• 
a significant increase in passenger and freight transport activity – Passenger and freight traffic by inland mode 
have both tripled between 2000 and 2020 to 6 trillion passenger kms and ~1.8 trillion tonne kms respectively, 
which has been predmoniately driven by the road sector,38 and; 
• 
the sector’s high reliance on fossil fuels – The Indian transport sector has grown 50% since 2010, and now 
accounts for 20% of the country’s final energy use (in terms of exajoules). Oil products contribute 95% of final 
energy used in the transport sector, with natural gas, biofuels, etc. comprising of the remaining portion. Further, 
as the energy use has increased over the last two decades, GHG emissions too have increased, implying a 
strong causal relationship between the two (refer to the below charts for more details).  
 
Figure: Energy use by mode in passenger and freight transport in India (exajoules), 2000-202039 
 
Figure: CO2 emissions by passenger and freight traffic in India (MtCO2e), 2000-202040

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
41 Decarbonising the Indian transport sector pathways and policies, Climate Action Tracker, December 2020. 
42 https://rmi.org/insight/mobilizing-finance-for-evs-in-india/ 
 
Going forward 
To limit the impact of growing GHG emissions from India’s road sector, a multi pronged approach is required. According 
to a report by Climate Action Tracker, the electrification of vehicles is “absolutely essential” if India is to achieve net 
zero emissions from its road sector by 2050. The electrification of vehicles has the potential to reduce emissions by 
570 MtCO2e/year, which is 2.8 times more of a reduction than can be achieved through innovative urban planning and 
the use of alternate fuels.41 However, to achieve this ambitious target, all new vehicles sales will need to be electric by 
2035, a mammoth task given the electric vehicle penetration was just 0.7% of total vehicle sales in FY20.  
Figure: Annual emissions from the transport sector until 2050 (MtCO2e) 
 
Whilst both central and state governments have introduced policies and initiatives to promote electric vehicles over the 
last few years, such as the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and EV (FAME) subsidy scheme I and II, the 
National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP), and the vehicle scrappage policy, a lot more needs to be done to 
achieve the emission reduction targets mentioned above. According to a report by Niti Aayog, Govt. of India’s think 
tank, an estimated USD 266 billion of capital is required to be invested in the EV industry over next 10 years.42 To date, 
only USD 5-6 billion has been invested, the majority of which has been over the last 12 months. There are several key 
barriers that need to be addressed before significant private capital starts to invest. These include the high upfront cost 
of EVs, unproven operational performance, limited availability of financing, low product offerings from OEMs and 
inadequate infrastructure buildout, primarily charging stations (refer to section B.2 – Theory of Change for more details), 
all in the context of a very low operating margin business model. Robust solutions are required to address these issues 
before the EV industry can fulfil its role as a significant contributor to India’s climate change mitigation story. 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
43 Mobilising Finance for EVs in India: A Toolkit of Solutions to Mitigate Risks and Address Market Barriers, Niti Aayog and Rocky Mountain 
Institute, January 2021 PP 11. 
44 Mobilising Finance for EVs in India: A Toolkit of Solutions to Mitigate Risks and Address Market Barriers, Niti Aayog and Rocky Mountain 
Institute, January 2021 PP 1. 
45 On 19 Feb 2016, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway issued a draft notification of Bharat Stage (BS) VI emission standards, 
equivalent to Euro VI. The standards, as proposed, will take effect throughout the country for all light-duty and heavy-duty vehicles as well 
as two and three-wheelers manufactured on or after 1 Apr 2020. The BS VI standard specifies 10 ppm sulphur for gasoline and diesel fuels. 
The Programme intends to support the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the transport sector in India, aligned 
to GCF’s results management framework. This is expected to be achieved by providing enhanced and innovative 
financing (leasing and other financing products) across the e-mobility value chain, which will directly or indirectly 
overcome the current barriers to increased electrification of vehicles in India.  
Barriers 
There is a need to address the various challenges that have limited the e-mobility sector’s growth potential and 
prevented it from becoming a mainstream sector. Some of the key factors affecting the EV adoption are:  
1. Availability of financing:43 Improved access to attractive financing products will be a key growth driver for EV 
demand. High financing costs and uncertainty around long-term economics, including residual value, remain both 
real and perceived issues for financial investments. Risks associated with the nascency of the electric mobility 
ecosystem have given rise to investment barriers, such as high interest and insurance rates, short tenure, low loan-
to-value ratios, and requirements for high collateral value or corporate guarantees, all limiting retail / corporate 
customer interest. These issues are most pronounced for electric buses and four wheelers, and charging 
infrastructure, all of which have longer gestation periods and high per unit capex involvement. The envisaged 
Programme will seek to provide bespoke financing products in the target segments across the value chain to 
overcome these barriers.  
The investments made by the Platform (activity II below) will provide new financing options, improving the 
availability of, and risks assumed by, financing.  
 
2. Upfront cost: The high upfront cost of EVs is slowing down its adoption rate, despite lower running and maintenance 
costs associated with EVs vis-à-vis ICE vehicles. Demand for more affordable EV products is also expected, as 
consumers and businesses reduce spending in the short term due to COVID-19. This potential shift in consumer 
preferences may affect manufacturers’ investment and production decisions,44 which may slow the entire EV value 
chain evolution in India. Providing attractive financing solutions for better adoption by lowering the upfront capital 
outlay is required to accelerate growth of the sector, which is in its nascency in India. Furthermore, increased 
investment in the sector is expected to support a greater flow of capital into research and development, which 
should lower the cost of new EVs over time.  
The financing provided by the Platform (activity II below) is intended to target a substantial reduction in the 
upfront cost paid by the customers of EVs. The investments in charging infrastructure section (activity II) 
will increase India’s capacity to support more growth in EVs. Similarly, the increased EVs financed by the 
Platform will support the development of charging infrastructure, by the Platform or otherwise. 
 
3. Infrastructure buildout: Charging infrastructure is the backbone of electric mobility, but is also one of the key 
perceived barriers to EV adoption in India given its limited availability and long charging times. High operating costs, 
uncertain utilisation rates and unproven business models are some of the key challenges holding back existing and 
new EV charging stations operators from expanding their current presence. However, as technology develops, EV 
adoption continues, and financing becomes available, electricity distribution companies (DISCOMs), charging 
service providers, and other stakeholders can focus on building robust charging infrastructure networks. The 
Platform will seek to work with these stakeholders to finance charging infrastructure projects to propel overall EV 
adoption.  
 
4. Manufacturing and supply: EV battery manufacturing in India is still largely dependent on imports due to a lack of 
domestic supply of lithium, nickel and cobalt, the key raw materials and major cost drivers of EV batteries. Domestic 
manufacturing of advanced batteries and cells, electric motors, and other EV components are required to reduce 
the high cost of importing these critical components and equipment from international markets. OEM capital has 
recently focused on the migration of ICE vehicles to Bharat Stage VI (BSVI) standards,45 whilst the industry is 
experiencing lower sales due to COVID-19. This is hampering supply-side investment in EVs. The Patform’s 
investment in the EV space will provide OEMs / operators the necessary liquidity to recycle their capital and invest 
in enhancing their manufacturing and research and development (R&D) capabilities. The Platform will encourage 
this to be done in accordance with latest Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) standards.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
Establishment of the Platform and the financing provided by it, is expected to increase the penetration of 
EVs, support local manufacturing of vehicles in an inclusive and sustainable manner, as well as reduce 
upfront capital commitment from OEMs to invest further into R&D in the e-mobility space.  
 
5. Investor risk appetite and availability of investment opportunities: Increased investment across the e-mobility value 
chain is expected to support market development, grow existing business models, and encourage additional 
research and development. Without this investment, the barriers outlined above are expected to persist. Investment 
into the e-mobility sector in India has not yet achieved scale due to high perceived and real investment risks, and a 
limited number of investment opportunities that meet the risk appetite of large investors. Despite the increase in the 
quantum of investment over last few months, the aggregate investment amount is minimal compared to the potential 
size of the Indian EV market. Risk-taking capital is required to support commercial investors to invest and develop 
the sector to the point where there is increased commercial and maintenance risks appetite for the sector.  
Establishment of the Platform (activity I) provides an investment opportunity for commercial investors to 
invest in the e-mobility sector in India. Further investment and development of the sector through other 
activities will also help to reduce investment risks (real and perceived) associated with the sector.  
 
Activities and Outputs 
The activities of the Platform, as shown in the diagram below, will immediately and permanently increase the flow of 
private sector investment into the EV sector, assisting to overcome the barriers outlined above and enable delivery of 
the intended programme results and desired outcomes. 
1. Platform Establishment and Fundraising: The E-mobility Financing Programme will facilitate investment from GCF 
to the end beneficiaries whilst also crowding-in investment from other investors. MAM will use its vast and 
experienced capital raising capabilities to attract funds from commercial investors alongside GCF, which will be 
used to capitalise a “first of its kind” e-mobility focused financing platform in India. This platform will adopt best in 
class risk management, ESG, Diversity and Inclusion and IT and HR policies, along with other industry leading 
asset management frameworks. GCF’s capital will act as a risk-mitigating buffer providing downside protection to 
commercial investors. This is expected to help meet the risk-return expectations of commercial investors, 
consequently resulting in increased interest and higher availability of capital for the e-mobility sector.  
 
Relevant Output 
Description 
I. Commercial capital 
crowded-in 
• 
By establishing the Platform, investors will have an avenue to invest in the 
e-mobility sector in India which meets their risk / return requirements. 
 
2. Platform Investments, Monitoring and Exit: The Platform will provide operationally integrated financing products to 
overcome the barriers outlined above, either through scaling-up access to existing products, such as vehicle and 
project financing, or developing bespoke structures, such as operating and finance leases in the EV domain, to 
meet the needs of market participants. Financing will be provided across the e-mobility sector which will support an 
increased number of EVs, charging stations and other associated infrastructure across the e-mobility value chain. 
With the Platform being a MAM-managed vehicle, it will adopt best in class investment monitoring, workplace health 
and safety, environmental and social governance and risk management practices, hire an experienced and 
professional management team and leverage MAM’s industry leading standards for portfolio companies to deliver 
the desired results for investors. Once proof of concept is established using equity from GCF and commercial 
sources, it is anticipated that further capital will be mobilised from local and international debt markets, with the 
potential to raise further equity capital to enable continued growth. 
 
Relevant Output 
Description 
I. Commercial capital 
crowded-in 
• 
The Platform will support investment made by OEMs / operators / 
sponsors, enabling capital to be crowded-in. 
II. Electric vehicles 
financed by the Platform 
• 
The Platform will finance a number of electric vehicles based on 
transaction opportunities and market demand across different vehicle 
segments.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
46 Please note that the Platform will encourage the potential counterparties to use renewable energy as the primary source of energy to power 
the EV charging stations. To incentivise the use of renewable energy, Platform may provide certain incentives to potential counterparties if 
renewable energy use related targets are met. Irrespective of this, India’s electricity grid is getting increasingly decarbonised. Over the last 
5 years, the contribution of renewable energy in the overall energy mix has increased from 50 GW in January 2017 (15.9% of total capacity 
installed) [Source: CEA Monthly Installation Report, January 2017] to 105 GW in December 2021 (26.6% of total capacity installed) [Source: 
CEA Monthly Installation Report, December 2021], an average increase of ~10.8 GW per annum. Further, the central government has set 
a target to achieve 500 GW of renewable energy by 2030 (50% of all its energy requirements through renewable energy sources), as it 
looks to achieve its commitments under Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as per the Paris Agreement and meet its COP26 
pledges. This robust government focus on decarbonisation of India’s power sector will help to reduce the overall level of GHG emissions 
by the country and assist the Program in achieving part of its additionality targets. 
III. Charging stations built 
or financed by the Platform 
• 
The Platform will finance several charging stations based on transaction 
opportunities and market demand.46 
III. Investments made in 
other e-mobility sectors 
• 
The Platform may make investments in other e-mobility sectors and EV 
technologies based on transaction opportunities and market demand. 
 
3. Wind up of corporate structure: From an exit point of view, as outlined in section B.6, any partial or full exit from the 
Platform will be possible only when the EV financing market in India has or is becoming mature and offers high 
growth potential. At the time of exit, depending upon the market conditions, past performance and future growth 
estimates, the Platform is expected to attract significant interest from strategic and financial investors. Once either 
the SG Master Co. sells its stake in the SG Co, or the SG Co sells its stake in the Platform, within the exit period  
to a new investor, the exit proceeds received will be distributed to the investors, depending upon the cashflow 
distribution waterfall as provided in the Term Sheet. However, the winding up of the structure may take time, 
depending upon the nature of indemnities and warranties that may be offered to the buyer at the time of sale. 
 
Relevant Output 
Description 
I. Commercial capital 
crowded-in 
• 
The sale of the Platform is likely to attract new or existing market players 
who are looking to expand their investment in the e-mobility space.  
 
Outcomes 
This Programme is focused on crowding-in private sector capital to support the scaling-up of investment in e-mobility 
sector across India. There are two programme level outcomes: 
• 
Enabling environment for EV market established: Through the demonstration of innovative financing products, 
increased EVs on the road, and more charging infrastructure, it is expected that there will be an enabling 
environment for EVs to accelerate further, including an increased number of participants, new financial 
products, greater infrastructure, and developed domestic manufacturing and supply capabilities. 
• 
Increased penetration of electric vehicles in India: This is the fundamental outcome sought as a result of all 
the activities. This will be achieved both directly through investments made by the Platform (increasing number 
of e-vehicles and charging stations) but also indirectly through crowding-in commercial capital that is expected 
to expand operations and make independent investments (not linked to the Platform) which in turns will also 
increase the penetration of e-vehicles.  
 
Co-benefits 
 
• 
Decreased pollution: As outlined in section D.3 (co-benefits), greater penetration of EVs is expected to have a 
significant impact on air quality and related health benefits due to lower pollution in Indian cities. 
• 
Direct job creation: There is expected to be significant growth in the EV sector and a corresponding increase 
in financing solutions for such EVs. The Platform will create new jobs as part of this broader sectoral growth. 
Ultimately these outcomes contribute to achieving the GCF Results Area of reducing emissions through increased 
access to low-emission transport.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
 
B.2 (b).  Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Enabling 
environment 
for EVs 
established  
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Increased 
penetration of 
EVs in India 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Decreased 
pollution 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Direct job 
creation 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
The Indian E-Mobility Financing Programme’s aim is to accelerate decarbonisation of the Indian economy by focusing 
on sustainable and electrified road transport, enabled through faster adoption of electric vehicles and growth of 
associated infrastructure in the country. 
The main objectives of the Programme are: 
1. to provide suitable financial solutions (for example operationally integrated, performance guaranteed leases or 
structured credit instruments) to electric vehicle owners and operators; 
2. to provide tailored financial solutions to ancillary areas to further develop the electric vehicle ecosystem, such 
as charging infrastructure and batteries; 
3. using financial solutions to mitigate current user concerns, including high upfront costs, residual value risk and 
reliability; 
4. to facilitate development of EV ecosystem through investments, partnerships, and capability development of 
market participants; 
5. to set a high benchmark and continually improve the efficiency of services in the Indian electric vehicle domain 
via improvement of systems, processes, and resources; 
6. to provide competitively priced solutions that enhances competitiveness of EVs in terms of long-term cost of 
ownership vis-à-vis ICE vehicles, aligned with the Indian government’s policy; and 
7. to mobilise significant amount of nascent institutional capital into electrification of India’s road transport sector.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
47 Securing NBFC license from RBI is an iterative and collaborative process, which needs engagement with RBI. MAM will work with its 
advisors to prepare the right information package, which would include details about the shareholder, capitalization information and 
background on the management team, among other information, which puts it in the best position to secure this license. The process to 
secure NBFC license from the central bank will be initiated only after signing of the FAA. As per advise provided to MAM, the timelines to 
get this approval varies between 6 to 18 months subject to RBI requirements and internal processes 
The Programme is uniquely designed to offer ‘first of its kind’ financing solutions in the Indian e-mobility sector. The 
Programme is expected to create a wide impact in this sector by addressing the key gap hindering the uptake of electric 
vehicles viz. access to scalable and competitive financing solutions. The Programme will provide financing products 
and solutions at competitive rates to multiple domestic businesses and entrepreneurs, facilitating healthy competition 
in the space to further drive down costs and enabling “crowding-in” of commercial capital. 
The Programme is designed with a blueprint for success followed in other nascent technologies at early stages in their 
evolution. For example, in the renewable energy space, formation of Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(IREDA) as the pioneer for financing and promoting self-sustaining renewable energy has vastly contributed to the high 
growth and mature renewable energy market that operates in India today. 
The Programme is also in line with India’s NDCs as well as policy initiatives as outlined in section B.1. 
Part A – Programme description 
Legal Form 
Under the programme, a dedicated E-Mobility Financing Platform will be setup in India, that 
will be managed by Macquarie Asset Management (MAM) (more details provided below). 
This Platform (refer to section B.4 – Implementation Arrangements for more details on the 
proposed corporate structure) will adhere to all local licensing and regulatory requirements, 
including being registered as a Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) with India’s central 
bank, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). A NBFC license will be essential for the Platform to 
provide leasing and other credit solutions in the Indian market to both business and retail 
customers.47 
Currency 
While the investments from GCF and commercial investors will be in USD at the Limited 
Partner (LP) level (refer to section B.4 – Implementation Arrangements), financing provided 
by the Platform to counterparties in India will be in Indian Rupees (INR). 
Target Initial 
Equity Capital 
Commitment 
(Proof of 
Concept stage) 
USD 405 million, including USD 200 million of ‘first loss’ capital from GCF and USD 205 
million from commercial investors.  
The first loss coverage of GCF will be up to its share of capital commitment for all commercial 
investors coming with preferential shares across the proposed structure (refer to section B.4 
– Implementation Arrangement for more details). Further, any capital commitment by 
commercial investors across the chain will be counted as part of their target commitment of 
USD 205 million. Given the ‘market making’ nature of the program, GCF will invest a 
minimum of USD 50 million on the FAA effective date (First Close).  
These funds will be used to capitalise the above legal entity and enable its initial formation 
and growth as a proof of concept. If this is done successfully, it is envisaged that the next 
phase of growth will be funded by capital raises of ~USD 1.1 billion from local and 
international debt markets.  
The current business plan  does not incorporate additional equity injections from new 
investors during the implementation period. However, if the Platform successfully achieves 
its base case business plan, it is anticipated that additional equity will be secured from 
commercial investors to enable continued corporate growth. Determination in this regard will 
be taken later depending upon market conditions and future growth prospects.  
Investment 
Period 
5 years from the FAA effective date. 
However, note that the 5-year period for GCF to make disbursements is an approximation 
and, in reality, it will be driven by actual traction on the ground (the actual timelines may be

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
48 https://niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-01/RMI-EVreport-VF_28_1_21.pdf 
faster or slower). GCF will need to set aside the entire committed amount from the beginning 
and disburse the same as per the disbursement mechanism that will be detailed in the FAA.  
Implementation 
Period 
Implementation period will be 10 years from FAA effective date. It can be further extended 
by two consecutive two-year periods based on customary approvals which will be elaborated 
in the FAA. 
Platform’s 
guiding 
principles 
The Platform will be driven by a few guiding principles as below: 
1. Build a business that will provide “customer-centric” financing solutions to e-mobility 
companies in India. The Platform will build unique capabilities and partnerships that 
will underwrite the technology risks associated with electric vehicles and develop the 
ability to own and redeploy assets in the market if required.  
2. Focus primarily on the Business to Business (B2B) space. This will allow the 
Platform to address the key problem in the sector, which is access to sustainable 
and scalable capital for growing businesses. However, the Platform may 
strategically expand its coverage to the retail customer segment if there is a strategic 
requirement and requisite market conditions.  
3. In the B2B space, the Programme’s focus will be on the entire electric mobility value 
chain. However, given the nascency of the industry, few key sectors within the 
overall value chain, such as electric buses, shared 4W fleet and electric charging 
infrastructure, are expected to act as the anchor for the Programme. Other segments 
may include light and medium commercial vehicles (LCVs and MCVs), commercial 
2W and 3W fleet, old vehicle scrappage, battery recycling, or others. Additionally, 
the Platform will have flexibility to re-orient its financing focus depending on the 
emerging requirements and its ability to drive high impact.  
4. The Platform will seek to develop long-term partnerships with a few large OEMs / 
sponsors / operators who are actively present in the e-mobility space. It will work 
with them to promote strong Work, Health, Safety and Environment (WHSE) 
practices and focus the portfolio deployment in partnership with these large 
organisations, whilst seeking to create alignment around vehicle reliability and 
residual value. 
Target Sub-
Sectors 
As mentioned above, while the mandate of the Platform will be the entire e-mobility value 
chain in India, there are a few key sub-sectors that will be of higher focus initially. These 
include electric buses, shared 4W fleet and electric charging infrastructure. These sectors 
all have a substantial growth potential with an estimated USD 50 billion of financing required 
by 2030.48 
A. Electric Buses  
Electric buses are capital intensive, with a concentrated OEM base and a fragmented 
operator base. The Platform will focus on this space and partner with a few key large OEMs 
actively seeking to migrate to electric buses. The Platform will provide innovative financing 
solutions to the key players targeting the intra-city, government led auctions as well as to 
key players operating in the private, inter-city bus space. The financing solutions will include 
products such as leasing, project financing, receivables financing, and other innovative 
solutions that best help addresses the market need. The Platform will target all segments of 
bus deployment including intra-city public transport, inter-city transportation, school busses, 
office and other commercial applications.  
B. Shared / Corporate 4W Fleet  
Migration to electric vehicles is a key theme for companies that provide mobility as a service 
to private corporates. However, this space faces key challenges of limited financing 
availability from banks due to a lack of suitable business models and / or the inability to 
achieve the utilisation thresholds required to run a sustainable business. 
This sector offers the investment themes preferred by the Platform of a key financing and 
viability gap, as well as of working with a few large players and concentrating the portfolio to 
a limited number of key relationships. The Platform will work towards enabling migration of

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
shared fleet service providers to electric vehicles across buses and other 4W light 
commercial vehicles.  
 
C. Electric Charging Infrastructure  
To achieve the desired electrification targets for vehicles, charging infrastructure (public and 
private) needs to be rapidly scaled up from current levels.  
This space is currently plagued by supply chain issues, policy uncertainty and limited 
financing, coupled with high upfront costs. The Platform will seek to alleviate a major 
bottleneck in growth of e-mobility space in India by making financing solutions available for 
aggressive and pro-active deployment of charging infrastructure as a shared service for 
multiple owners / operators of electric vehicles. Further, to enhance the additionality aspect 
of the program, the Platform will both encourage and incentivise electric charging station 
operators through appropriate financial incentives (to be decided by the Platform 
management) to directly source renewable energy to meet the power requirement of EV 
charging stations.  
The balance of the portfolio will comprise other segments such as OEM or vendor supply 
chains, vehicle scrappage, battery swapping, commercial 2W and 3Ws, or others. Over time, 
the Platform may also expand into the B2C / retail segment. Note that funding of hybrid 
vehicles will be out of Programme’s scope of target sub-sectors. Moreover, the Platform will 
continuously look at realigning its business focus as the e-mobility sector evolves and new 
business opportunities emerge in this space. 
Leasing and 
Financing 
Solutions  
The leasing and financing solutions to be provided by the Platform will be based on the 
requirements of its customers as no one solution can cater to, and address all the needs of, 
the counterparties in the sector. By offering leasing and / or credit solutions (noting that no 
equity investments will be made by the Platform), the Platform will be able to support a larger 
number of counterparties within the same sector without giving rise to any conflict-of-interest 
issues. Some of the main financing products to be provided by the Platform: 
1. Leasing (Operating and Finance leases): The Platform’s strong preference will be to 
provide leasing solutions to its customers. Most of the financial institutions in India 
have focused on providing credit offerings rather than leasing solutions which 
require developing strong underlying product and technology capabilities. The lack 
of depth of leasing offerings in India force the operators / vehicle owners to invest 
substantial upfront capital as part of overall capex. The problem is even more acute 
in case of electric vehicles, where the upfront capex requirement can be much higher 
than the ICE vehicles. This leasing offering will be most pertinent for customer 
segments like e-busses (private counterparties), 2/3/4W fleets, LCVs and MCVs. 
We expect that, as the Indian e-mobility market matures, the Platform will emerge 
as one of the leading leasing companies in India with end-to-end capabilities on 
asset sourcing, asset deployment / financing, asset maintenance and redeployment 
at the end of the leasing tenure, which also addresses a key barrier of residual asset 
value.  
 
2. Project and vehicle financing (and other relevant credit solutions including Revenue 
Discounting): Project and vehicle financing solutions generally have shorter tenures 
and have higher risk premium as the asset ownership continues to remain with the 
borrower. However, there are additional accounting benefits (such as depreciation 
and interest) that can be valued by the borrowers. 
 
The project and vehicle financing markets for traditional vehicles are highly competitive due 
to the presence of large number of banks / NBFCs and other financial institutions. However, 
Indian financing markets do not currently have any scalable offering for electric vehicles and 
so, depending upon customer’s requirement, the Platform will look to utilise its strong 
sectoral understanding and experience to offer a tailored solution for EVs that is beneficial

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
49 As at 31 December 2020. 
50 As at 30 September 2021. 
51 As at 15 February 2022. 
52 IPE Real Assets 2021 – Top 100 Infrastructure Investment Managers. 
53 As on 31 December 2021. 
54 https://www.macquarie.com/au/en/about/news/2009/sbi-and-macquarie-launch-indian-infrastructure-fund-usd1billion-raised.html 
55 https://www.infrastructureinvestor.com/miras-second-asia-fund-wins-indias-1-5bn-highway-privatisation/ 
for the counterparty and seek to establish a long-term relationship and commitment. 
Irrespective of the type of financing solution, the key element for any financial product offered 
by the Platform is GCF’s first loss capital, which will allow the Platform to offer the necessary 
product for the higher upfront cost at a lower financing rate and assume right residual value 
risk. This will allow the provision of electric vehicles at competitive cost to ICE alternatives 
in order to scale up the sector. On the back of this structure, the Platform can attract other 
commercial capital that would otherwise be hesitant to invest in this nascent sector. By 
raising a large amount of capital, the Platform can deploy funds across financing solutions 
at scale, thereby driving down costs of electric vehicles in India and building a vibrant 
ecosystem across the value chain. 
Select 
Financing 
Criteria 
Financing solutions provided by the Platform will be subject to various financing criteria, such 
as funding size per counterparty account, single counterparty limit, credit quality, coupon 
type, repayment terms, etc.  
Macquarie 
Asset 
Management 
(MAM) 
Overview 
The Platform as indicated in the structure in section B.4 will be managed by offshore and 
onshore management companies that are owned and controlled by MAM, the asset 
management division of Macquarie Group. MAM has a significant track record in managing 
investments, with >140 portfolio companies across its managed funds globally.49  
MAM overview 
1. MAM’s expertise in asset management: MAM is a global specialist asset manager 
with AUD 735.5 billion of assets under management (AUM),50 aiming to deliver 
positive outcomes to everyone. MAM provides investment solutions to clients across 
a range of capabilities, including infrastructure and renewables, real estate, 
agriculture and natural assets, assets finance, private credit, fixed income, and multi-
asset solutions.  
Macquarie Group is a diversified financial services company headquartered in 
Sydney and listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX), with a market 
capitalisation of AUD 74.4 billion.51 Macquarie Group provides asset management 
and finance, banking, advisory and risk, and capital solutions across debt, equity, 
and commodities. 
Through its infrastructure focused private equity arm within the Private Markets 
division, MAM is the world’s largest infrastructure asset manager52 with equity under 
management (EUM) of AUD 160.1 billion,53 receiving commitments from pension 
funds, insurance companies, and sovereign wealth funds for its products and 
broader platform. 
 
2. MAM’s expertise in India: MAM has been present in India since 2009 when it 
established a ~USD 1 billion infrastructure focused fund in partnership with State 
Bank of India (SBI), India’s largest bank.54 Today, MAM has invested across multiple 
assets in roads, power, telecom towers and airports sectors in India. It is led by a 
team of highly experienced professionals who have robust record of establishing 
new businesses in the country. For example, in March 2018, MAM won the first 
auction of toll roads under the Toll Operate Transfer (TOT) model from National 
Highway Authority of India (NHAI) wherein it was awarded the concession to operate 
687 kms of toll roads over a period of 30 years at a cost of ~USD 1.5 billion.55  
Macquarie Group’s track record in e-mobility sector 
3. Expertise in e-mobility sector: Since 2018, Macquarie Group has been active in the 
e-mobility sector undertaking both debt and equity positions in some of the leading 
e-mobility companies across the world.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
MAM plans to leverage the above expertise and experience across its various 
business divisions to establish a high quality e-mobility financing platform. 
 
Macquarie Group’s track record in leasing platforms 
4. Expertise in building and exiting leasing platforms: Since 2006, Macquarie Group 
has successfully built multiple leasing platforms across sectors such as aircraft, 
helicopters, engines, rolling stock, passenger vehicles, computer equipment and 
utility meters. 
 
Platform 
Management 
MAM will hire an experienced management team to manage the Platform once it has been 
established post GCF’s Board approvals. 
Being a MAM managed vehicle, the Platform will also be able to leverage Macquarie’s global 
network, expertise, and brand value across the world, thereby increasing its visibility and 
ability to generate inbound approaches from market participants. 
Governance 
MAM’s main responsibility will be to approve new financing opportunities, have robust 
oversight over the Platform’s performance and drive innovative, leading capital sourcing and 
management solutions, including exit at an appropriate time. Through the Accredited Entity 
(AE), it will apply its fiduciary duties as per GCF’s AMA and the best practice standards it 
applies across its global operations. It will report on the Platform’s performance on a 
quarterly and annual basis. The audit of annual financial statements will be performed by an 
independent auditor, to ensure transparency and control of flow of funds. Impact reporting 
will be performed annually, either in-house or by a third party consultant, with the two GCF 
specific programme independent evaluations (mid-term and final) to be undertaken by the 
AE and shared with GCF. ESG will be carried out as per the Environmental and Social (E&S) 
Document (refer to Annex 6 – Environment and Social Management System) and IFC 
Performance Standards. Further, the Platform will be subject to MAM’s best in class asset 
management practices, which provide guidance on Governance, Money Laundering, Bribery 
and Corruption, Diversity and Inclusion, Cyber-security, etc. related aspects. 
Economics 
The Platform will target investment in opportunities that balance the long-term risk adjusted 
returns for investors with market development and innovative financial solutions for 
counterparties, aiding the accelerated growth of the Indian e-mobility sector. 
Distribution of proceeds to investors will be in accordance with the distribution waterfall as 
detailed in the term sheet provided to GCF.   
 
Part B – Key activities of the Program 
As mentioned in section E.6, the Programme will have 3 key phases: 
1. Activity Set I – Platform Establishment and Fundraising 
2. Activity Set II – Platform Investments, Monitoring and Exit 
3. Activity Set III – Wind up of corporate structure 
 
Activity Set I – Platform Establishment and Fundraising 
This primarily includes the establishment of entities / structure in Singapore and India for efficient inflow / outflow of 
capital to establish India’s ‘first of its kind’ ‘E-mobility Financing Platform’. Some of the key activities include: 
1. setup of LP – GP structure (refer to section B.4 – Implementation Arrangements for more details) for the transfer 
of GCF capital into the e-mobility programme through the Accredited Entity; 
2. establishment of structure and entities in India, with necessary regulatory and legal approvals, to start providing 
financing solutions in the e-mobility space in India;

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
3. crowding-in of commercial investors, including fundraising efforts and legal execution of their investments, 
either into LP or SG Master Co. or SG Co. or the Platform; 
4. ensuring compliance of the entire structure with all applicable local rules and regulations; 
5. setup of systems and processes across the structure, which includes adoption of risk management, HR, 
cybersecurity, third party vendor management, E&S and Diversity and Inclusion (D&I) frameworks and policies; 
and 
6. hiring and appointing the management team and the Board of Directors (the Board) at various levels, to ensure 
proper functioning of each entity. 
 
Activity Set II – Platform Investments, Monitoring and Exit  
This primarily includes screening and evaluating transactions and counterparties, application of best business 
practices, WHS, gender and environmental standards, diligent monitoring, establishing innovative financial and capital 
management solutions and, ultimately, exit on behalf of investors from the Platform.  
Financing Process 
 
 
The Platform will implement its strategy through a well-defined policy of identifying, evaluating, investing, managing, 
and realising the financing opportunities (where applicable).  
 
Key investment and financing decisions of the Platform will be approved by SG Co. (as shareholder) with guidance 
from the Singapore Manager. This will be supported by: 
1. day-to-day management of the Platform by the experienced professionals employed by the Platform; and 
2. strategic support and oversight to the Platform by the Singapore Manager in consultation with Macquarie India 
Advisory Company (IAC). 
 
Throughout each stage of the financing process, risk assessment will be a key focus for every financing solution 
provided by the Platform. This risk focused approach will begin at the earliest possible stage, even before transaction 
screening and will continue throughout the life of each financial solution. 
 
 
 
 
A. 
Opportunity Sourcing 
 
Access to deal flow will be one of the key factors in the success of the program. Access to a wide range of potential 
opportunities will enable the Platform to assemble an appropriately diversified portfolio. The Platform expects 
opportunities to arise from several sources, including:

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
Management team  
Management team members will have many years of work experience in 
infrastructure, vehicle financing and leasing / credit sectors across the world. They 
will therefore have long-standing relationships with sponsors, operators, banks, and 
intermediaries who will provide a regular flow of opportunities.  
Macquarie relationships 
Macquarie is a leading infrastructure advisor and investor with global coverage. It 
holds significant roles on a number of globally relevant forums, such as the Climate 
Finance Leadership Initiative and the Global Committee for Adaptation. This will 
bring opportunities and provide personal introductions for the Platform to 
prospective financing counterparties.  
Strategic partnerships 
Macquarie has unparalleled group-level relationships with a range of infrastructure 
sponsors, operators and banks, all of which will enhance Platform’s access to deal 
flow.  
MAM has developed strategic partnerships with several domestic and international 
financial institutions (banks and NBFCs) through its existing portfolio of 
infrastructure assets in India. It also has close relationships with key individuals 
within the e-mobility, automotive and energy sectors, which will enable detailed 
discussions that are important for originating and refinancing transactions. 
 
Further, these opportunities are expected to arise through circumstances which may include companies:  
• 
bidding for new central / state government tenders; 
• 
partnering due to the large amounts of capital required to construct or manufacture the assets; 
• 
looking to recycle capital to expand the existing business in the sector; or 
• 
restructuring or repositioning their business activities. 
 
In certain cases, due to MAM’s position and relationships in the market, the Platform may have the ability to finance 
assets / counterparties on an exclusive basis. 
MAM executives and the Platform management team will develop / have strong relationships with many of the key 
stakeholders in the sector, including corporate sponsors (such as utilities and suppliers), professional advisors and 
lenders. These relationships are important, not only for deal origination, but also execution, on-going management, and 
exit. 
B. 
Opportunity Screening 
 
After becoming aware of a financing opportunity, the Platform will apply its Opportunity Screening process to test the 
characteristics of the opportunity against the Financing Selection Criteria of the Platform.  
The Platform’s investment screening process will typically include assessment of: 
• 
the financing thesis and alignment to Financing Selection Criteria; 
• 
the creditworthiness, operational capability and ESG performance of the counterparty (lessee / borrower), with 
particular regard to their financial position, expected outlook, and sensitivity to external factors; 
• 
the capability of existing management of the lessee / borrower, including recent performance, expertise, 
experience, and incentives to perform; 
• 
the revenue model of the business (including whether underpinned by contracts or regulation), the stability of 
the cashflows of the business and possible factors influencing future revenue and cashflows; 
• 
an initial assessment of the environmental and social categorisation of transactions (refer to section G.1 – 
Environment and social risk assessment for more details); 
• 
a high level overview of expected terms to be provided under the financing; and 
• 
an initial assessment of GHG emissions reduction, ESG risks and other investment risks. 
 
Based on the Financing Selection Criteria and in accordance with delegation of authority within the Platform (to be 
established once the Platform is operational), the Platform management team will negotiate the term sheet with the 
counterparty. Once there is broad alignment on the commercials and additional analysis has been undertaken by the

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
Platform management team, a detailed discussion paper will be presented to the Board of the Platform (or an 
empowered team as mandated by the Board) for approval and advice. The Platform management will also regularly 
seek advise from Macquarie’s IAC and necessary approvals from the Singapore Manager as required.  
 
C. 
Due Diligence (DD) 
 
The management team will engage with the counterparty and undertake, in conjunction with specialist experts and 
advisers, due diligence as required to ensure all aspects of the transaction are sufficiently reviewed. The management 
team will also take an active role in the negotiation and setting of lease or loan terms and conditions as reflected in the 
documentation.  
Key risk considerations will typically include:  
Due Diligence (DD) Items 
Description 
Enhanced Counterparty / 
Promoter DD 
Assess Counterparty / Promoter’s financial strength, reputation, ESG 
performance and track record of honouring contractual commitments. 
Financial Modelling 
Counterparties typically provide a financial model which can be used for future 
cash flow and financial statement analysis. The financial model will be 
stressed for several different scenarios based on the management team’s 
view of key drivers, with input from Platform’s professional advisors if 
required.  
Financial DD 
Tax, accounting, and financial statement diligence as required to ensure 
financial robustness. 
Technical DD 
Third party consultants and other expert reports (either undertaken in-house 
or provided by the counterparty) providing details around technical aspects of 
the asset, including whether technology is commercially proven, 
environmental exposures, asset condition, construction risk (including network 
expansion), operations and maintenance complexity and experience, 
contracts, and performance damages and ESG. 
Legal DD 
Dependent on the nature of a transaction and contract. Typically, would 
include diligence on key entities, contracts, regulatory regime, security, and 
enforcement analysis.  
Additionally, legal advisers / in-house experts will draft robust leasing / loan 
documents that ensure strong enforceability of contracts, preserve the rights 
of the lessor / creditor in the event of asset deterioration and provide an 
appropriate redressal mechanism. It is possible that these markets may form 
the basis of market standards in the future. 
Insurance DD 
Summary of insurances in place and adequacy of the insurances 
(construction risk, business interruption, operational risk, third party liability 
insurances). Often the lease / credit agreement will specify a required level of 
cover.  
Commercial or Market DD 
Economic and market reports (comprising of industry structure, barriers to 
entry, product substitution and certainty of supply). Only applicable for first 
time financing in a segment where there is an underlying demand risk, tariff 
risk or where there is a significant cost component that may be subject to 
market dynamics. 
 
Note that the above list of due diligence items may not be applicable for all transactions. Any decision in relation to the 
due diligence process (and appointment of relevant third party advisers) will be undertaken by the management team 
in consultation with Macquarie India Advisory Company and the Singapore Manager.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
D. 
Financing Decision and Execution 
 
The results of the due diligence process will be set out in a financing paper and presented to an empowered team 
within the Platform (as per the delegation of authority) and the Singapore Manager (for specific cases based on size of 
the transaction) for guidance and decision regarding the financing. Once a decision is made and financing is approved, 
the management team and its legal advisers will work with the counterparty to negotiate and agree the leasing / loan 
documents. These documents will detail out the various rights of the lessor / lender, lessee / borrower’s reporting 
requirements and clearly layout the redressal mechanism in case of any default or conflict.  
 
E. 
Ongoing monitoring and management 
 
The Platform will take a proactive approach to asset management by following a structured framework as approved by 
the Platform Board, with guidance from the Singapore Manager and Macquarie India Advisory Company, which protects 
the best interests of the investors and ensures that Platform is protected against any risk (including fiduciary or 
reputational risks). All of Platform’s financing solutions will be continually monitored and maintained. The general 
principles of the finance and impact monitoring process are:  
• 
The Platform’s management team will take the primary responsibility for monitoring performance of the 
financing instrument and the impact created by it. The team will be responsible for tracking both financial and 
impact performance of the instrument and will update the Board of the Platform and the Singapore Manager 
on a quarterly basis on lessee / borrower’s financial and non-financial covenants. 
• 
Monitoring by the management team will be dynamic (following general relevant market data via information 
subscription services), and periodic (prompted by ongoing proactive engagement with the lessee or borrower 
as well as the lessee / borrower’s reporting obligations) including internal quarterly monitoring meetings and 
reporting. 
• 
Material changes to the lessee / borrower’s business or credit quality, and the impact created by it, will be 
discussed internally and escalated to the Singapore Manager where it will be determined whether it is 
sufficiently material or not.  
• 
Requests for waivers or amendments to facility terms, if any, will be reviewed and approved post detailed 
discussions with the Singapore Manager as and when required. Further, at the quarterly meeting, the 
Singapore Manager will be notified regarding all waivers and amendments granted in the previous period. 
 
Further, as part of the monitoring process, the Platform will utilise a heightened review process called Watchlist. If a 
management team member sees evidence of potential stress, business practice concerns or other factors that could 
have a material impact on the financing solution provided to the counterparty, then it will decide whether to recommend 
that lease or loan be placed on Watchlist.  
The counterparty will be placed on Watchlist when it is deemed, they are, or are expected to come, under stress.  
The Watchlist process described above will seek to ensure heightened scrutiny and early action in the case of 
counterparties that are at high risk of a material change in credit profile or loan / lease restructure. In an event of default, 
the Platform will take the necessary action, which is likely to result in the best return to the investors. These actions 
could include managing the financing instrument through the work out process, asset repossession or sale of the 
instrument. 
F. 
Realisation and exit 
 
During the term of the Platform, the Singapore Manager will consider appropriate strategies to provide liquidity from 
the Platform which achieves an exit, provides liquid return to the investors and generates capital for re-investment (refer 
to section B.6 – Exit and Sustainability for more details). Within its Investment Period, the Platform will seek to create 
a sustained, positive impact through its robust deal sourcing, execution and monitoring capabilities, focus on 
sustainability and good corporate citizenship and high performing product portfolio, all of which is anticipated to be 
attractive to a future investor. The Platform is expected continue to make a positive impact on the Indian road transport 
sector, even after the exit of the initial set of investors in case the potential buyer(s) continue the mandate in the future. 
Activity Set III – Wind up of corporate structure

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
56 Subject to Legal and Tax Due Diligence which will be completed prior to FAA execution. 
57 The decision regarding the use of specific instruments for investing in the Platform will depend on the regulatory requirements and prudent 
capital structuring opportunities. It is noteworthy that any capital repaid from any equity like or debt instrument injected by SG Co into the 
Platform will either be available for distribution to the investors or re-invested for business expansion subject to the Singapore Manager’s 
discretion.. 
58 The proposed structure is subject to regulatory approvals. 
Once the General Partner (GP) of the Singapore LP has distributed capital to the investors, it will need to wind up the 
corporate structure. However, wind up of the corporate entities may take time in case the Singapore Manager offers 
any indemnities or warranties to the buyers at the time of exit. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Platform structure, governance, and flow of funds56 
 
Proposed Structure and Governance 
An offshore pooling vehicle (LP) is proposed to be set up in Singapore to aggregate funds from GCF and commercial 
investors via a Limited Partnership Agreement (LPA). This Singapore LP will set up a Singapore private limited 
company (SG Master Co.) which will, in turn, establish another wholly owned Singapore private limited company (SG 
Co.) which will invest in the Platform in India by way of equity, equity like, hybrid securities, debt instruments and other 
similar instruments57 from shareholders for efficient capital structuring.58 
Proposed Structure 
 
 
Accredited Entity 
GCF will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with MAAML, the AE, which will detail the key implementation 
arrangements, commercial terms, and legal obligations, including mechanics to pass down GCF policies and 
requirements to the offshore entities in Singapore and onshore entities in India. These key terms are summarised under 
the Term Sheet. The AE will transfer the funds to the LP on behalf of GCF, as the investor of record. 
The AE will oversee the implementation of the Programme on behalf of GCF. It will ensure that: 
1. all GCF’s policies are implemented at the Platform levels and in underlying financing documents;

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
59 Note that there will be no direct legal arrangement between the Platform, Singapore Manager and Macquarie India Advisory Company. SG 
Co pursuant to shareholder rights in the Platform will review the information received and based on the advice from the Singapore Manager, 
approve relevant shareholder matters. All recommendations to the SG Co’s Board would be reviewed and proposed by the Singapore 
Manager under the management agreement. Further Singapore Manager will engage Macquarie’s India Advisory Company to provide non-
binding investment advisory services. 
2. the GCF account is managed and maintained in compliance with the requirements under the AMA and FAA; 
and 
3. GCF is provided access to the Platform’s performance vis-à-vis the Programme’s targeted outcomes and 
results.  
In order to satisfy its obligations under the AMA and the FAA to be entered into with respect to this Programme, 
MAAML will enter into a deed of undertaking with each Executing Entity). 
 
LP 
The offshore pooling vehicle will be domiciled in Singapore as a Limited Partnership (LP). The Singapore GP, as 
general partner, together with GCF and the other Investors, as limited partners, will enter into a partnership agreement. 
The capital commitment / contribution of each limited partner in the LP will have different class of interests: 
1. Class A interests for commercial investors. Class A would benefit from first-loss benefit provided by Class B 
investor. Class A investors would not have participated in the LP without this first-loss benefit due a perceived 
unfavorable risk / reward dynamic;  
2. Class B interests for GCF, against which GCF would provide first-loss benefit to the Class A investors, making 
the risk / reward dynamic for Class A investors acceptable; and 
3. Class C interests for Singapore GP / Singapore Manager or provision by way of management agreement, for 
the purposes of receiving carried interest distributions from the LP. 
 
The LPA will detail terms of investment (including the ownership interest of each LP), in line with the FAA signed 
between the GCF and the AE. Note that the proposed structure will not change as commercial investors become part 
of the LP, SG Co. or the Platform, on or after First Close. The AE will analyse the LP’s compliance with GCF’s business 
model by reviewing several documents provided by other Executing Entities (EEs) in the structure. 
Singapore GP and Singapore Manager 
A 100% Macquarie Group owned, Singapore private limited company will be established to act as the GP to the LP. 
The GP, under a management agreement, will delegate its investment management responsibilities to the Singapore 
Manager, which will be a Capital Markets Services licensed entity. The Singapore Manager will have an overall 
responsibility for the management and operation of the LP under the management agreement. Some of its key 
responsibilities include: 
1. managing LP’s investment, including identifying representatives for the Board of the Platform (where 
appropriate); 
2. identifying and assisting with the implementation of strategic enhancements at the Platform level; 
3. undertaking other matters involved in the management and administration of the Platform; and 
4. determining appropriate risk and liquidity strategies for the LP and the Platform. 
 
To ensure that Singapore Manager’s responsibilities are appropriately resourced, the Singapore Manager will enter 
into a non-binding investment advisory agreement with Macquarie India Advisory Company (IAC).59  
Singapore Master and SG Co. 
The LP will establish a Singapore private limited company (SG Master Co.) as a wholly owned subsidiary, which will 
in turn incorporate another Singapore private limited company (SG Co.) to make investments via equity, equity-like 
hybrid securities, debt instruments and other similar instruments from shareholders in the Platform. SG Master Co. is 
primarily being set up to provide flexibility to investors to exit the investment at Singapore level and avail India – 
Singapore tax treaty benefits, subject to meeting relevant conditions. SG Master Co. and SG Co. will also be a party to 
the GP management agreement, or enter into a separate management agreement with the Singapore Manager.  
 Platform

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
60 At least two shareholders are required for incorporating a private company in India. Apart from SG Co., the second entity will be a nominee 
shareholder (can either be a person or a company) holding one share on behalf of SG Co. Second nominee will be finalised once the 
Platform is being incorporated. 
A company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act will be established by SG Co. as the Platform.60 The Platform 
will apply for necessary licenses and approvals in India to undertake a lease and loan business in India. To enter into 
lease (finance lease) and lending arrangements, the Platform will obtain NBFC license as prescribed by the Reserve 
Bank of India. A professional management team will be identified and hired to manage the Platform with support / 
approval from the Singapore Manager. SG Co. will nominate its representative (MAM staff) on the Board of the Platform 
to participate in the key investment, operational, and governance decisions. The Singapore Manager will also provide 
strategic oversight to the Platform through SG Co.’s shareholder rights, including supporting the Board and 
management with access to subject-matter experts and support on operational and governance expertise within 
Macquarie Group. The Platform’s management team will be responsible for day-to-day screening and evaluation of 
investment opportunities, performance monitoring and compliance. It is this entity that would likely engage with debt 
markets to source the anticipated ~USD 1.1 billion of debt over the implementation period, if proof of concept is 
successful. 
Macquarie India Advisory Co (IAC) 
IAC, a 100% Macquarie Group owned entity incorporated under the Indian Companies Act will provide non-binding 
investment advisory services to the Singapore Manager. Its role inter-alia includes: 
1. analysing the progress of the transactions in Platform, monitoring performance, performing the necessary 
compliance checks, and providing reports to the Singapore Manager; 
2. providing assistance in relation to the valuation of SG Co.’s investment in the Platform; and 
3. providing assistance in relation to adequate implementation of risk management systems in order to identify, 
measure, manage and monitor appropriately all risks relevant to the LP’s investment strategy.  
 
Roles and Responsibilities 
The roles and responsibilities of various Executing entities in the above structures are laid down below: 
Category 
Name 
Role 
Accredited Entity 
MAAML 
• 
Execute an FAA with GCF 
• 
Act as an investor on record in the LP on behalf of GCF 
• 
Enter into the LPA (see below) on behalf of GCF 
• 
Execute the FAA that incorporates all agreed GCF 
requirements set out under the AMA and the term sheet for 
the programme, and to be implemented down the chain 
• 
Enter into a compliance undertaking with each of the 
Executing Entities 
• 
Crowding-in of commercial investors, including fundraising 
efforts and legal execution of their investments into the LP 
Executing Entity 
Singapore LP 
• 
Pool GCF capital (via MAAML) and other commercial 
investor capital 
• 
Enter into the LPA with Limited Partners (LPs or Investors) 
and General Partner (GP) 
• 
GCF requirements as set out under the AMA and FAA, to 
be incorporated in the constitution documents of LP. 
Enforcement of the policies to be a limited partner’s right for 
MAAML acting as an investor on record for GCF

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations 
Executing Entity 
Macquarie Group 
entity that will set up 
GP 
• 
Incorporate Singapore GP to act as a General Partner to the 
above LPA  
Executing Entity 
Singapore GP 
• 
Party to the above LPA as a GP 
• 
Responsible for managing the LP 
• 
Singapore GP to be a Macquarie Group Limited controlled 
entity 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations 
Executing Entity 
Singapore Manager 
• 
By way of Management agreement, GP to appoint 
Singapore Manager as an Investment advisor and 
incorporate GCF requirements in AMA and FAA, in the 
Management Agreement 
• 
Investment Committee (IC) comprising of Macquarie 
employees and/or industry experts to take investment 
decisions on behalf of the Singapore LP/ SG Co. 
• 
The Manager to provide investment advisory service to the 
GP, SG Master Co. and SG Co. 
• 
Investment advisory service to comprise of advice around 
investments in Platform, recruitment of key management at 
the Platform and key business activities of the Platform 
• 
Singapore Manager to enter into an agreement with 
onshore IAC for receiving non-binding advisory services 
• 
Provide quarterly investment report to Investors based on 
information received from IAC 
• 
Engage with potential investors in the market with the 
assistance from IAC to explore and identify exit 
opportunities. Summary of any relevant exit process to be 
provided in quarterly investment reports. 
• 
Lead all documentation discussions with the assistance of 
IAC. 
• 
Ensure that appropriate sale value is received on time and 
subsequently distributed back to the limited partners as per 
the LPA 
• 
Distribute capital and returns to investors as per the LPA 
• 
Ensure compliance with indemnities & warranties, if any 
• 
Wind up of corporate entities (including the Platform)Ensure 
compliance with all applicable local rules & regulations

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
Executing Entity 
SG Master Co. 
• 
SG Master Co to act as a pass-through entity between the 
LP and SG Co. 
• 
SG Master Co board to comprise of employees of 
Macquarie and/or industry experts 
• 
Constituent documents of SG Master Co, as well as 
shareholder rights with LP, to include implementation of 
GCF requirements as set out in AMA and FAA down the 
chain 
• 
Establishment of SG Co. to make investment into the 
Platform in India 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations 
Executing Entity 
SG Co 
• 
SG Co to act as a pass-through entity between the SG 
Master Co. and the Platform 
• 
SG Co board to comprise of employees of Macquarie and/or 
industry experts having diverse industry and finance 
experience 
• 
Shareholder rights with SG Master Co to include 
implementation of GCF requirements set out under the AMA 
and FAA. 
• 
Establishment of the Platform in India 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations 
Executing Entity 
Macquarie India 
Advisory Company 
(IAC) 
• 
Macquarie India entity controlled by Macquarie Group 
Limited 
• 
To provide non-binding advisory services to the Singapore 
Manager 
• 
Help in identification of the management team and relevant 
support staff for the Platform 
• 
Reporting 
on 
opportunities 
considered, 
screened, 
approved, and executed. 
• 
Provide quarterly investment report to Singapore Manager 
• 
Engage with potential investors in the market to explore and 
identify exit opportunities under the guidance of Singapore 
Manager. Summary of any relevant exit process to be 
provided in reporting to Singapore Manager. 
• 
Lead all documentation discussions with the assistance of 
the legal adviser under the guidance of Singapore Manager 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
61 Please note that arrangement of MAAML / AE acting as trustee for GCF’s bank account is subject to regulatory advice. 
Executing Entity 
Platform 
• 
SG Co to establish and control the Platform in India 
• 
Platform to comprise of a management team and a board 
• 
The board to comprise of Macquarie employees, senior 
management team members and/or industry experts having 
diverse industry and finance experience 
• 
Platform to procure NBFC license to provide financing and 
leasing solutions to counterparties. 
• 
Participate in workshops and/or stakeholder consultations 
organized by local, state or national governments, or 
affiliated think tanks and/or industry bodies to promote the 
development of EV financing in India 
• 
Use learnings, data or market knowledge from the Platform 
to inform new policies or regulations to promote 
development of the EV sector 
• 
Source transactions & implement the mandate of the 
platform 
• 
Undertake ongoing monitoring of financial solutions 
provided to counterparties, including compliance with 
financing 
covenants, 
meeting 
of 
agreed 
reporting 
requirements, and credit assessment of counterparty. 
• 
Undertake climate impact assessment of the portfolio on 
annual basis. 
• 
Based on delegation arrangements, Platform to seek 
approvals from the SG Co. on shareholder matters (and 
correspondingly up the chain) 
• 
GCF requirements as agreed in AMA and FAA to be 
incorporated in the shareholder rights with the SG Co. 
• 
SG Co, pursuant to shareholder rights in Platform, as the 
case may be, would review the information received and 
based on advice from the Singapore Manager, approve the 
relevant shareholder matters 
• 
Ensure compliance with all applicable local rules & 
regulations 
  
Flow of Funds 
The capital invested by LP into SG Co. will be used to create the Platform which will seek to secure the necessary 
regulatory approvals in India to provide a different kind of financing in the market.  
The AE on behalf of GCF will channel funds to the Platform through the LP structure.61 The GCF funds will be channeled 
by the AE as follows:  
Fund flows for investments

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
62 https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/india/current-policy-projections/ 
63 https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-981-15-4327-2.pdf 
64 https://www.livemint.com/economy/indias-fiscal-deficit-at-9-3-of-gdp-in-fy21-down-from-revised-estimate-of-95-11622459720813.html 
65 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/india-to-breach-fiscal-deficit-target-in-fy22-fitch-
solutions/articleshow/82451801.cms?from=mdr 
1. GCF and the AE will contractually agree that GCF will commit an amount of funding, as detailed in the Term 
Sheet, with the single stated purse of the AE utilising it for investment in the Singapore LP, for the purpose 
defined in this FP. 
2. The AE will request GCF to remit funds to its fiduciary GCF account. GCF funds will be kept in this account 
without being co-mingled with any other sources of capital with AE. 
3. Once the Platform is established and additional funds are required, the Platform, subject to approval by the 
Singapore Manager and Singapore GP, will issue a drawdown notice to the LP and the LP will in turn issue a 
drawdown notice to the AE (for GCF as prescribed under FAA). 
4. Upon the receipt of drawdown notice, the AE will remit the funds to the LP from its fiduciary GCF account, 
which, in turn, remit the funds to SG Co. through SG Master Co.  
5. SG Co. will utilise the funds received to capitalise the Platform. 
6. Note that the AE will drawdown the capital as committed by GCF over the Investment Period as defined in the 
Term Sheet. 
 
Fund flows for distribution 
Upon receipt of distributions from the Platform, SG Co. will remit the funds to SG Master Co. which, in turn, will remit 
the funds to the LP. The LP will then make distributions to fiduciary GCF account as per the distribution waterfall 
mechanics in the LPA. 
Please note that we do not expect any conflict of interest issue to arise between the executing entities and the AE, as 
the mechanics for payment rights of GCF via the AE as against those of commercial investors will be well defined and 
documented as part of the FAA and LPA.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate vulnerabilities and fiscal situation 
According to Climate Action Tracker, India’s GHG emissions, excluding Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF), 
are estimated to be 2.8-2.9 GtCO2 in 2020. They are expected to increase by ~3.5% over next 10 years, reaching 3.8-
4.1 GtCO2 by 2030. This represents a 27-35% increase in emissions from 2010 to 2020 and a 76-87% increase by 
2030. 62  Further, India’s average temperature is expected to increase by >4.4°C by 2100 (relative to average 
temperature between 1975-2006) in the worst-case scenario, according to a report by the Indian government’s Ministry 
of Earth Sciences.63 This leaves India highly vulnerable, prone to extreme climatic events such as flash floods, cyclonic 
storms, droughts, heatwaves, etc. and more susceptible to crop damage, forced migration, increases in social issues 
and poor economic growth. Whilst India’s NDCs under the Paris Agreement are 2.0°C compatible (indicating that India’s 
climate commitment in 2030 is a significant share of global effort based on its responsibility and capability), a significant 
amount of capital is required to achieve it. According to the Indian government’s preliminary estimates, India requires 
~USD 2.5 trillion of capital between 2015 – 2030, which is equivalent to annual requirement of USD 170 billion per year 
at 2014-15 prices (8% of India’s FY15 GDP). Further, as per IFC, total capital required to achieve the climate targets 
was much higher at USD 3.1 trillion between 2018-2030. Given the size of the required investment, a robust support 
from domestic and foreign investors is essential.  
Additionally, with the onset of COVID-19 pandemic since March 2020, the finances of the Indian government have 
become further stretched (fiscal deficit was 9.5% of India’s GDP in FY21 vs 4.6% in FY2064 and is expected to be in 
8.3% in FY22 according to Fitch65), forcing the Indian government to prioritise investments in healthcare infrastructure 
and research and development of affordable medicines and vaccines. As a result, the availability of capital from GCF 
during these testing times for the Indian population and economy will be significantly important as it will 1) assist the 
country to be on track to its achieve its set targets under the Paris agreement, 2) reduce pressure on the government’s 
limited resources while it focuses on keeping its citizens safe and healthy, and 3) provide the necessary capital to the 
nascent and cash starved e-mobility sector to drive innovation and achieve scale.  
GCF value add

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
Under the proposed transaction structure, GCF’s USD 200 million investment will be used to provide “first loss” capital 
protection to commercial investors, de-risking them by absorbing higher risk in case of the Platform’s underperformance 
due to the multiple risk factors as highlighted in section F – Risk Assessment and Management. GCF’s concessional 
capital is expected to have a multi-fold impact on the entire e-mobility value chain in terms of: 
1. Crowding in capital: Catalysing investments from various institutional investors who otherwise would have been 
reluctant to participate in the nascent e-mobility sector in India. 
2. Drive TCO parity: Help achieve TCO parity for electric vehicles at a faster rate than currently estimated, thereby 
assisting the government in limiting its financial subsidy support for the sector. 
3. Improve availability of capital: Assist in easing the availability of finance for electric vehicles and e-mobility 
focussed companies and / or customers, which is presently one of the biggest barriers impeding the growth of 
the sector. Successful implementation of this enterprise will likely lead to competitors in time. 
4. Help offer differentiated products: Enable the Platform to offer bespoke leasing and structured credit solutions 
at attractive terms such as long tenure, competitive interest rates, high Loan to Value (LTV) ratio, reduced 
requirement of collateral or other forms of security and acceptance of operating and residual value risks, thus 
addressing several requirements of customers which are unmet by current product offerings in the market. 
5. Assist in capital recycling: Help e-mobility focussed companies recycle their capital and invest either in 
technological advancements or expansion of existing manufacturing facilities (refer to section C.3 – Capacity 
building and technology development / transfer for more details). 
6. Drive replication in other geographies: Demonstrate a business model that could be deployed in other markets 
to accelerate EV adoption. 
7. Establishment of sustainable, inclusive business practices: The Platform will encourage counterparties to 
adhere to GCF standards and policies, on environmental and gender aspects. Increasing sensitisation and 
proactiveness on such aspects by counterparties is expected to have a profound impact on the local community 
and environment, and set a good example for other businesses / competitors in the industry. For more details 
refer to Annex 06 – Enivronment Social Management System and Annex 08 – Gender Assessment Report. 
 
Apart from raising equity capital from institutional investors, the Platform will leverage on its Macquarie Group affiliation 
and networks to identify and hire an experienced management team and raise large amounts of third party debt capital 
from domestic (INR denominated) and / or foreign banks / financial institutions (USD denominated) depending upon 
market conditions, thus compounding the effect of GCF’s concessional capital. 
The Platform is anticipated to have a positive impact on India’s post pandemic economic recovery, carbon emission 
reduction targets, air quality, health outcomes, new job creation and gender inequality. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Exit strategy 
The aim of the Programme is to build a leading E-mobility Financing Platform which can continue as a ‘going concern’ 
post the exit of investors. GCF and commercial investors’ (‘Investors’) capital commitment will be for a period of up to 
10 years, subject to defined extension options. The form of exit from the investment will be dependent upon the global 
and India’s macro-economic environment, growth prospects, competitive landscape and status of rules and regulations 
governing the EV sector, future business potential of the Platform, ease of exit and returns offered to the Investors. 
Exit can be in the form of: 
1. Partial or Full Platform trade sale to: 
o 
Strategic investors such as banks and NBFCs who are looking to expand their exposure to the EV 
sector and / or are looking to diversify their existing asset portfolio. 
o 
Financial investors such as impact funds, infrastructure or sector agnostic private equity funds, 
pension and sovereign wealth funds that may be looking to enter the market. 
2. Initial Public Offering (IPO): The Singapore Manager may also look to provide exit to existing investors through 
the IPO route which will provide opportunity for retail investors to participate in the company’s long term of 
objective of decarbonising the transportation sector of India. 
  
Sustainability

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
66 IPE Real Assets 2021 – Top 100 Infrastructure Investment Managers. 
67 https://www.macquarie.com/assets/macq/investor/reports/2022/macquarie-group-hy22-interim-report.pdf 
68 As at 31 March 2021, https://www.macquarie.com/assets/macq/investor/results-and-presentations/2021/macquarie-group-fy21-annual-
report.pdf 
MAM, with support from GCF and commercial investors, is looking to build ‘first of its kind’ E-mobility Financing Platform 
in India, with the aim to create long term value and provide a sustainable and successful pathway for other companies 
and investors in the EV sector, even after GCF and commercial investors have exited the Platform.  
To achieve this, the Programme has identified key areas related to building of 1) a sustainable business by instilling 
best practices (ESG and financial processes including monitoring, reviews, etc.), and 2) a sustainable EV ecosystem 
as critical for long term value creation and development of future investments’ foundation. 
A. 
Building a sustainable business by instilling best governance practices 
 
MAM is recognised as the largest infrastructure asset manager globally66 with an AUM of AUD 735.5 billion as at 30 
September 2021.67 It employs 1,92168 investment and portfolio management professionals across the world who have 
relevant experience in building successful platforms and unique business models leading to scaled operational 
platforms. 
As an entity managed by MAM, the Platform will leverage on MAM’s experience to implement best practices and 
frameworks developed over several decades to build a sustainable company. This will include establishment of an 
empowered and effective Board and management team, operational checks and balances, effective systems of internal 
control and risk management, promoting a ‘governance culture’ of transparency and accountability, and putting in place 
remuneration policies that reward achievement of objectives and long-term shareholder value creation.  
Further, post initial investment, MAM will be actively engaged with the Platform, driving long term sustainability and 
value creation. This will happen through active performance oversight, which includes monthly performance monitoring, 
news tracking, periodic assessment of counterparty’s credit quality, active engagement and assistance to Platform 
management and impact assessment (refer to section B.3 – Programme Description for more details).  
Additionally, the Platform will also implement a ‘Watchlist’ framework which will ensure that any stress or other factors 
that could have a material impact on the counterparty viability, are highlighted in advance so that appropriate remedial 
measures can be taken where possible.  
Establishment of a robust oversight culture will seek to ensure that there is low probability of default and / or fraud 
among the lessees / borrowers which, in turn, will result in: 
1. a strong sense of comfort to new players, investors and financiers looking to enter the market; and 
2. ‘proof of concept’ affirmation for existing portfolio companies’ business models. 
 
B. 
Building a sustainable EV ecosystem  
 
Development of new financial products 
The Platform will look to offer bespoke financial products in the EV sector, which will include operating and finance 
leases. Apart from this, the Platform will consider offering other structured credit / financing instruments depending 
upon the requirements of the counterparty. As these products are scaled-up, there will be increased capacity from 
existing financial institutions, such as banks and NBFCs, to understand the key risks in EV financing, assess the 
performance of the financial products and develop relationships with key market players. All this will support potential 
replication of the financing products and development of newer products as the market heads towards maturity. 
Reduce upfront EV costs through long-term financing at attractive rates 
Currently, most EV companies generally find it difficult to raise capital from financial institutions. Even if companies can 
raise capital, the terms of that capital are usually unattractive and biased towards the financier making it a significant 
barrier impeding the growth of the sector. This Platform aims to change this paradigm through:  
1. differentiated product offering: The Platform will look to provide differentiated financing products (operating and 
financial lease including variations that assume certain reporting and performance risks) at attractive rates that 
help reduce upfront capex and ongoing costs for OEMs, operators, and sponsors; 
2. focusing on the entire value chain: Support the roll-out of EVs, charging infrastructure and other e-mobility 
infrastructure;

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
 
3. longer tenure: Make long tenured financing products a norm rather than an exception; 
4. acceptance of residual value risk: Accept residual value risk to clearly demonstrate the useful life of EVs (>10 
years in most cases) and promote greater market acceptance; and 
5. increasing private sector participation: Increase participation of OEMs, operators, and sponsors in government 
tenders (wherein the concession agreements are usually awarded for 8-10 years). 
 
Catalysing further investment through capacity building and replicable models 
The risk-sharing models developed with local OEMs and financiers will have compounding effects outside the direct 
impact from the Platform itself: 
• 
Increased investment in the sector is expected to instil greater confidence in the market, increase competition 
and drive down upfront and operating costs, thereby encouraging a cycle of further investment and market 
maturation. 
• 
Increased capacity of local OEMs will support higher investment from the private sector in enhancing the 
manufacturing capabilities and developing new business models that propel long-term presence in the sector. 
 
Lastly, the Platform will ensure continuous engagement with various stakeholders such as Niti Aayog (nodal agency 
for electric vehicles in India), Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (MoEFCC), OEMs, Operators, other 
financing companies (such as banks and NBFCs) and consultants to: 
1. drive further policy improvements; 
2. help address challenges affecting the accelerated growth of the EV sector; 
3. encourage innovation and competitiveness; and 
4. help drive long term sustainability of the sector.

=== PAGE 37 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
200 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
- 
- years 
- years 
- % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
- 
- years 
- years 
- % 
(iii) Equity 
200 
10 years 
2+2 years 
 
(iv) Guarantees 
- 
- years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
- 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
-  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
- 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
1,297 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Commercial 
Investors  
Equity 
205 
million USD 
($)  
10 years 
2+2 years 
 
senior 
Domestic/ 
International 
Banks and 
NBFCs 
Senior 
Loans 
1,092 
million USD 
($)  
5-7 years 
Enter years 
Market 
driven 
senior 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
1,497 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
A total capital commitment of USD 405 million is expected from GCF and commercial 
investors. This amount will be invested over a period of 5 years across the various 
segments of the e-mobility value chain.  
What is the purpose of third party debt? 
In addition to equity capital from GCF and other investors, the SG Master Co., the SG Co, 
and / or the Platform will also look to raise third party debt (either INR and / or USD 
denominated) for future business expansion and create multiplier effect on equity investors’ 
capital commitment. The decision to raise third party debt at either of the levels will depend 
on the market conditions, commercial considerations and ease of compliance.  
How will debt be serviced? 
Any third party debt that is drawn by the Platform will be serviced through the principal and 
interest payments that the Platform will receive from various lessees and borrowers.

=== PAGE 38 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
 
How will the Platform ensure financial discipline and compliance with debt servicing 
obligations? 
Firstly, the maximum leverage that will be raised by the Platform will be as per industry 
benchmarks. 
Secondly, in order to secure a competitive third party credit rating (local or global) and 
attractive financing terms for this debt, the Platform will 1) establish robust credit and risk 
assessment frameworks, seeking to minimise payment defaults, 2) have a diversified 
portfolio by sub-sector, financing solution and credit profile of counterparties, 3) have a 
professional and experienced management team, 4) adopt the strong governance and risk 
framework generally followed by MAM managed companies, and 5) leverage on 
Macquarie’s global expertise to overcome any initial challenges.   
How much quantum of co-financing capital will the Platform be able to mobilise? 
As mentioned in section B.3, the Programme will look to offer bespoke financial products 
such as operating leases, finance leases and structured loans depending upon the 
requirement of the counterparty. By offering such unique financing solutions, the Platform 
expects some level of either equity investment, mezzanine debt or secured debt to be raised 
by the counterparties. The exact amount of this funding may vary across each lessee / 
borrower. 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component I: 
Crowding-in of 
capital  
 
Output 1.1: 
Corporate 
structure 
establishm
ent 
Output 1.2: 
Decarbonisi
ng India’s 
transport 
sector 
through 
investments 
across the 
e-mobility 
value chain 
 
Click here 
to enter 
text. 
USD 405 
million 
USD 200 
million 
Equity 
USD 205 
million 
Equity 
To be 
finalised 
once GCF is 
confirmed as 
an anchor 
investor. 
USD 1,092 
million 
- 
Choose an 
item. 
USD 1,092 
million 
Choose an 
item. 
Domestic / 
international 
banks and 
other 
financial 
institutions / 
markets to 
be finalised 
near the 
debt 
drawdown 
date. 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
USD 1,497 
million 
USD 200 million 
USD 1,297 million 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒  No ☐

=== PAGE 39 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
 
The focus of the e-mobility Programme is to provide bespoke financial solutions to EV focussed companies in 
India. This Programme will create an enabling environment through the flow of capital into domestic OEMs, 
operators and start-ups, which have otherwise been unable to raise long term financing at attractive terms. This 
Programme will invest in the e-mobility sector at scale which will demonstrate new financing solutions to the 
market, build capacity of counterparties in developing financing solutions and support government tenders and 
initiatives. Furthermore, it is expected that various domestic OEMs, operators and / or start-ups who receive 
the capital from the Programme will: 
1. recycle capital and invest either in technological advancements or expanding existing / establishing 
new manufacturing facilities; 
2. re-invest capital in existing business to make it more sustainable; 
3. invest in further development of supply chain; 
4. be encouraged to participate in vertical or horizontal integration; and 
5. encourage new financiers (debt and equity investors) to take additional risk. 
 
All the above factors cumulatively are expected to help reduce the upfront vehicle and maintenance costs, thus 
driving down the EV TCO below that of ICE vehicles, and help in the overall development of the e-mobility 
sector.

=== PAGE 40 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
As a signatory to the Paris Agreement, India has committed to reducing the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33% to 
35% below 2005 levels by 2030 (UNFCCC, 2015). While India includes a sector-specific target for the power sector in 
its NDC and COP26 pledges, there is no such target for the transport sector. Decarbonising the transport sector in India 
can help to substantially reduce the impacts related to GHG emissions and other air pollutants and has several 
additional potential co-benefits, such as major improvements in public health, particularly in urban areas, improved fuel 
savings and reduced noise pollution.  
Electrification of vehicles plays an essential role in decarbonising the transport sector69 as it offers promising GHG 
emission abatement potential, in comparison to other alternates, by 2050 i.e., towards 1.5°C scenario proposed by 
IPCC (refer to the below diagram). However, a mix of financial, behavioural and infrastructure incentives are needed to 
develop the e-mobility sector and associate infrastructure to achieve the promised targets.  
 
 
 
The proposed Programme is expected to have a direct GHG reduction potential of ~2.3 MtCO2e over the 
implementation period and ~9.5 MtCO2e over the lifetime. Note that, to improve the additionality of the program, the 
Platform will seek to encourage counterparties to use natural coolants in the vehicles instead of hydrofluorocarbons. 
However, on a conservative basis, the impact of this has not been considered as part of the additionality analysis. 
The Programme, through its implementation approach, is poised to lead the pathways to decarbonise the transport 
sector in India, pursuant to India’s NDCs and COP26 pledges. Discussions on the Programme’s leverage towards 
sustainable development, including contribution to 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, are elaborated in the 
subsequent section (refer to section D.3 – Sustainable development for more details). 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The E-mobility Financing Programme aims to encourage a wide range of initiatives and aspects which are related to 
sustainability. For instance, the Programme aims to support the acceleration of India’s EV sector as a key 
mechanism in decarbonising the transport sector. Financing solutions provided by the platform will aim to create a 
paradigm shift within the Indian context by supporting the private sector to drive forward the e-mobility sector, which 
can serve as an example for other similar markets. The Platform’s ability to drive reduction of ~9.5 MtCO2e emissions 
over the lifetime, will contribute towards making India more resilient to the impacts of climate change, and provide a 
pathway that is consistent with national adaption strategies and plans (refer to section B.1). 
The Platform will also contribute to the Indian regulatory framework and other policies launched by the Indian 
government and several state governments by regularly engaging with them and providing inputs on how to increase 
 
69 Decarbonising the Indian transport sector pathways and policies, Dec 2020, Climate Action Tracker.

=== PAGE 41 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
the effectiveness and impact of policies / regulations enacted. For instance, the Platform will work with the government 
to slowly reduce subsidies and other tax incentives over time as the sector achieves maturity and substantial crowding-
in of private capital, which would help achieve TCO parity across various segments of the e-mobility value chain. 
Additionally, the Platform will provide support to government think-tanks, such as the Niti Aayog, and other government 
bodies in formulating new policies leveraging MAM’s global presence in leading EV markets such as China, USA, UK, 
and Germany, that will drive the development and success of the Indian EV ecosystem and EV financing market.  
Contribution to an enabling environment for private sector investment 
The EV sector is currently partially supported by an enabling policy environment, however, several barriers to 
investment (as outlined in section B.2 – Theory of Change) currently exist. The Platform aims to shift the e-mobility 
sector from a nascent industry to a mainstream sector which does not rely on concessional funding.  
Contribute to achieving cost parity: The Platform, through its ‘first-of-kind’ financing solutions, aims to provide operating 
and finance leases to OEMs, sponsors, and operators. These financial solutions, priced at attractive rates with long 
tenures, will assist the counterparties to deleverage their balance sheets and recycle their limited capital, thereby 
encouraging further investments in technological advancements / R&D. Higher expenditure on R&D is expected to help 
reduce the high upfront EV cost and achieve TCO parity far before the current estimate of 2030 for different electric 
vehicles as provided in the diagram below.70 
Vehicles 
Upfront cost 
differential 
Expected time for TCO parity 
(with subsidy) 
Expected time for TCO parity 
(without subsidy) 
Two wheelers 
(Commercial) 
0.9x – 1.1x 
At partity  
2023 
Two wheelers (High 
speed) 
1.5x – 2.0x 
2024 
2028 
Three wheelers 
1.2x – 1.5x 
At parity  
2022 
Four wheelers  
(Commercial) 
2.0x – 2.5x 
2023 
2025 
Four wheelers 
(Personal) 
2.0x – 2.5x 
2025 
2030 
Bus 
2.0x - 3.0x 
2024 
2030 
 
Contribute to providing supportive infrastructure: By offering financial solutions to key parts of the ecosystem, the 
Platform is expected to support overall market development, especially in the area of charging infrastructure. For 
example, financial products to enable more widespread deployment of charging infrastructure assets / projects, 
especially in dense city areas, can reduce behavioural barriers, such as range anxiety for consumers. Supportive 
infrastructure such as battery swapping stations and quick charge stations would enhance EV adoption and make it 
more economically viable to own an EV. Strong supportive infrastructure has been shown to be a leading contributor 
to greater penetration growth in more mature EV markets.71 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning 
The core focus of the Platform is to achieve maturation of the e-mobility market and development of EV financing 
market in multiple ways: 
• 
Local and sustainable industry growth: This Programme intends to partner with local OEMs and other 
companies such that the e-mobility technical and market capacity is developed locally. The advantages of local 
development of EVs include lower costs, new job creation (refer to section to D.3 – Sustainable Development) 
and better logistical coordination. The Platform would also work with counterparties to encourage inclusive, 
socially responsible business practices. This would support the long-term growth of the sector and reduce the 
need for concessional or public funding over time. 72 This also contributes to the Indian government’s vision of 
an Atmanirbhar Bharat (Self-Reliant India) and ‘Make in India’ initiative, as the Programme encourages the 
growth and development of local businesses and industries.  
 
 
70 https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/in/pdf/2020/10/electric-vehicle-mobility-ev-adoption.pdf and industry discussions. 
71 Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVs): Towards A Policy Framework- NITI Aayog, 2018. 
72 Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVs): Towards A Policy Framework- NITI Ayog, 2018.

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
• 
Financing structures: The focus on financing and leasing structures, rather than equity ownership of companies, 
through this Platform is expected to support the development of innovative business models across a broad 
range of local companies in India, where there are currently significant financing gaps. EV leasing is the 
predominate financing model in mature markets73 and propagation of this structure is expected to encourage 
increased investment from private sector participants as the market matures. The Platform will look to offer long 
term leasing solutions at attractive terms (such as low interest rates, high LTV ratios, limited security and 
undertake asset ownership risk) which are not offered by any of the existing financial institutions in India. Below 
is a brief comparison of the types of products available in the market. 
 
Parameters 
E-Mobility 
Financing 
Platform 
Banks 
NBFCs 
EV specific product 
offering 
Yes 
Limited offering by couple of 
banks  
Limited offering by select 
NBFCs  
Type of products 
Operating and financial leases, 
Structured loans 
Loans 
Structured loans 
  
• 
Most banks and NBFCs are generally reluctant to provide financing solutions to EV companies due to the high 
technology risk and unproven business models (due to a lack of operating history). The Platform aims to change 
this paradigm as the learnings from the Programme will act as guiding precedents on how to price the product, 
manage various operational and financial risks, and what protection measures financial institutions need to seek 
to ensure appropriate risks adjusted returns on their capital investment. 
 
• 
Institutional investment: Institutional investors generally invest in mature markets and have a lower risk appetite 
compared to public investors. The Platform intends to approach institutional investors to crowd-in investors to 
a sector / geography that they may have not previously considered due to the sector’s nascent stage of 
development. It is intended that by providing exposure through a platform with a risk buffer provided by GCF’s 
concessional capital, institutional investors will build their capacity and better understand the market as it 
matures, such that further investment can be considered with less or no reliance on concessional finance over 
time.  
 
Potential for scale-up and replication  
Financing solutions developed by the Platform will be designed for the Indian context, with an understanding of what 
has worked best in other mature e-mobility markets. Once established, the structures may have an ‘example’ effect 
whereby other financiers can replicate the products in the market to generate greater investment in the sector.  
A successful electrification of India’s EV market, at scale, provides a path for other geographies with similar markets to 
follow, including other South- and South-east Asian developing countries who are similarly faced with significant 
population and economic growth that will increase the contribution of emissions from the transport sector. The Platform 
itself could also be replicated in other markets to similarly support early-stage investment and providing financing 
support in-line with country ambitions. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
73 For example, 80% of EVs in the US market are leased and not sold. KPMG, NextContinent.

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
Social co-benefits 
Social and gender impacts 
Through its partnerships with select domestic OEMs, the Programme aims to promote universal access and safety 
measures for women, children and people with disabilities, including proper lighting, in-vehicle cameras, vehicle 
monitoring systems and other safety measures, especially in buses. The Platform will look to encourage the 
engagement of women and men of all ages as stakeholders in the design, development and implementation of 
strategies and activities to be financed. A report by the World Research Institute (WRI) states that, the manufacturing 
and delivery of electric vehicles will require far lesser mechanical tasks that are perceived to be heavy-duty. Instead, 
digital and IT related skills that are more cerebral and ‘strength neutral’ will be needed. This opens the possibility of 
promoting inclusion and gender diversity in the auto industry workforce, which has historically been lopsided. Some 
vehicle manufacturers in India have set up women only shop floors, but mainstreaming and additional systematic efforts 
are required. Studies show that gender parity improves problem-solving, leading to increased profits. This is unlikely to 
become a reality for India without concrete actions, which may include: (i) Stronger marketing of skilling courses for 
women, (ii) Incentivising industry players who maintain gender balance in diverse roles across the sector, and (iii) 
Establishing labour and on-the-job welfare systems for equal benefits, job growth and safety for women working in the 
transport industry.74 The Platform therefore will strive to maximise the impact of its funding for adaptation, mitigation 
and promotion of environmental, social, economic, and development benefits, taking not only a gender-sensitive, but a 
gender-responsive approach in line with the GCF’s Gender Policy (refer to Annex 8 – Gender assessment and 
programme level action plan for more details). 
Environmental co-benefits 
Air pollution and health outcomes 
The transport sector in India is linked with emissions of other pollutants, such as fine particulate matter (PM2.5), known 
to have a damaging impact on human health. This is caused by (among other things)75 vehicles with low emission 
standards, compounded by increased congestion in cities, causing pollutants to be trapped. India has 21 of the top 30 
most polluted cities76 and it is estimated that over 84% of India’s population are exposed to high concentrations of air 
pollution. This causes over 2 million deaths annually, and associated healthcare costs equalling ~5.4% of GDP.77 India’s 
capital, Delhi, was ranked as the worst city in the World Air Quality Report 2019,78 and half of the 50 most polluted 
cities were also in India. The adoption of electric vehicles, especially in urban areas, will reduce pollution compared to 
adoption of ICE vehicles and, over time, replace older, polluting vehicles, thereby improving risk to the health of the 
population.  
Economic co-benefits 
Energy security 
The Indian government’s push for EVs is directly linked with its stated intent to enhance energy security in addition to 
GHG emissions reduction. Since the early 2000s, India’s crude oil imports have risen steeply, of which 40% of total oil 
consumption comes from the transport sector.79 Oil imports contributed USD 102 billion to the Indian trade deficit in 
2020, covering over 80% of the country’s oil needs. 80 An increase in the penetration of EVs directly and indirectly 
through this Programme will decrease India’s oil import requirement, decreasing oil imports which is estimated to save 
USD 330 billion between 2017 and 2030, as well as corresponding GHG emissions.81  
Economic impact and job creation 
 
74 “EV Connect” by WRI India, Issue 16, November 2019. 
75 Pollution is also linked to cooking activities, construction dust and factory emissions in cities. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-
india-48744163  
76 IQAir Study, “World’s most polluted cities 2019”. 
77 Greenpeace report on “Air pollution from fossil fuels – Feb 2020”. 
78 https://www.iqair.com/world-most-polluted-cities/world-air-quality-report-2019-en.pdf  
79 International Energy Agency (IEA) – World Energy Outlook 2018. 
80 Economic Times Publication on “India’s crude oil import – April 2020”. 
81 NITI Aayog.

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
 
India’s middle income class group is expected to increase from 158 million households in 2018 to 300 million 
households by 2030.82,83 During the same period, the number of urban residents is expected to increase from 473 
million to 600 million.84 This is poignant for the e-mobility Programme, which primarily aims to target public buses and 
corporate fleet segments which are mainly used by middle income groups and urban residents. Further, through its 
investments, the Programme will aim to provide a safe, reliable, comfortable, and affordable transportation system, 
which will increase the adoption rate among urban residents and middle-income groups, thereby accentuating the 
Programme’s intended impact.  
Additionally, as per a recent Niti Aayog report, European Climate Foundation has estimated that any reduction in oil 
demand by more efficient electric cars is expected to create 500,000 to 850,000 more domestic jobs by 2030. This 
report explains that oil production and distribution has a very low employment intensity, with just four jobs per million 
Euros of value added. This is far below the 24 jobs per million Euros in the general economy. Therefore, any shift in 
expenditure from buying imported oil to other expenditure choices would generate additional employment.85  
The below chart highlights how a transition to EVs results in cumulative benefits to the economy, primarily through 
increased job creation.86  
 
Thus, the Programme, through its partnerships with leading domestic OEMs, operators and sponsors, will have a 
significant impact on the local economy through new job creation in both rural and urban areas, and supporting urban 
mobility for economic growth. 
Alignment to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
The Programme represents an increasingly important linkage to provide value to society by delivering safe, secure, 
and sustainable mobility and associated co-benefits. It has a large potential to promote and accelerate country’s 
 
82 Note: Low income: < USD 4,000, Lower mid: USD 4,000-8,500, Upper-mid: USD 8,500-40,000, High income: >USD 40,000, basis income 
per household in real terms per annum; Projections with annual GDP growth assumed at 7.5%. 
83 World Economic Forum – Future of consumption in fast growing consumer markets: India. 
84 World Economic Forum – 3 biggest challenges for India’s future. 
85 Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVS): Towards A Policy Framework- NITI Ayog, 2018, pp 10. 
86 https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/CEEW-India's-EV-Transition-Post-COVID-19-22Dec20.pdf.

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
 
National Development Agenda to implement United Nations Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 as mirrored in the 
SDGs. The Programme relates to the following United Nations SDGs:  
Key UN SDG 
Contribution  
 
1. Reduced emissions from greenhouse gases 
2. Reduced air pollution (Lower health related issues) 
3. Reduced petrol / diesel fuel use 
 
1. 
Reduction in urban air and noise pollution 
2. 
Improved health outcomes / lower costs87, 88, 89 
3. 
Improved ride comfort 
 
1. 
Accelerates shift from ICE to EV 
2. 
Faster scale helps lower upfront costs 
3. 
Innovative financing  
 
1. 
Cleaner air 
2. 
Promoting public transport 
3. 
Promoting financial sustainability 
 
1. 
Greater adoption of public transport 
2. 
Improved productivity 
3. 
New high quality manufacturing and maintenance jobs  
 
1. 
Promoting access to technology 
2. 
Mobilizing international capital 
3. 
Building capacity for green transition 
• 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
India’s vulnerabilities 
Between 1901 and 2018, India’s average temperature rose by 0.7°C, resulting in extreme weather events and putting 
pressure on the country’s already scarce resources, thereby threatening the livelihood of millions of people. In recent 
times, with increases in sporadic climatic events such as cloud bursts, flash floods, unseasonal rains and prolonged 
droughts, crop failures have become widespread, water shortages more chronic (India already ranks as #13 on the 
WRI’s National Water Stress Rankings Across Globe) and migration and related conflicts elevated across the country. 
Changes in rainfall patterns and sea level can have severe impact on coastal cities. Cyclone Amphan in 2020 in the 
coastal state of West Bengal was one of the strongest cyclones on record in the Bay of Bengal, killing ~100 people and 
causing USD 14 billion worth of damage.90 
 
The average temperature in India is expected to rise by 4.7°C to 5.5°C by 2100 under the Representative Concentration 
Pathway (RCP) 8.5 scenario (a scenario in which emissions continue to rise throughout the 21st century),91 with extreme 
climatic events and natural hazards rising in terms of intensity, spatial extent, and frequency across India. If there is no 
 
87 OECD has estimated the poor outdoor quality will negatively impact Indian GDP growth by ~1% between 2010 and 2060 in a “do nothing” 
scenario (~£15bn equivalent). 
88 Greenstone et al, 2015; CSTEP, 2018. 
89 Sustainable Development Department, World Bank 2013. 
90 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CycloneAmphan 
91 https://reliefweb.int/report/india/assessment-climate-change-over-indian-region-report-ministry-earth-sciences-moes

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
change to current climate mitigation policies, India may lose the equivalent of 2.8% of GDP by 2050.92 The most severe 
impact of this is expected on low and middle-income groups, women, children, and the elderly. Around 28% of the 
population, or 364 million people, live below the national poverty line of USD 2 per person per day.93 1.77 million people 
are homeless94 and 6.5% of the population are unemployed according to the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy 
(CMIE).95 Lower GDP would mean fewer jobs, which will have a disproportionate impact on youth and women. Today, 
many households in the rural and urban areas do not have adequate provision of basic infrastructure and services, 
such as access to electricity, safe water, and mobility. Given these factors, there is an urgent need to undertake low or 
zero carbon and climate resilient infrastructure investments in India. According to a recent report by Lifegate, India 
needs ~USD 2.5 trillion of investment between 2015 and 2030, or USD 170 billion/year in-order to meet its NDCs by 
2030.96 The government’s budget alone will not be sufficient to finance the required funding for climate action. While 
the Indian government has doubled its spending on green projects since 2016, its budget is increasingly focused on 
socio-economic development activities rather than climate mitigation and / or adaption activities. Furthermore, the 
COVID-19 pandemic, national lockdown and job losses have exacerbated the strain on the government’s finances as 
the need to build healthcare infrastructure takes priority. In a post Covid-19 scenario, there will be an even greater need 
for the private sector to drive capital flow in the e-mobility sector.  
Economic stimulation 
The need for economic stimulation is also critical as the country faces the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic 
has triggered a shift in the priorities of the government towards the creation of an effective healthcare ecosystem, 
primarily focused on delivering quality primary care to citizens. Confronted with the ever-growing threat of physical 
climate risks, the economy requires a more focused approach to policy development and funding. This is iterated by 
an analysis by Oxford Economics that suggests that India’s GDP could fall by 90% by 2100 if current policies are not 
improved and climate finance is not scaled up.97 Additionally, a McKinsey report states India is set to face significant 
impacts of climate change, which will also have severe impacts on economic development.98  
Financial pathways 
According to a recent report by Niti Aayog, over the next decade, India’s EV transition will require a cumulative capital 
investment of INR 19.7 trillion (USD 266 billion) in vehicles, charging infrastructure, and batteries. This analysis 
suggested that, by 2030, the market size for the financing of EVs in India has the potential to be INR 3.7 trillion (USD 
50 billion). As the amount of investment required for India’s mobility transition is significant, mobilising the investments 
to finance OEMs, battery manufacturers, charging stations and end consumers will require targeted and systemic policy 
support, in addition to shifts in market design, business models, and financial structuring. There are financing barriers 
currently in place which restrict the large-scale penetration of EVs. In a recent report, Niti Aayog and Rocky Mountain 
Institute outline the following key challenges to scaling up finance for EVs in India:99 
1. High interest rates: Electric vehicles face an additional risk premium compared to ICEs when seeking financing , 
adding to operating costs.  
2. Low LTV ratios: Due to the risk of borrower default and low EV resale value, low LTVs are offered in financing 
packages which increase the equity contribution required by operators.  
3. 
Specialised products: Most financing institutions do not currently offer specialised products such as leasing for 
EVs. Operators face high interest rates, low LTVs and shorter repayments compared to loans for ICE vehicles. 
Additional collateral may also be required, which does not support innovation by newer or smaller companies. 
The above issues get more pronounced in case of EVs as the upfront capital cost of acquisition of EVs are significantly 
higher than their peer ICE vehicles and the residual value is uncertain. Therefore, this Programme aims to provide the 
Indian transportation sector with a new and focused EV financing platform that can: 
1. play a catalytic role to accelerate the creation of India’s EV leasing market by offering customised operating 
and financial leases. By providing this solution, the Platform will be willing to undertake asset ownership, 
 
92 https://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/climate-change-could-cost-india-2-8-of-gdp-by-2050-says-world-bank-
118062801005_1.html 
93 https://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/governance/mass-poverty-is-back-in-india-
76348#:~:text=Contrast%20this%20with%20the%20situation,per%20cent%20of%20the%20population. 
94 https://www.indiaspend.com/1-77mn-indians-are-homeless-40-of-them-are-getting-no-lockdown-relief/ 
95 https://www.businesstoday.in/sectors/jobs/india-unemployment-rate-drops-65-in-january-employment-rate-surges-379-
cmie/story/431334.html 
96 https://www.lifegate.com/india-climate-finance-sdgs 
97 https://www.livemint.com/news/india/india-s-gdp-could-fall-90-by-2100-due-to-climate-change-analysis-11594187614729.html 
98 “Will India get too hot to work?” – Case Study – McKinsey Global Institute, November 2020. 
99 https://niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-01/RMI-EVreport-VF_28_1_21.pdf

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
performance and residual risks, a capability currently not available with any of the existing banks and 
NBFCs; 
2. ensure overall development of the entire EV value chain by reducing upfront capex deployment, increasing 
availability of finance and offering attractive lease / credit terms by leveraging on GCF’s concessional capital; 
3. help mobilise the massive quantum of capital from various institutional investors towards India’s EV sector and 
assist in reducing the need for government financial subsidy over time; and 
4. bring focus to a sector which has, until now, received muted response from existing banks and NBFCs. It is 
important to note that, whilst select banks, NBFCs, fintechs and sustainability financiers have started providing 
vehicle financing loans / structured credit solutions to electric vehicles: 
a) most banks and NBFCs are reluctant to participate in the sector due to small present market size, 
limited performance history and high residual value risk; and 
b) fintechs and sustainability financiers do not have the balance sheet strength to create meaningful 
impact, and are primarily retail (B2C) focused with two and three wheeler customers as the target 
segment. 
 
 
Although current policies, incentives, and financial assistance have caused some movement in the EV sector, it still is 
not adequately backed to overcome challenges faced by OEMs in accessing capital for expansion, weak business case 
for charging infrastructure and high up-front cost associated with EVs. Therefore, this Programme intends to drive 
climate mitigation (positive externalities) and economic stimulation (creation of a multiplier effect) by providing 
innovative financial solutions, investing in charging infrastructure, crowding-in institutional investors and supporting 
growth of the domestic industry to reduce costs. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
This Programme directly contributes to India’s NDC target of reducing carbon emissions by 35% by 2030 from 2005, 
including through transforming 30% of all vehicles to EVs.100 EV promotion has been supported by significant policy 
development at both the national and state levels. The Indian government has already committed subsidies of up to 
USD 1.4 billion to enable an accelerated roll out of EVs under the FAME Phase II scheme. The Programme will 
participate in the FAME scheme and other government policies and schemes where appropriate, which includes 
requirements for a predefined level of domestic component manufacturing.  
At least 10 states have policies that are being implemented, and another six are drafting relevant policies101. Although 
most of these policies prioritise public transport, paratransit, and job creation, each of these states have also set targets 
and other incentives (depending on the state) for supply-side (manufacturing) and demand-side (consumer and 
charging infrastructure investments).102 For example, this Programme will seek, directly or indirectly, to engage in 
tenders released by the states for public buses, charging infrastructure or otherwise, and aim to be involved in 
stakeholder discussions to support further policy development.  
Stakeholder engagement  
Whilst we have been in active discussions with multiple stakeholders across the value chain, including government 
entities such as Niti Aayog, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway (MoRTH), the Ministry of Environment, Forest, 
and Climate Change (MoEFCC) and the Ministry of Power, most of the efforts have been largely concentrated towards 
engaging with Niti Aayog, the Indian government’s think thank, which is the key driver of all e-mobility initiatives in India. 
It has been playing a major role in shaping industry policies, guidelines, charging standards and best practices for the 
Indian EV ecosystem.  
In addition, several discussions have been held with other industry stakeholders, including leading domestic OEMs, 
bus operators, charge infrastructure providers, vehicle scrappage companies, banks, NBFCs, and independent experts. 
The discussions have been focused on:  
• 
better understanding the present market dynamics; 
• 
future growth potential of the EV sector; 
 
100 http://www.cleanenergyministerial.org/campaign-clean-energy-ministerial/ev3030-
campaign#:~:text=The%20EV30%4030%20campaign%20redefines,share%20for%20EVs%20by%202030. 
101 Niti Aayog and Rocky Mountain Institute. “Mobilising Finance for EVs in India”. January 2021. 
102 Ramanath Jha, “Preparing Indian Cities for a Shift to E-Mobility,” ORF Issue Brief No. 458, April 2021, Observer Research Foundation.

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
• 
opportunities, key challenges, and constraints faced by the industry, especially in relation to high upfront vehicle 
costs, lack of financing solutions, slow progress on EV adoption, etc.; 
• 
understanding how some of the key risks and constraints can be addressed; and 
• 
ground realities, challenges, and issues in the implementation of EV related infrastructure. 
 
The key constraint we have identified during this dialogue has been access to the right kind of capital. The proposed 
Programme seeks to address this constraint. 
 Engagement with National Designated Authority (NDA)  
There has been an active engagement with NDA since the Concept Note stage, regularly updating it about the various 
aspects of the e-mobility programme as envisaged by MAM.  
The AE secured a No Objection Letter for the Programme from Indian government on 15th September 2021 
(refer to Annex 01 – No Objection Letter for more details).  
Capacity and successful track record to execute investments in India 
For over twenty-five years, MAM has partnered with clients, governments, and communities to finance, manage, 
develop, and enhance essential infrastructure. Today, MAM’s portfolio is relied on by more than 100 million people 
every day and employs ~170,000 people globally.103 Our team of highly experienced professionals invest in businesses 
that underpin economies and communities, aiming to add real and lasting value for our clients and the people our 
assets serve. 
MAM launched its first India focused fund with ~USD 1 billion of capital commitments in 2009 in partnership with the 
State Bank of India and IFC.104 Since then, MAM has invested via its multiple Asia funds across roads, airports, 
communications, energy, and renewable energy in the country.  
MAM’s India portfolio is managed by a team of highly experienced investment and asset management professionals in 
the infrastructure and impact investing space, based out of Mumbai in India. The team is well supported by MAM’s 
global network on asset management, legal, ESG, HR, IT, finance and tax related matters.  
Given MAM’s prescence across India through its portfolio, the investment team has a robust mechanism of stakeholder 
management ably supported by senior management of portfolio companies, third party consultants and advisers. This 
mechanism ensures that MAM India is continuously engaged with all stakeholders, such as central and state 
government ministries and agencies, consultants / advisers, competitors through industry forums and end users, to be 
abreast of the latest trends, developments and policy changes envisaged by the government. Through its strong 
relationships across the industry, MAM India can play a vital role in the overall development of the sector and growth 
of the Indian economy. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The e-mobility sector in India requires a significant amount of capital to accelerate the transition to EVs and avoid the 
multi decade technology lock-in of conventional vehicles. However, as a nascent sector, commercial investors do not 
have the risk appetite to deploy the capital at the pace required given the real and perceived investment risks outlined 
in this proposal. Although there is strong government support, the market requires additional intervention from 
concessional capital to help the market mature and create an enabling environment for large-scale commercial 
investments.  
Role of GCF capital 
Capital provided by GCF will serve to crowd-in all other investors into the Programme that would otherwise have not 
explored the opportunity to invest in the e-mobility sector in India due to their risk appetite, nascency of the sector, or 
small investment ticket size.  
The Programme aims to provide ‘first of its kind’ financing solutions in the market, such as operating and finance leases, 
through a new investment vehicle in India. GCF’s capital will sit in a ‘first-loss’ position which provides a cushion to the 
 
103 https://www.macquarie.com/assets/macq/investor/results-and-presentations/2021/macquarie-group-fy21-presentation.pdf 
104 https://www.macquarie.com/au/en/about/news/2009/sbi-and-macquarie-launch-indian-infrastructure-fund-usd1billion-raised.html

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
potential downside investment risks for commercial investors. This has been sized based on the risk appetite of potential 
investors, including what level of downside risk can be accepted by these types of investors.  
GCF’s capital will be provided in the form of an equity instrument which is able to take a high-risk position in the 
investment structure in line with GCF’s elevated risk appetite. Further, GCF’s involvement will not only increase the 
amount of capital invested in the sector, but also allow the Platform to provide financing that is not currently available 
in the market (i.e. a higher risk appetite than current financiers are able to provide). Over time, current financiers / other 
market participants will replicate the Platform’s business model and leverage its learnings to provide wide array of 
financing solutions to large number of counterparties, thus assisting in overall development of the EV ecosystem.  
Role of the Platform 
As described in this proposal, there are several interested parties and existing players (such as OEMs / operators, etc.) 
who are seeking to grow in the e-mobility space, however they are currently inhibited by high upfront costs and limited 
availability of financing solutions. This Platform, through its innovative financing solutions such as operating and 
financial leases, helps to mitigate these issues. Further, it generates efficiency by enabling OEMs / operators to help 
recycle capital which can be deployed by them to drive technological advancements, market development, growth of 
associated infrastructure within India.  
Structure and mobilisation 
Pooling of GCF and other investors outside of India establishes the waterfall of cashflow returns from the underlying 
Platform in a way that is familiar to international and large-scale investors (refer to sections B.4, C.1 and C.2 for more 
details).

=== PAGE 50 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☐ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of 
change).     
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
There is a growing level 
of investment in the e-
mobility space in India, 
which is contributing to 
the penetration of EVs 
and ultimately reduced 
GHG emissions from 
the transport sector. 
However, the sector is 
stil in its nascency and 
investment needs to be 
Low 
A mature market and enabling 
environment across multiple sub-sectors 
within e-mobility segment resulting in 
increased penetration of EVs, 
development of associated infrastructure, 
and achievement of various national 
adaption targets. 
The programme aims to mobilise ~USD 
2.1 billion105 of capital over the 
implementation period by providing 
bespoke financing solutions (such as 
leasing and other structured credit 
solutions) to e-mobility companies and 
customers, thus supporting deployment 
of ~115,000 new EVs and charging 
infrastructure points over the life of the 
Programme (activity 2). Further, this 
intervention is projected to deliver ~9.5 
MtCO2e of lifetime GHG emission 
reductions and ~32 MT of other pollutants 
 
105 Includes redeployment of internal accruals

=== PAGE 51 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
 
scaled-up to support 
maturation of the 
market. 
being avoided (~20.5 MT of Carbon 
Monoxide (CO) and ~11.5 MT of Nitrogen 
Oxides (NOx)), even before any 
replication effects are considered, 
representing a paradigm shift on 
emissions.  
Additionally, mobilisation of capital 
through ‘first of its kind’ leasing solutions 
is expected to drive TCO parity among 
electric and ICE vehicles at a much faster 
pace, whilst at the same time enabling 
OEMs / operators/ sponsors to recycle 
capital for further technological 
advancements, thus setting up the right 
environment for the market to mature and 
scale up the impact. 
Replicability 
There are limited 
financing solutions 
(especially leasing 
solutions) available in 
the e-mobility space in 
India.  
Low 
A number of financing solutions available 
from multiple providers (beyond the 
Platform funded by this GCF Program) 
and across e-mobility sub-sectors. These 
financing solutions are fit-for-purpose and 
apply best practices developed from the 
Platform’s experience.  
The Platform will be established by the 
Programme (activity 1) and provide 
financing to counterparties (~USD 2.1 
billion106 over the life of the Program) 
across e-mobility sectors. Financing 
solutions will be new to the market or 
build on existing best practices across 
different sub-sectors. Successful 
implementation of these new structures 
will promote replication both within and 
outside India.  
Further, the Platform will provide direct 
employment opportunities which will also 
help develop capacity within the sector. 
Sustainability 
Investment in the e-
mobility space is 
growing, however 
sustainable and 
profitable business 
Low 
The creation of an enabling environment 
to support continued growth of the e-
mobility sector in India, including new 
participants and sustainable business 
models. In particular, sustained 
The Platform will be established as a 
‘going-concern’ entity and will implement 
best in class governance, institutional and 
fiduciary frameworks to provide financing 
solutions to multiple counterparties / 
customers. The exit strategy for the GCF 
 
106 Includes redeployment of internal accruals

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
 
models across various 
e-mobility sub-segments 
are yet to be 
established.  
availability of financing for key segments 
of the e-mobility space where there is 
significant potential to reduce GHG 
emissions. 
envisages the Platform being sold either 
to a new or existing market participant, 
who will continue to operate the Platform 
and therefore continue to finance the e-
mobility sector. The sale of the Platform 
will be evidence of e-mobility market 
maturation and will also provide an 
avenue for the intervention to be 
continued. 
  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term107 
Final108,109 
 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Portfolio company data 
and independent 
verifications of inputs to 
GHG calculation 
methodology. 
0 
~0.3 MtCO2 
~2.3 MtCO2 
Methodology: For EVs 
(CDM Version AMS III C: 
Emission reduction by 
electric and hybrid vehicles 
– version 15.0) and for EV 
charging systems (Verified 
Carbon Standard (Verra) 
VM0038 – Methodology for 
electric charging systems).  
Project Lifetime: 20 years 
based on initial capital 
 
107 Mid term refers to FY27 (5 years from FAA effective date). 
108 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective. 
109 Final refers to FY32 (10 years from FAA effective date). Note that there is a high likelihood that GCF investment may be exited before this timeline in which case the targets will need to be 
suitably modified.

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
 
deployed over 5 years and 
15 year vehicle life. 
Annual emissions avoided: 
~0.23 MtCO2e 
Lifetime emission 
reductions: ~9.5 MtCO2e 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current state 
(baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
EV and charging 
technology is somewhat 
established in India, 
especially in 2W. 
However conversion to 
this new technology 
away from ICE is still in 
its nascency and further 
innovation is pivotal in 
accelerating the market 
towards greater 
penetration of EVs. 
medium 
A mature market for EVs 
in India where the 
national target of 30% 
(or otherwise by sector) 
is reached by 2030. This 
will involve not only 
conversion to existing 
technology, but private 
sector (including OEMs 
and other financing 
counterparties) investing 
further in research and 
development across the 
sector. 
The programme will 
provide financing 
solutions to support 
financing counterparties 
choose the new 
technology of EV 
(including new models 
developed) over ICE, 
ultimately supporting 
greater penetration of 
EVs in India and 
supporting the paradigm 
shift. These financing 
solutions will address 
the significant upfront 
cost of a new EV, 
allowing for greater 
capital to be recycled by 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
 
companies into research 
and development.  
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
The e-mobility sector in 
India has significant 
potential, however it 
remains in its nascency. 
Despite the regulatory 
and policy frameworks in 
place, the markets in 
most sub-sectors remain 
relatively limited and 
best practice business 
models are still being 
developed. Increased 
capital, and financing 
options in particular, are 
needed to support large-
scale investment that will 
contribute to overall 
market maturation. 
medium 
Strong e-mobility 
financing market offering 
a range of products to 
support investment of 
capital across the e-
mobility sector, which 
increases the 
penetration of EVs and 
enabling infrastructure. 
This should, in turn, put 
downward pressure on 
the cost curve and make 
EVs more attractive 
compared to traditional 
fuel alternatives. 
The programme will 
provide financing 
solutions to 
counterparties across 
the e-mobility space 
which will not only 
support scaling up new 
EV penetration, but also 
have the potential to be 
replicated by other 
financiers to further 
scale-up the market 
impact. 
 
National level (one 
country) 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Best practice and range 
of financing solutions 
available in the e-
mobility space are still 
being developed. Many 
existing banks and 
financial institutions do 
not have the capacity to 
provide financing to the 
sector given the 
significant real and 
perceived risks (like 
unproven technology, 
lack of operating history, 
limited or negligible data 
on residual value, etc.). 
low 
Knowledge of financing 
products and best 
practices within each 
sub-sector is developed. 
Increased capacity 
among financial 
institutions and 
otherwise to provide 
customised financing 
solutions to companies / 
customers in the e-
mobility space at 
attractive terms. 
Financiers provide 
knowledge and learnings 
to support development 
The programme will 
provide financing 
solutions not currently 
available in the market 
and help develop new 
products that have the 
potential to be 
replicated. 
Counterparties will also 
be exposed to the 
implementation of good 
standards in 
environmental, social 
(including gender) and 
fiduciary elements. The 
programme will have 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
 
There are some new 
entrants to the market in 
specific segments or 
products, however 
increased capacity to 
deliver a range of 
financing solutions is 
important for scaling-up 
the penetration of EVs 
and the transition away 
from ICE vehicles. 
of policies and 
regulations in the e-
mobility space. 
monitoring and 
evaluation systems in 
place to identify lessons 
learned. The Platform 
will participate in forums 
of knowledge sharing to 
support regulation and 
policy in the e-mobiltiy 
space. 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs). AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Output I – Crowding-in 
of commercial capital to 
invest in the e-mobility 
sector in India 
Capital raised at the 
platform level from 
commercial sources 
leveraging GCF 
capital (annual basis) 
Final capital structure 
0 
USD 205 
million 
USD 205 
million 
This represents the total 
equity capital expected to 
be raised from 
commercial investors 
during the implementation 
period across the 
executing entities. 
Additional equity is not 
expected to be raised in 
the base case, however, 
debt financing for the 
Platform will be sought.

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110 Excludes the management fee, setup, and other operating costs. 
111 Excludes the management fee, setup, and other operating costs. 
Note that, given the 
‘market making’ nature of 
the Programme, GCF will 
invest a minimum of USD 
50 million of capital on 
the FAA effective date 
(First Close).  
 
 
Amount of capital 
invested by the 
Platform into e-
mobility value chain 
(to be reported by 
segment) 
Platform’s annual reports 
0 
USD 841m110 
USD 2,074m111 
Total capital (including 
debt plus equity) to be 
mobilised during the 
implementation period. 
Debt capital may be 
raised from domestic or 
international banks / 
financial institutions 
depending upon the 
market conditions. 
Output II – Electric 
vehicles financed 
Number of e-buses 
financed by the 
Platform 
The Platform’s quarterly 
and annual reports 
0 
8,000 
18,000 
1.Continued strong 
government support for 
electrification of transport. 
2. Regular government 
tenders for EV buses, 
charging infrastructure 
and other e-mobility sub-
sectors. 
3. Increased investment 
in EVs will displace 
investment in ICE 
vehicles. 
 
Number of four-
wheelers financed by 
the Platform 
0 
7,000 
22,000 
Number of two / 
three-wheelers 
financed by the 
Platform 
0 
15,000 
65,000 
Output III – Charging 
stations financed 
Number of charging 
stations established 
0 
3,000 
10,500

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 E-Bus at 64.46/km compared to Diesel-Lc bus at 49.08/km as per https://wri-india.org/blog/unboxing-barriers-scaling-electric-bus-adoption-india (Note Total Cost Ownership (TCO) will vary 
depending upon the bus model, opex and leverage assumptions). 
113 https://vahan.parivahan.gov.in/vahan4dashboard/, sourced September 2021 
114 Considering stated government target and past realisation % of the targets. https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-
04/FullReport_Status_quo_analysis_of_various_segments_of_electric_mobility-compressed.pdf 
through investment by 
the Platform 
Output IV – Total 
amount invested in 
other parts of the e-
mobility value chain 
Percentage of total 
investments into other 
parts of e-mobility 
value chain 
 
0 
 
Up to 5% 
 
Up to 5% 
 
Outcome 1 – Enabling 
environment for EV 
market established 
The TCO of electric 
buses per kilometre 
compared to ICE 
alternative 
Portfolio company data 
1.31x112 
1.25x 
1.15x 
Continued overall market 
growth, government 
support and shifting 
consumer attitudes. 
Not assumed to be 
directly attributable to the 
Programme but reflective 
of the overall growth in 
the sector. 
Conservative targets set 
given the Programme 
does not have control 
over outcomes of entire 
market. 
TCO representative of 
entire market and not just 
the buses financed by the 
Platform. 
 
Outcome 2 – 
Increased penetration 
of electric vehicles in 
India 
% penetration of EVs 
as a proportion of 
total new vehicles 
registered 
Government published 
data 
1.7%113 
5% 
15%114 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit – 
Decreased pollution 
Tail pipe emissions of 
Carbon Monoxide 
Portfolio company data 
and independent 
verifications 
0 
3,096 tonnes 
20,505 tonnes 
Tail pipe emissions 
reduced are calculated 
basis average of Bharat

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 https://dieselnet.com/standards/in/2wheel.php, https://dieselnet.com/standards/in/ld.php, https://dieselnet.com/standards/in/hd.php 
(CO) avoided through 
Platform investments 
Standard IV and BS VI 
emission standards 
across multiple vehicle 
segment115 
Tail pipe emissions of 
Nitrogen Oxides 
(NOx) avoided 
through Platform 
investments 
Portfolio company data 
and independent 
verifications 
0 
1,929 tonnes 
11,536 tonnes 
Co-benefit – Direct job 
creation 
Direct jobs created by 
the Platform 
The Platform’s annual 
reports 
0 
75 
100 
Baseline of zero given the 
company is not yet 
established. 
Direct jobs defined by 
roles created by the 
Platform itself and not 
including consultants or 
roles created at financing 
counterparties. 
Expected growth driven 
by investments and new 
debt capital raised 
increasing size of overall 
Platform and capacity for 
staff. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity set 1– Platform establishment and fundraising

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.1.1 – Establishment of e-
mobility program’s corporate 
structure 
Establishment of corporate entities / 
structure in Singapore and India for 
tax efficient inflow / outflow of capital 
to finance India’s ‘first of its kind’ ‘e-
mobility program’ 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 – Establishment 
of corporate structure outside India 
 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2 – Setup of 
corporate structure within India 
 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 – Raise capital 
from commercial investors and 
financial institutions 
• 
Setup of LP – GP structure for 
transfer of GCF capital into the e-
mobility program. 
• 
Establishment of corporate 
structure and entities in India and 
procurement of NBFC license for 
the Platform company to provide 
financing solutions to 
counterparties. 
• 
Crowding-in of commercial 
investors, including fundraising 
efforts and legal execution of their 
investments either in LP and / or 
SG Master Co., SG Co. and / or 
the Platform. 
• 
Ensure entire corporate structure 
is compliant with all applicable 
local rules and regulations. 
Activity 1.2.1 – Setup of systems 
and processes in each entity 
Adoption of various operational and 
governance related frameworks and 
policies to ensure smooth, efficient, 
inclusive and transparent working of 
each corporate entity 
Sub-Activity 1.2.1.1 – Finalise 
governance policies and standards 
including adoption of operational 
manual and investment procedures as 
agreed with GCF 
• 
Adopt risk management, HR, 
cybersecurity, third party vendor, 
E&S and D&I, etc. frameworks 
and policies for each entity in 
alignment with GCF policies at 
each entity level. 
Activity 1.3.1 – Setup of key 
management team 
Hiring and appointment of 
management team and Board to 
ensure proper functioning of each 
entity 
Sub-Activity 1.3.1.1 – Identification, 
hiring and appointment of Board of 
Directors, management team and 
support staff 
• 
Appointment of Board of Directors 
having diverse industry and 
finance experience. 
• 
Ensure timely hiring of 
management team and relevant 
support staff. 
Activity Set 2 – Platform Investments, Monitoring and Exit  
Activity 2.1.1 – Investment approval 
(pipeline development, due 
diligence, secure approval from 
Board or empower sub-committee) 
The management team to source 
transaction opportunities across the e-
mobility value chain that have strong 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1 – Sourcing of 
opportunities and development of 
pipeline, including stakeholder 
engagement with local OEMs, 
• 
Overview of origination efforts, 
including summary of stakeholder 
discussions for pipeline

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
 
potential to help in climate impact and 
drive gender and social inclusion  
government stakeholders, and 
relevant market participants 
 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2 - Due diligence, 
investment approval and transfer of 
funds 
development. To be included in 
quarterly reporting.  
• 
Reporting on number of 
opportunities considered, 
screened, approved, and 
executed. 
Activity 2.2.1 – Post investment 
performance monitoring 
Establish robust performance 
monitoring and reporting protocols for 
the lessees or borrowers also 
incorporating the additional 
requirements for GCF compliance 
 
Collect and share knowledge based 
on investment experience in the EV 
financing market 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1 – Monthly MIS, 
quarterly and annual reports to be 
prepared based on information 
received from the counterparties 
 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2 – Impact 
assessment 
 
Sub Activity 2.2.1.3 – Share 
knowledge developed on financing in 
e-mobility sector to support enabling 
environment 
• 
Ongoing monitoring of financial 
solutions provided to 
counterparties, including 
compliance with financing 
covenants, meeting of agreed 
reporting requirements, and credit 
assessment of counterparty. 
Summary will be provided in 
quarterly investment reports. 
• 
The Platform will undertake a 
climate impact assessment of the 
portfolio on annual basis. This will 
be performed either in-house or by 
an external consultant. 
• 
This assessment will be separate 
from the two independent 
evaluations that will be undertaken 
by the Platform (mid term and final 
evaluations) during the 
implementation period. 
Activity 2.3.1 – Exits 
Management team to drive exit out of 
the underlying financing products 
including realising residual value, and 
/ or overall Platform in order to 
achieve the target Internal Rate of 
Return (IRR) for Investors 
Sub-Activity 2.3.1.1 – Identifying 
potential exit opportunities 
 
Sub-Activity 2.3.1.2 – Ensure 
successful transaction closure 
• 
Management team to actively 
engage with potential investors in 
the market to explore and identify 
exit opportunities. Summary of 
any relevant exit process to be 
provided in quarterly investment 
reports. 
• 
Management team to lead all 
documentation discussions with 
the assistance of the legal adviser.

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 
It will ensure that appropriate sale 
value is received on time and 
subsequently distributed back to 
the Platform’s Investors. 
Activity Set 3 – Wind up of corporate structure 
Activity 3.1.1 – Wind up of 
corporate entities post exit 
Wind up of corporate structure post 
sale of Platform company in India or 
offshore pooling vehicle in Singapore 
Sub-Activity 3.1.1.1 – Distribution of 
capital to investors 
 
Sub-Activity 3.1.1.2 – Ensure 
compliance with share purchase 
agreements and local rules and 
regulations 
• 
Distribution of capital and returns 
to investors as per the LPA (LP 
Agreement). 
• 
Ensure compliance with 
indemnities and warranties if any. 
• 
Wind up of corporate entities in 
compliance with local rules and 
regulations 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Investment reporting 
All investors of the Platform will receive quarterly business update reports including: 
1. updates for key financings, where relevant; 
2. performance metrics; and 
3. drawdowns and distributions during the quarter. 
 
Financial reporting 
All investors of the Platform shall receive: 
1. Within 120 calendar days of the end of the relevant accounting period, annual audited accounts of the Fund for each accounting period prepared in 
accordance with the accounting principles agreed with the auditors, which shall include, without limitation, a balance sheet, profit and loss account, 
statement of changes in Investors’ capital for such period, summary of the financial information received from or in respect of investments and summary of 
material risks and their management. 
2. Quarterly reports within 60 calendar days at the end of each calendar quarter, providing an update on the performance of the Platform, a statement of 
drawdowns and distributions, anticipated capital calls during the next quarter if any, details of related party transactions, valuation, etc. 
 
ESG reporting 
The Platform will circulate with all investors an annual report on the ESG performance of all the counterparties to whom it has provided the financing solution. The 
Platform team will take inputs from the counterparties and compile the annual report for applicable reporting period as required by Investors. 
Impact reporting

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
An annual impact reporting will be performed. The mid-term and final year verification of climate impact will be undertaken by the independent third party provider. 
Monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
With regards to monitoring and evaluation of the mid-term FY27 and final impact numbers (subject to modification basis exit from the Platform), an independent 
evaluator will be appointed in FY27. 
Midterm evaluations 
At the time of midterm evaluation, significant developments may not have been achieved as the Platform will take time to reach maturity. Therefore, the focus of 
the evaluation will be on the implementation of the investment strategy. This will also cover aspects like the quantum of credit extended by the Platform, GHG 
avoidance, private sector capital catalysed, and estimated number of people served. 
Final evaluation 
For the final evaluation, it is expected that development effects will be fully realised (adjusted to the exit timelines). Therefore, an external agency will be hired to 
conduct evaluation of various aspects in line with evaluation best practice such as relevance, coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, impact, and sustainability (which 
align to the OECD DAC evaluation criteria). 
• 
Relevance: the extent to which the investments are suited to the priorities and policies of the Platform. 
• 
Coherence: the interaction of the Platform with other interventions in the the e-mobility sector in India. 
• 
Effectiveness: the extent to which the objectives of the Platform were achieved. 
• 
Efficiency: the extent to which activities were cost-efficient and timely. 
 
Impact: To assess the positive and negative changes driven by the Platform, directly or indirectly, intended, or unintended because of the financing solutions:  
• 
The focus will be on local social, economic, environmental, and other development indicators as mentioned in the previous section (at output, outcome, and 
impact level). 
• 
Comparison of baseline and end line data. 
• 
Assessment of other factors which would have been influenced the impact of the Platform. 
 
Sustainability: GCF and commercial capital will build the Platform as a high quality, long lasting business which can continue to operate and move ahead towards 
its objective of decarbonising the transport sector in India, long after the Investors have exited the company. 
Methodology for calculation of GHG emission reduction 
List of Methodologies for the Platform’s key focus sectors: 
Sectors methodology link 
 
Sector 
Methodology 
Link 
Electric vehicles  
CDM Methodology AMS-III.C., 
version 15 
CDM: Emission reductions by 
electric and hybrid vehicles

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EV Charging Systems, including 
their associated infrastructure 
Verified Carbon Standard (Verra) - 
VM0038 
VM0038 - Methodology for Electric 
Vehicle Charging Systems, version 
1.0 
 
Implementation and governance 
 
The Platform’s impact strategy will be implemented by the management team with access to the broader MAM platform and in accordance with MAM’s governance 
framework and policies.  
MAM has a team of dedicated professionals with expertise in impact assessment and reporting, sustainability, environmental science, and law, who will assist in 
the ongoing management and measurement processes throughout the Investment Period to enable reporting of impact and ESG metrics.

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
The risks associated with the Programme include deployment, credit / counterparty, technology, country, and foreign 
exchange risks inherent to all financial institutions providing leases (operating and financial), vehicle financing and other 
similar solutions. Whilst it is difficult to provide an exhaustive list of these risks, a summary of key risks has been detailed 
out below, which relate to financing by the Platform in the e-mobility sector in India. Specific risk factors will be assessed 
throughout the life of GCF’s investment in the Programme with strict monitoring and mitigation. However, no guarantee 
or assurance can be given that the investment objectives of the Programme will be achieved, or that other risks not 
outlined below do not apply to the program.  
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Deployment Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
MAM is currently in the process of building a strong pipeline which is in various stages of discussion, however, given 
the Platform is not viable without GCF and / or commercial capital, this risk has not been mitigated as yet. Whilst there 
is optimism about a robust deal flow and growth of the sector over the next few years, deployment of capital may be 
affected by several factors, including investment priorities of counterparties, increased competition from other financial 
institutions, change in government policies and volatility in macroeconomic factors which may have adverse impact on 
the Platform’s ability to deploy the funds.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
MAM believes that the Platform’s financing program, once established and backed by a highly experienced 
management team with support from MAM senior professionals’, will moderate this risk. No guarantee or representation 
is provided that the Platform will be able to deploy capital and / or achieve the expected financial returns. However, 
given the program’s wide mandate, the Platform will be able to provide financing solutions to a wide range of 
counterparties across e-mobility value chain thereby reducing the risk of the Platform to deploy the committed capital 
within the agreed timeframe. The focus of the Platform will also evolve as the e-mobility market matures in India and it 
will be guided by the Board of Directors of the Platform as well as MAM senior professionals directly involved with this 
programme.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Credit and Counterparty Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
High 
Medium 
Description 
There is a risk that the counterparties of the financing instruments will not be able to maintain their financing payments 
which could result in the instrument defaulting and ultimately a potential loss for investors.  
The Platform will be primarily providing financing instruments which will be generally illiquid in nature. These financing 
instruments may be difficult to sell or otherwise liquidate, particularly in stressed conditions, and as such the risk of loss 
may be greater than the risk of listed debt securities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform will conduct extensive due diligence on potential financing opportunities, including the creditworthiness of 
counterparties, the impact of the financing payments compared to expected revenue from use of the asset, and 
performance of the financing instrument under various stress scenarios. The Platform will seek to target contracts with 
credible counterparties with long term visibility to cashflows (preferably over life of the investment). A risk buffer to loss 
from anyone financing instrument or counterparty will be provided by diversification across different financing 
instruments, sub-sectors, and counterparties. The Platform will apply its robust monitoring process described in section 
B.3 – Programme Description to manage the risk of default and deliver the best outcome for the Platform and ultimately

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
the investors. It is anticipated that any re-possessed assets will be redeployed, although the terms of redeployment 
may vary on a case by case basis. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Technology Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Medium 
Description 
The e-mobility sector is still in its nascency in most markets, particularly in India wherein technology across the entire 
EV value chain is still evolving. Thus, there is a substantial risk that the Platform may provide financing for EVs or other 
sub-sectors based on currently available technology, which is then superseded, reducing any asset value held by the 
Platform or by counterparties. This could reduce financial returns for investors or the credit quality of counterparties.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform will apply its technical expertise and leverage MAM’s experience in conducting detailed due diligence on 
underlying technology, monitoring the latest technical advancements and trends in the sector, and analysing any 
potential impact on the financing instruments before taking any exposure. Further, whilst pricing the financial solutions, 
particularly leases, the Platform will try to account for any technology risk through a detailed estimation of expected 
residual value at the end of the lease term, which will provide the Platform the necessary cushion against any 
accelerated obsolescene of the EV technology.  
Spearately, this development in technology would also mean that there has been positive advancements in EV 
technology which could support higher EV penetration and help meet the Programme’s objectives faster.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Country and Regulatory Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Any detrimental change in laws and regulations relating to the EV sector, methods and rules of taxation, compliance, 
foreign investments, restrictions on currency conversion, imports, etc. may impact the Platform’s ability to provide 
financing solutions at attractive terms, impact its ability to deploy capital and / or restrict it to provide financing solutions 
to certain e-mobility sub-sectors.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform aims to provide financing instruments that are aligned to government priorities in the e-mobility sector and 
development of local industry. The government has put in place long-term policies to support the ongoing growth of the 
sector which should continue to support deployment opportunities in the sector, viability of the business models and 
creditworthiness of the financing counterparties. The Platform’s ability to deploy across the e-mobility value chain will 
provide diversification against the risk of regulation or policies changing in any particular sub-sector. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Exit Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
There is a risk that, at the point of GCF’s expected exit from the program, the Platform cannot be sold down to another 
investor due to poor performance of underlying financing instruments, credit worthiness of the financing counterparties, 
high technology and regulatory risks, unfavourable market conditions and unattractive pricing. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform intends to build a diversified portfolio in terms of exposure to multiple e-mobility sub-sectors, 
counterparties and financing solutions, which mitigates the concentration risk if any and acts as a hedge against any 
foreseen risk. Apart from this, the Platform will be led by a highly experienced management with strong background in 
screening and evaluating potential opportunities and performance monitoring. Further, the Platform will implement best 
in class governance practices and will have strong oversight and support from MAM, who have significant experience 
in developing and executing an exit strategy for the benefit of investors. The risk is also managed by the expected

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
growth in the sector ajnd strong policy alignment, which provide strong fundamentals for market development and 
create a case for a robust exit for the investors. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Bribery an Corruption Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Senior management of the financing counterparties may be involved in committing fraud or the adoption of other 
deceptive practices which may 1) have a negative impact on Platform’s reputation, 2) stifle further debt and equity 
capital flow into the sector, and 3) undermine the Platform’s due diligence efforts and its ability to generate desired 
returns from the asset. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Macquarie Group has a robust Bribery and Corruption framework which will be implemented by the Platform as part of 
upfront establishment. Upfront and ongoing monitoring of financing counterparties will be performed, including 
enhanced due diligence where required. Compliance with the Bribery and Corruption policies and procedures will be 
reported to the Platform Board and to the Accredited Entity on an ongoing basis.  
The Platform will establish a project-level grievance mechanism which will be available for the reporting of complaints 
and allegations of impropriety, wrong-doing or other related issues in the project. This will be made available on the 
GCF and AE website once established. 
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Foreign Exchange Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Low 
Low 
Description 
The GCF will make commitments in USD, however the Platform will receive investments and provide financing in INR 
terms. There is a risk that the exchange rate volatility may result in a lower amount of investment capital being available 
in INR terms to the Platform, or returns to GCF and commercial investors are negatively impacted at the time of exit. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
No hedging instruments will be put in place for equity investments made by the investors in the Program. MAM believes 
that the Programme will be able to generate robust returns for investors both in INR and USD terms, and will be able 
to easily absorb INR’s depreciation vis-à-vis USD, which historically has been in the range of 2.5-3.5% over a 5 year 
period.  
In case, SG Master Co., SG Co. and / or the Platform undertake USD denominated currency debt then the respective 
entities may have to undertake a hedging instrument as per the lenders’ requirements. Any such requirements / 
conditions will be actively managed and monitored by the Platform’s management team. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
AML/CTF 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
There are risks associated with financing counterparties which could have links to terrorism, money laundering or 
subject to sanctions. Instances of these practices may undermine the Programme in achieving its aims both from an 
operational and reputational perspective. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform will conduct the day-to-day management of Anti Money Laundering (AML) / Counter Terrorism Financing 
(CTF) and sanctions in line with the requirements set out in subsidiary agreements, which will flow down GCF 
requirements under the AMA and FAA. The AE will monitor compliance with GCF’s requirements under these 
agreements. As entities managed by MAM, the Executing Entities will be also subject to Macquarie policies which align 
to international best practices. These policies were reviewed by GCF as part of the accreditation process for MAAML. 
In line with Macquarie policies and the existing AMA between MAAML and GCF: 
• 
Programme activities will not be undertaken in any jurisdiction which is subject to, or affected by, United Nations 
Security Council resolutions. 
• 
No individual or entity that is listed on any UN Security Council sanctions list (including the UN Consolidated 
Sanctions list) will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or beneficiary.

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Environment and Social Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
The programme will establish the Platform, which will provide financing within the e-mobility sector. There may be 
environmental and social risks associated with sub-projects as outlined in section G1 and the ESMS. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Platform will implement robust governance, policies and procedures to identify, diligence and manage E&S risks 
in direct operations, in the investment process and monitoring of underlying sub-projects. The Platform will assess the 
potential risks and impacts for each sub-project based on the IFC Performance Standards. An Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be developed for each sub-project to outline any required mitigating measures 
against identified risks and impacts. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Gender Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
The Platform will be established and invest in sub-projects in the e-mobility sector which may have different impacts on 
women and men. There are identified impacts and opportunities for gender mainstreaming at a national and sector 
level (transport). However, there is limited sex-disaggregated data available in the e-mobility sector or transport sector 
more broadly to determine some potential risks or impacts. There is a risk that the Programme has an unexpected, 
outsized negative impact on women or that gender mainstreaming is not promoted as effectively as possible. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
There are identified areas in the Gender Action Plan where gender mainstreaming activities can be implemented, 
including the focus areas of improving knowledge within e-mobility sector on gender sensitivity, safety to prevent 
gender-based violence, and opportunities to provide employment opportunities. Other actions will be identified over 
time through stakeholder engagement with women’s groups, financing counterparties and the result of sex-
disaggregated data.

=== PAGE 68 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Governance of E&S 
E&S considerations will form an intrinsic part of the Platform’s operations and will be considered at all stages of the 
investment process. This will include consideration of E&S risks and impacts that are more prevalent in the e-mobility 
sector (such as materials or supply chain factors) or specific transaction types (such as heightened counterparty and 
procurement risks for leasing structures).  
As a financing intervention, the Platform will not be able to directly implement activities regarding the operation of the 
EVs. However, this is mitigated through upfront diligence and structuring by the Platform as part of a transaction and 
by activities flowed through to the financing counterparty. 
Financing counterparties will be involved in the implementation and management of E&S in sub-projects, including 
complying with any requirements included in the financing documentation set by the Platform or ESMP developed as 
part of the sub-project development. The Platform will be responsible for considering the counterparty’s capacity to 
implement E&S management, what requirements are integrated into financing documentation to meet GCF and 
international standards, and overseeing that counterparties appropriately implement these requirements.  
A dedicated E&S specialist will be hired by the Platform to lead the implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS) at the Platform level. They will also provide or arrange training for Platform staff and, 
where applicable, other stakeholders such as financing counterparties. 
The Platform will have oversight from MAM, which has dedicated risk and sustainability teams that are responsible for 
setting and implementing MAM’s ESG strategy and framework, including the management and operations of the 
Platform. 
1. MAM’s risk team is responsible for ensuring all operational risks, including ESG risks, are identified and 
managed. Reporting to the MAM Chief Risk Officer, MAM’s risk team is independent of MAM’s portfolio 
management functions and is supported by specialist expertise within MAM, including the MAM sustainability 
team and Macquarie Group risk functions.  
2. MAM’s sustainability team is responsible for setting MAM’s overall sustainability strategy and ESG framework, 
providing specialist expertise on environmental and certain social issues, and supporting asset management 
teams in harnessing ESG opportunities across the portfolio. 
Supported by centralised policies and processes, MAM’s risk and sustainability teams support MAM’s transaction and 
asset management teams to effectively address ESG risks and opportunities throughout each phase of the lifecycle. 
E&S risk assessment and classification 
The focus of the Programme is establishing a Platform to provide financing to predominately corporate counterparties 
(in the initial years) for electric vehicles, building charging infrastructure and / or other investments along the e-mobility 
value chain. The Programme has been categorised as Intermediation-2 to reflect that the Platform will act as an 
intermediary to the operation of the e-mobility investments, which will have maximum categorisation of Category B, 
based on an assessment using the Macquarie’s ESR Toolkit which is based on IFC Performance Standards.  
The key E&S risks for each sub-project that have contributed to this classification are outlined below, along with why 
their impacts are limited or mitigated. For the avoidance of doubt, this is not an exhaustive list of considerations. Each 
sub-project will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis to ensure E&S risks are considered holistically. 
 
Capacity of the 
financing 
counterparties 
(PS1: Risk 
Management) 
The counterparty will be involved in direct implementation of E&S management for sub-
projects. There is a risk that the counterparty does not have the capacity or the governance in 
place to manage potential E&S risks.  
The Platform will review the policies, procedures and capacity of the counterparty as part of 
its upfront due diligence, and will monitor the implementation of E&S management as part of 
the ongoing monitoring of the sub-projects.

=== PAGE 69 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
Air quality and 
indirect 
emissions 
(PS3: Resource 
efficiency) 
EVs do not have any emission from its operations as only electricity is consumed. This is a 
significant advantage over the petrol / diesel driven vehicles as vehicular emission contributes 
to a significant proportion of pollution in all major cities, including India. 
Indirect emissions will arise in the generation of power, which is used for charging of batteries 
in the EVs, given India’s grid still has reliance on conventional energy sources. However, this 
will be mitigated through India’s ambitious program to decarbonise its grid over time through 
the integration more renewables, which will support the decarbonisation of the transport sector 
alongside electrification. In this way, the impacts will decrease over time. Opportunities to 
encourage green-only charging points will also be explored. 
The Platform will use best efforts to investigate and pursue commercially feasible opportunities 
to reduce the indirect emissions associated with its operations. This may include installation 
of onsite renewables (e.g., rooftop solar), dispatchable storage, procurement of renewable 
electricity. 
The Platform will incorporate into its policies and stakeholder management program the 
support of and participation in government programs that support grid decarbonisation. 
Hazardous waste 
(including e-
waste) 
(PS3: Resource 
efficiency) 
EVs do not require handling of hazardous materials because they do not contain engine oil 
and similar lubricants, which are associated with conventional vehicles.  
However, lithium-ion batteries that include other chemical moieties like cobalt, graphite and 
nickel are an important component of an EV. At the end of the battery lifespan, there is a 
battery waste, comprising significant amounts of chemicals such as cobalt, electrolytes, 
lithium, manganese oxide and nickel. These substances, if not recycled or treated adequately, 
can contaminate soil and groundwater. Further, lithium itself spontaneously reacts with 
moisture and can lead to major landfill explosions. 
As a nascent sector, there are limited regulatory frameworks for the end-of-life treatment or 
recycling of e-waste related to EVs, however these are rapidly evolving and options for re-use, 
recycling and safe disposal are being developed globally. Although current policies related to 
e-waste in India do not currently include guidance on the safe disposal of lithium-ion batteries, 
the Platform will align to international best practice in the disposal of the batteries for each 
sub-project.  
Regulations and best practices in the nascent e-waste management sector are rapidly 
evolving. It is recognised that the e-waste management approach adopted by the Platform and 
sub-projects will be subject to these evolving regulations and best practices.  
Generally, the Platform will seek that commercially feasible best practices and e-waste 
management principles are employed to minimise adverse environmental and social impacts 
associated with used batteries. An e-waste management strategy relevant for each sub-project 
will be developed.  
The Platform will develop a vehicle scrappage policy aligned with government guidelines and 
will require counterparties to comply with the same. Government approved scrappage facilities 
with focus on recycling and reusing materials recovered from the scrappage. 
Supply chain and 
labour issues 
(PS2: Labour, PS4: 
Community) 
As with any manufacturing sector, the supply chain can be prone to E&S issues if working with 
non-reputable counterparties, such as child labour, SEAH, inadequate working conditions, 
health and safety lapses and corruption. Required standards and compliance can vary from 
country to country and across different counterparties. There are known supply chain issues 
related to mining of lithium-iron and other materials for batteries, which involves extraction of 
metals from jurisdictions where E&S regulations may not be as strict. 
The Platform will conduct due diligence on counterparties, including their labour practices and 
supply chain, as part of the upfront assessment of a transaction which would impact on the 
ultimate financing decision to proceed. This will mitigate against any significant adverse social 
impacts that would otherwise require a Category A classification such that the Platform only 
works with credible counterparties with adequate policies and measure in place to manage 
these risks.  
The Platform intends to mitigate this through the following outcomes: 
• 
A Board-approved human rights policy that outlines the Platform’s commitment to 
avoiding causing or contributing to adverse human rights impacts (including modern

=== PAGE 70 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
slavery) and the Platform’s commitment to seek to prevent or mitigate adverse human 
rights impacts directly linked to the Platform’s operations, products or services. The 
human rights policy will also support the UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights, the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the ILO 
Fundamental Conventions and Recommendations. 
• 
Undertaking supply chain due diligence for select suppliers of the proposed entity. 
• 
Excluding suppliers with negative reports. 
• 
Each sub-project will have in place, commensurate with its human rights risk profile, a 
process to screen and undertake due diligence on suppliers to a human rights risk 
ascertain track record. 
• 
Actively engage in stakeholder consultations regarding regulatory developments in this 
sector to support greater transparency and controls. 
• 
Participating in workshops and trainings with financing counterparties regarding 
supplier governance and best practices in relation to this issue. 
Social impacts 
(PS4: Community) 
The addition of EVs to public transport will see new buses with better features and quality of 
transportation. Advanced safety features, on-board cameras, universal access, etc. are 
expected to benefit society in general. However, as the transition to EVs continues, there may 
be unintended societal impacts, such as requirements for reskilling of jobs in the conventional 
sector. These are not expected to be direct impacts from sub-projects as a result of the 
financing provided. As such, the impacts are expected to be minimal. However, the approach 
of the financing counterparty to managing the transition of their staff (where applicable) will be 
considered as part of the upfront assessment and diligence.  
The Platform intends to mitigate this through the following outcomes: 
• 
Consider, as part of the planning phase of each sub-project, the social impacts, 
including job creation for new / reskilled workers, improved amenity and aesthetics due 
to reduced noise and pollution, enhanced low-cost mobility and connectivity for 
communities and improved quality of life and security for customers. 
• 
Review any likelihood of significant retrenchment as a result of the transaction 
(considered unlikely). 
• 
Support or be involved in workshops and training for the e-mobility sector organised 
by financing counterparties. 
Gender-based 
violence 
(including SEAH) 
(PS4: Community) 
Gender-based violence and the related safety considerations in public transport are known 
issues in India. There is potential for gender-based violence to occur on the buses or other 
vehicles financed by the Platform. This is not within the control of the Platform, however there 
are a number of safety regulations, such as CCTV cameras, panic buttons, etc., that are 
required. The Platform will seek to monitor the compliance of vehicles in meeting these 
regulations to mitigate against significant impacts from this risk. The regulations, best practice, 
obligations and other mitigating features will be reviewed as part of each sub-project to limit 
the impacts of this risk. 
Mitigants for these risks are outlined in more detail in the Gender Action Plan. Some examples 
from the Gender Action Plan include: 
• 
the Platform will review the GBVH policies of counterparties as part of the upfront due 
diligence; 
• 
the Platform will monitor compliance with requirements in e-buses regarding safety 
features such as emergency call button, CCTV cameras, easy access for disabled; 
and 
• 
the Platfrom will support initiatives such as increasing number of woman conductors 
or drivers on buses or women only buses. 
Land 
procurement 
It is envisaged that, in rare cases, sub-projects that will be considered for financing may involve 
land procurement, such as the setting up of charging infrastructure. The footprint is likely to be 
small. Resettlement, significant biodiversity impacts or impacts on indigenous peoples or 
cultural heritage are not expected due to the nature of the size and location of charging points,

=== PAGE 71 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
(PS5: Land 
resettlement, PS6: 
Biodiversity, PS7: 
Indigenous 
peoples, PS8: 
Cultural heritage) 
targeting predominately urban environments where there is likely existing commercial use 
where charging is convenient for users. Where resettlement is required, a Resettlement Action 
Plan will be developed using the principles outlined in the ESMS for this Programme. 
Any limited biodiversity, indigenous peoples or cultural heritage impacts identified in E&S 
diligence will need have mitigating actions in the ESMP for that sub-project. 
Any major resettlement, biodiversity, indigenous peoples or cultural heritage would be 
classified as a Category A project or not able to be mitigated and the Platform will not invest 
in these activities. 
 
Integration into investment processing and monitoring of underlying sub-projects 
E&S risks will be assessed during the due diligence process and feed through into the analysis for all transactions. 
A robust E&S due diligence process will ensure that these risks are identified and appropriately incorporated into the 
financing decision. Integrating E&S into the process will ensure that the fundamental and credit analysis of the 
underlying financing captures all risks and potential impacts, to ensure the borrower or lessee’s ability to repay its 
obligations is effectively assessed. A summary of E&S risks, mitigants, classification and actions will be prepared for 
each sub-project as part of the financing decision and will be approved as part of each project.  
The Platform will screen opportunities using Macquarie Group’s Environmental and Social Risk Assessment Tool (ESR 
Tool). The environmental and social criteria and categorisation are based on International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
performance standards. The system is kept up to date in line with industry best practice. The results of the ESR Tool 
will be used to shape the scope of due diligence (generally tailored to the location, sector, and risk profile of the 
opportunity) and identify material ESG risks and information gaps relevant to the financing opportunity. The ESR Tool 
provides a risk categorisation based on IFC performance standards as Category A, B or C. This categorisation will also 
be approved as part of the financing decision.  
The Platform will monitor sub-projects against risks identified during upfront due diligence, in addition to against broader 
sectoral changes and themes, to identify new or emerging risks over the lifetime of the financing. Where (if any) a 
material E&S risk is identified, issues will be escalated to the Platform’s Board immediately. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
MAM has completed a gender assessment study and developed a Platform level Gender Action Plan for the India e-
mobility Financing Program. Refer to Annex 8 – Gender assessment and programme level action plan for more details.  
It is understood that gender related issues in the e-mobility sector are common to those in the broader urban mobility 
sector in India. Issues are specific to gender-based violence and harassment, economic disparity, and limited public 
transport options. However, recent flow of capital in safe and well-designed transport infrastructure can increase 
economic empowerment of women by improving mobility and access to better avenues of employment, education, and 
healthcare. Introduction of new electric vehicles fleets replacing older public transportation systems will enhance the 
safety features due to the required design modifications under tender and concession contracts. Therefore, the growth 
of the e-mobility sector and sub-sectors has the potential to lead to changes in gender dimensions by supporting safer 
public transportation options. Moreover, as a new industry, there is potential to promote the implementation of gender 
inclusive design and practice, as well as applying broader workforce policies, such as bridging the pay gap, involvement 
of more technically qualified women and opening more avenues of employment for women. 
The key issues identified in the gender assessment, and the actions the Platform will implement to address these 
issues, are outlined in the table below.

=== PAGE 72 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
Key issue identified 
in gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or 
risk 
Actions to address issues identified 
Employment 
opportunities 
Limited opportunities for 
women to participate in 
the growth of the e-
mobility sector through 
increased access to 
employment opportunities 
within the sector  
Provide employment opportunities at the Platform level to grow skills 
within the e-mobility financing industry that is set to grow and apply 
fair hiring practices. 
Start an internship programme providing young women opportunities 
to gain experience in e-mobility financing space. 
Review relevant policies of counterparties, including statutory (e.g. 
anti-discrimination), company (e.g. D&I or relevant recruiting 
policies), and other D&I and gender related company practices. 
Limited sex-
disaggregated data 
Track relevant candidate gender data through application and hiring 
process and identify / mitigate any bias if identified. 
Track skills gaps of applicants which can feed into the internship 
programme design. 
Gender-blindness, 
adequate 
transportation 
infrastructure to 
reach services 
(education, training) 
Limited number of 
services designed for 
women incorporating 
women specific needs 
Identify opportunities to work with private bus companies or 
corporates which support women-focused services (such as women-
only buses, school services, etc), or working with counterparties to 
develop initiatives. 
Women’s specific 
requirements not 
adequately incorporated 
into project-design 
Upfront gender assessment to identify whether there are 
opportunities to optimise the placement of charging points for 
increased use of EVs by women wherever applicable (e.g. 
considering well-lit areas, public areas). 
Periodic consultation with women’s groups (e.g. women drivers 
associations, self-help groups for women from low income 
backgrounds, NGOs working on women employment) to identify 
potential risks and opportunities. 
Limited sex-
disaggregated data to 
improve gender sensitivity 
in the sector or sub-
sectors 
Design a robust plan for collection of relevant sex-disaggregated data 
for each sub-project on transport usage, and collate the data to 
understand areas of improvement. 
(Note that sex-disaggregated data will be collected for relevant sub-
projects relating to use of vehicles. However, as the sub-projects 
have not yet been identified, the actual data to be collected will be 
finalised as part of the investment approval of each sub-project. Any 
collection of sex-disaggregated data privacy regulations including 
collection and storage of sensitive data, as relevant and required) 
Gender Based 
Violence and 
Harassment (GBVH) 
(including SEAH) 
Facilities around transport 
hubs and vehicles (e.g. 
poor lighting, 
unsupervised spaces, 
absence of emergency 
buttons, etc.) 
Conduct due diligence of counterparties to review their existing 
policies and procedures for management of GBVH issues, including 
existing education programs, safety measures, trainings, and 
grievance mechanisms. 
Require projects to include adequate design and maintenance of 
lighting and CCTV cameras (or other relevant safety features at 
charging infrastructure points). 
Require reporting / representation from counterparties that the 
vehicles are aligned with safety requirements as mandated by 
authorities / relevant concession agreements. 
Reporting of GBVH incidents for vehicles financed by the Platform.

=== PAGE 73 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
Key issue identified 
in gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or 
risk 
Actions to address issues identified 
Be involved in stakeholder consultations by public and private entities 
around the design of concessions or vehicles to provide views and 
data on relevant and improved safety features. Targets should be set 
on the number of consultations conducted per year on gender 
aspects. 
Behavioural aspects (e.g. 
physical violence and 
sexual harassment, lack 
of clear codes of conduct 
for employees, etc.) 
Require counterparties to install surveillance cameras and adequate 
security measures. 
Review training programs periodically delivered by counterparties to 
drivers and transport workers on gender sensitivity and how to report 
and refer incidents of GBVH. Where counterparties do not have 
existing training programs, offer relevant training for drivers and other 
employees on gender sensitivity and how to manage incidents of 
GBVH. 
Use transport infrastructure, such as signage and tickets, to 
disseminate messages and create awareness around GBVH more 
broadly in communities and public spaces. This will be undertaken 
through counterparties. 
Women’s 
involvement in 
decision making 
Due to societal and 
cultural practices, women 
are less likely to be 
involved in decision 
making, which may 
exacerbate gender 
blindness in project 
design 
Promote women’s involvement at a corporate level through: 
• 
Platform Board composition 
• 
Monitor Board composition of counterparties 
Ensure women and vulnerable groups have an active role in project 
and sector level stakeholder consultations. 
Need for capacity 
building and 
knowledge 
dissemination for 
gender 
considerations in the 
e-mobility sector 
Awareness of gender 
mainstreaming may be 
limited in the 
transportation, e-mobility 
and financing sectors 
Opportunities for capacity building for both the Platform and 
counterparties through trainings and workshops to increase 
awareness of gender sensitivity. Promote multi-stakeholder 
discussions to integrate gender considerations across the sector. 
Limited availability of sex-
disaggregated data in the 
e-mobility space 
Ensure each sub-project collects sex-disaggregated data which can 
be used to identify risks, mitigants and opportunities. 
Knowledge sharing of 
lessons learned is limited 
Promote examples of lessons learned through data collection or sub-
project implementation through thought leadership or otherwise to 
contribute to developing best practice.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
MAM will be responsible for the monitoring and review of Platform performance. It will work closely with the Platform’s 
management team to define their operating and financial policies and processes, and ensure compliance through 
industry leading MAM asset management standards. MAM, through Board representation, will participate in key 
financial, commercial and governance matters of the Platform. Further, it will seek monthly reviews with the Platform’s 
management team to discuss business updates / progress, review financial performance, ESG updates and review of 
governance, commercial and other operational matters. On a quarterly basis, the investment team will also conduct a 
detailed formal analysis of the performance of the Platform for the purpose of reporting to the GCF and commercial 
investors.  
MAM will seek following reporting from the Platform’s management team: 
• 
monthly reporting on financial and operational metrics; 
• 
reporting on E&S matters;

=== PAGE 74 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
• 
quarterly Board meetings; 
• 
regular site visits; 
• 
compliance with shareholders agreement; and 
• 
annual audited accounts. 
 
MAM will submit following reports to the LP Investors: 
• 
quarterly investor report (including Platform performance and financial information at consolidated LP level); 
• 
annual audited accounts and NAV statements; 
• 
annual ESS report including annual climate and sustainability impact assessment; and 
• 
GCF specific mid-term and final assessment reports. 
 
Note that ESG will be carried out as per GCF ESS Policy and IFC Performance Standards. 
Procurement 
Procurement of goods and services at LP, SG Master Co., SG Co. and Platform levels will be carried out in accordance 
with the AE’s policies and regulations as agreed under the AMA.  
One time setup costs relating to LP, SG Master Co. and SG Co., and highly commoditised services requiring minimal 
professional expertise, will be procured on Quality Cost Based Selection basis. Various professional / consultation 
services required on an annual basis will be procured on Quality Based Selection basis.  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
The Funding Proposal (FP) is prepared and submitted by Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML) 
to Green Climate Fund (GCF or Recipient). 
Macquarie and Macquarie Group refer to Macquarie Group Limited (MGL) and its worldwide subsidiaries and affiliates 
including MAM and Macquarie-managed investment vehicles. Members of the Macquarie Group are the owners of the 
copyright material in this document unless otherwise specified. No member of the Macquarie Group accepts any liability 
whatsoever for a direct, indirect, consequential or other loss arising from any use of this document and / or 
communication in relation to this document (including its contents).  
Any forward-looking statements included in this document represent our opinions, expectations, beliefs, intentions, 
estimates or strategies regarding the future, which may not be realised. These statements may be identified using 
words like “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate”, “expect”, “intend”, “may”, “plan”, “will”, “should”, “seek” and similar 
expressions. The forward-looking statements reflect our views and assumptions with respect to future events as of the 
date of this document and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual and future results and trends could differ 
materially from those described by such statements due to various factors, including those beyond our ability to control 
or predict. No forward-looking statements contained in this document constitute a guarantee, promise, projection, 
forecast or prediction of, or representation as to, the future and actual events may differ materially. Any target returns 
or other financial projections (including any data related thereto) in this document are based upon subjective estimates 
and assumptions about circumstances and events that have not occurred yet and may never occur. If any of the 
assumptions used do not prove to be accurate, results may vary substantially from any target returns or financial 
projections contained in this document. Any target returns or other financial projections are being shown for 
illustrative purposes only. 
This document has been prepared based by MAAML which is an entity within the Macquarie Asset Management (MAM) 
group of Macquarie Group. It is not a product of the Macquarie Research Department which operates outside the MAM 
information barrier. It is based on publicly available information and information made available to us by third parties or 
obtained from sources that we consider to be reliable, and is based on present circumstances, market conditions and 
beliefs. Where information in this document includes reference to a publicly available source or sources that can be 
subscribed to, the recipient should refer to and interpret the information in the context of that source. The document 
contains selected information and does not purport to be all-inclusive or to contain all the information that may be 
relevant or latest.

=== PAGE 75 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
MAAML is not an authorised deposit-taking institution for the purposes of the Banking Act 1959 (Commonwealth of 
Australia) and MAAML’s obligations do not represent deposits or other liabilities of Macquarie Bank Limited ABN 46 
008 583 542 (“Macquarie Bank”). Macquarie Bank does not guarantee or otherwise provide assurance in respect of 
the obligations of MAAML. In addition, if this document relates to an investment, (a) the investor is subject to investment 
risk including possible delays in repayment and loss of income and principal invested and (b) none of Macquarie Bank 
or any other Macquarie Group company guarantees any particular rate of return on or the performance of the 
investment, nor do they guarantee repayment of capital in respect of the investment. 
Nothing in this “Disclaimer” is intended to modify MAAML’s obligations to the Green Climate Fund as set forth in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement between MAAML and the GCF. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
 
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 76 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
Glossary  
2W 
Two wheeler 
3W 
Three wheeler 
4W 
Four wheeler 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
AE 
Accredited Entity 
AFSTP 
Alternate Fuels for Surface Transportation Program 
AIF 
Alternate Investment Fund 
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
ASX 
Australian Stock Exchange 
AUD 
Australian Dollar 
AUM 
Asset Under Management 
B2B 
Business to Business 
B2C 
Business to Consumer 
BEV 
Battery Electric Vehicle  
bn 
Billion 
BSVI 
Bharat Stage VI 
CDM 
Clean Development Mechanism 
CGM 
Commodities and Global Market 
CMIE 
Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy 
CO 
Carbon Monoxide 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide 
CPI 
Climate Policy Initiative 
CSG 
Client Solutions Group 
D&I 
Diversity and Inclusion 
DD 
Due Diligence 
DISCOMs 
Electricity distribution companies 
Ebus 
Electric Bus 
EE 
Executing Entity 
EMEA 
Europe, Middle East and Africa 
E&S 
Environment and Social 
ESG 
Environment, Social and Governance 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan

=== PAGE 77 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
ESR 
Environmental and Social Risk Assessment Tool 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Safegurads 
EUM 
Equity Under Management 
EV 
Electric Vehicle 
FAA 
Funded Activity Agreement 
FAME 
Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles 
FCEV 
Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle 
First Close 
The FAA effective date  
FP 
Funding Proposal 
FRBM 
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act 2003 
GBVH 
Gender Based Violence and Harassment 
GCI 
Global Competitiveness Index 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GIF 
Global Infrastructure Fund 
GIG 
Green Investment Group 
GP 
General Partner 
GtCO2 
Giga tonnes of carbon dioxide 
GRESB 
Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark 
GST 
Goods and Service Tax 
HR 
Human Resources 
IAC 
Macquarie’s India Advisory Company 
ICE 
Internal Combustion Engine 
IEA 
International Energy Agency 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IndAS 
Indian Accounting Standards 
INR 
Indian Rupee 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Investment Ratio 
The ratio of commercial investors to GCF’s equity capital commitment 
IPO 
Initial Public Offering 
IREDA 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
IT 
Information Technology 
LCV 
Light Commercial Vehicle

=== PAGE 78 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
LP 
Limited Partner 
LPA 
Limited Partnership Agreement 
LTV 
Loan to Value 
LULUCF 
Land Use Change and Forestry 
MAAML 
Macquarie Alternative Asset Management Limited 
MAM 
Macquarie Asset Management 
MCV 
Medium Commercial Vehicle 
MIRA 
Macquarie Infrastructure and Real Assets 
MNRE 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India 
MoEFCC 
Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, Government of 
India 
MoRTH 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highway, Government of India 
MGL 
Macquarie Group Limited 
MtCO2e 
Million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 
MW 
Mega Watt 
NAV 
Net Asset Value 
NBFC 
Non-Banking Financial Company 
NCAP 
National Climate Action Plan 
NCD 
Non-Convertible Debentures 
NDA 
National Designated Authority 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NEMMP 
National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 
NHAI 
National Highway Authority of India 
NOx 
Nitrogen Oxides 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OEM 
Original Equipment Manufacturers 
PAX 
Passengers 
pkm 
Passenger kilometers 
Platform  
The proposed India focused E-mobility Financing Platform 
PM2.5 
Particulate matter 
Preferred Hold 
Period  
The first 5 years of the Platform’s operation 
PRI 
Principles for Responsible Investment 
Programme 
The proposed India focused E-mobility Financing Platform 
RBI 
Reserve Bank of India

=== PAGE 79 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway 
R&D 
Research and Development 
SBI 
State Bank of India 
SDGs 
United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment 
SEBI 
Securities and Exchange Board of India 
Second Close  
24 months from the FAA effective date 
SEP 
Supplemental Environmental Projects 
SGX 
Singapore Stock Exchange 
SRTUs 
State Road Transport Undertaking 
TCO 
Total Cost of Ownership 
TOT 
Toll Operate Transfer 
UK 
United Kingdom 
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USA 
United States of America 
USD 
United States Dollar 
WRI 
World Resource Institute 
WWF 
World Wildlife Fund

=== PAGE 80 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule     
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects) 
☒ 
Annex 23 
GHG calculations 
☒ 
Annex 24 
Illustrative Term Sheet for an E-bus lease

=== PAGE 81 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
☒ 
Annex 25 
Macquarie Group Overview

=== PAGE 82 ===
78

=== PAGE 83 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
India E-Mobility Financing Program 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited 
(MAAML) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
India 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, April 15, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Hindi 
Explanation on language 
Hindi is the most spoken language in India and is 
understood by the stakeholders concerned.  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.mirafunds.com/assets/mira/esms/ESMS-india-
e-mobility-financing-program-MAAML-eng.pdf 
Hindi: 
https://www.mirafunds.com/assets/mira/esms/ESMS-india-
e-mobility-financing-program-MAAML-hin.pdf 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements of a Category I-
2 programme is contained in the “Environment & Social 
Management System”. 
79

=== PAGE 84 ===
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, April 15, 2022 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Hindi 
Explanation on language 
Hindi is the most spoken language in India, and is 
understood by the stakeholders concerned. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.mirafunds.com/assets/mira/esms/ESMS-india-
e-mobility-financing-program-MAAML-eng.pdf 
Hindi: 
https://www.mirafunds.com/assets/mira/esms/ESMS-india-
e-mobility-financing-program-MAAML-hin.pdf 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
The IPP and RPF are annexed to the ESMS. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, April 15, 2022 
Place 
Hard copies of the disclosure made available at the 
Macquarie Group Office in Mumbai located at: 
92, Level 9, 2 North Avenue, 
Maker Maxity, Bandra Kurla Complex, 
Bandra East, Mumbai 400051, 
India 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, May 16, 2022 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
________ 
80

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 81 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP186 
Proposal name: 
India E-Mobility Financing Program 
Accredited entity: 
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML)  
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I. 
 Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential 
  
 
 
                    Scale: Medium-High 
1. 
Overview - The E-Mobility Financing Platform funding proposal (Platform) assessed 
here is proposed by Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (MAAML) as an 
accredited entity (AE). This is a mitigation programme that focuses on promoting sustainable 
and electrified road transport in India. GCF is requested to provide USD 200 million in equity, as 
first loss capital to de-risk commercial investors, leading to a total commitment of USD 405 
million towards an E-mobility Financing Platform. The programme aims to leverage the GCF and 
commercial capital to accelerate decarbonisation of the Indian economy by focusing on the 
electrification of India’s transport sector. It will do this by providing financing solutions 
intended to bridge the overall cost of ownership between conventional vehicles and electric 
vehicles (EVs). 
2. 
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges faced by India. Between 1901–2018, 
India’s average temperature rose by 0.7°C due to increased atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases (GHG). India has also seen a rapid growth in its own GHG emissions resulting 
from multiple factors such as high population growth and increasing levels of industrialization. 
It is projected that temperatures will continue to rise in India resulting in greater frequency of 
extreme climatic events, vector-borne diseases, food shortage, migration, and loss of livelihoods, 
all of which will have adverse impacts on India’s social and economic development.  
3. 
In response, the Government of India has been pursuing various mitigation and 
adaptation activities including policy support for renewable energy and electric mobility 
sectors, to reduce GHG emissions. However, the scale of investment needed to help India 
achieve its climate goals as reflected in its nationally determined contribution (NDC) under the 
Paris Agreement will require the mobilization of funds beyond the public treasury. Sectors that 
can produce mitigation impacts such as the electric mobility sector will need to attract private 
capital at scale and in an accelerated manner. According to some estimates, India will need 
investment of approximately USD 2.5 trillion between 2015 and 2030 to meet its NDC by 2030. 
4. 
In the above context, the aim of the Platform is to facilitate the reduction of GHGs and 
other emissions from the road transport sector in India through accelerated adoption of electric 
vehicles. The funding proposal presents the creation of a Platform that would deploy targeted 
investments (in the form of operating and finance leases and other structured credit solutions) 
across the e-mobility value chain to overcome barriers that have historically limited the sector. 
India has the potential to be one of the largest electric vehicle markets in the world, but market 
growth has been hampered by high upfront capital expenditure associated with EVs, 
impediments around EV charging infrastructure and uncertainty around commercial EV 
performance. The funding proposal is intended to be complementary to Indian government 
efforts to accelerate its nascent e-mobility market by attracting new funding sources into the 
space, addressing market barriers, and financing the underlying infrastructure needed to scale 
up the EV sector.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 82 
 
5. 
The funding proposal seeks USD 200 million from GCF and an additional USD 205 
million from commercial investors to capitalize the E-mobility Financing Platform. It will be 
managed by MAAML which is part of Macquarie Asset Management (MAM), one of the world’s 
largest infrastructure asset managers, with an established presence in India. The proposal 
further envisages accessing local and international debt markets for approximately an 
additional USD 1.1 billion in debt leverage.  
6. 
Initially the Platform will focus on select segments of the EV ecosystem such as e-buses, 
shared fleet and electric charging infrastructure and will over time seek to diversify its portfolio 
by expanding into the other segments (including retail) as more subsectors within the EV value 
chain gain scale and prominence. Over the implementation period, MAAML expects the Platform 
to mobilize up to USD 2.1 billion of capital into the sector and reduce ~9.5 MtCO2eq over the 
project lifetime.  
7. 
Impacts - The FP and the accredited entity have been able to credibly demonstrate that 
decarbonising the transport sector in India can help to reduce the impacts related to GHG 
emissions and other air pollutants. Additionally, the Platform can generate several additional 
potential co-benefits, such as major improvements in public health, particularly in urban areas, 
improved fuel savings and reduced noise pollution.  
8. 
Electrification of vehicles plays an essential role in decarbonising the transport sector as 
it offers the most promising GHG emission abatement potential relative to other alternatives. In 
2021, India became the world’s third largest passenger vehicle market with the sector 
representing an increasing source of GHG emissions and other pollutants. Transportation 
activity reached over 6 trillion passenger kilometres, which represents three times increase 
from 2000 to 2020. This trend is expected to continue unabated as approximately 60 million 
more households are expected to enter the consuming class by 2025. At the same time, the 
transport sector in India is reliant on fossil fuels and contributes significantly to oil import 
demand. Transportation accounts for 20 per cent of the final energy use in India, and has grown 
by 50 per cent since 2010, comprising primarily oil products (95 per cent). India is presently the 
third-largest consumer of oil and fourth-largest oil refiner with well understood implications for 
India’s energy security.  
9. 
Transportation is the third most GHG emitting sector, contributing about 13 per cent of 
the total carbon dioxide emissions in India. Due to the dimension and scale of the Indian 
economy, its emissions from transport alone are equivalent to the total emissions of a mid-sized 
European country. Therefore, accelerating decarbonization of the Indian transportation sector 
(moving to EVs and away from fossil fuels and internal combustion engines) could significantly 
reduce emissions and generate co-benefits with substantial impact. However, a mix of financial, 
behavioural and infrastructure incentives is needed to develop the e-mobility sector and 
associated infrastructure. The funding proposal credibly demonstrates that the Platform could 
help achieve this target.  
10. 
Currently both EV market acceptance and EV industry dynamics are at an early stage. 
The EV adoption rate is less than 1 per cent and the domestic Original Equipment Manufacturer 
(OEM) are just starting to launch EV models. For instance, although India is the world’s second 
biggest bus market with approximately 100,000 units sold annually, over 95 per cent of them 
are fossil fuel reliant. At the same time, this represents a large market sector that could be 
converted to EVs if market financing barriers are addressed, and it is not surprising that the 
Platform proposes an initial focus on the passenger bus subsector of transportation. 
11. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) notes that from a GHG emissions 
standpoint, a successful shift away from fossil fuel vehicles to EVs is dependent on the GHG 
intensity of the relevant electric grid. In the case of India, coal still accounts for approximately 
57 per cent of the electricity mix. EV transportation will require a source of electricity for 
charging. The underlying source of electricity generation will affect the actual emissions 
avoided by the programme.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 83 
 
12. 
However, we also recognize that India has committed to an ambitious deployment 
programme of renewable energy resources and has already achieved its 2030 target of deriving 
40 per cent of the installed capacity from non-fossil fuels. The total non-fossil based installed 
electricity capacity stands at 156.83 GW, which is 40.1 per cent of the total installed electricity 
capacity. At the UN Climate Change Conference in 2021 (COP26), India announced a goal of 
reaching 500 GW of non-fossil fuel capacity and meeting 50 per cent of its energy requirements 
from renewable sources. All indications are that India is committed to a decarbonization path 
for its grid, but the scale of potential impact of this funding proposal will be heavily influenced 
by how rapidly and how deeply India’s energy generation is decarbonized. The underlying 
assumption in the funding proposal is that there will be increased penetration of renewables in 
the electricity grid and/or availability of charging sites using only renewables. The proposal 
intends to contribute to this decarbonization by encouraging its counterparties to use 
renewable energy for charging stations, by providing appropriate financial incentives linked to 
the carbon intensity of the energy utilized. 
13. 
The Platform expects to finance an estimated 18,000 e-buses (72.8 per cent of the total 
capital deployment), 22,000 four-wheel vehicles (7.5 per cent of the total capital deployment), 
65,000 three and two-wheel vehicles (3.5 per cent of the total capital deployment) and plans to 
invest and establish 10,500 charging stations over the life of the programme. As a result, over 10 
years the Platform is expected to reduce approximately 9.5 million tons of carbon dioxide 
equivalent over the project lifetime from the replacement of internal combustion engine 
vehicles across India by the funding of comparable electric transportation vehicles and by 
funding electric charging infrastructure. 
14. 
The assumptions made in the funding proposal on the pace of grid decarbonization are 
less aggressive than India’s 2030 commitment of 500GW of energy consumption coming from 
renewables. If India achieves its 2030 targets, then actual impacts could be higher. Alternatively, 
the Platform may end up underachieving the impact targets if a lower proportion of 
counterparties use renewable energy for charging stations, and the decarbonization of the grid 
decelerates.  
15. 
In addition to GHG mitigation impacts, millions of people are expected to directly benefit 
from better air quality during the lifetime of the programme and beyond.  
16. 
Another area of independent TAP concern involves the probable scale of the funding 
proposal programme. The speed and scale of the programme assumes that it can leverage, in 
addition to GCF funds, USD 205 million equity co-financing to be mobilized from commercial 
investors and that the platform will also raise substantial third-party debt (primarily from 
domestic sources) in the ratio of 1: 1 (debt: equity). This amount of co-financing will be vital for 
the Platform to achieve its intended climate impact. Based on the AEs demonstrated experience, 
early market soundings and its market feasibility study, we are sufficiently satisfied that these 
targets for raising capital can be achieved (with the catalysing effect of GCF funding), however, 
final realization may be difficult or delayed, due to unforeseeable market factors and shortage of 
liquidity in the debt capital market.  
17. 
We also note that the speed and scale proposed in the funding proposal rely on 
continued support from the Government of India for the EV sector and the continuing 
programme of regular government tenders for EV buses, charging infrastructures and other e-
mobility subsectors. Thus, continued government support is critical for the programme and any 
major policy change on the part of the Government could be detrimental to expected impacts. 
However, we have been sufficiently satisfied that support of the e-mobility sector is embedded 
in India’s long-term policy. 
18. 
Overall impact potential is assessed as Medium-High. The realistic possibility of 
materially contributing to the accelerated decarbonization of the Indian transport sector allows 
for a high rating. However, the relatively high percentage of GCF funding required to mobilize 
other equity co-investment and uncertainties about the pace of India’s efforts to decarbonize 
the power grid pushes this funding proposal into the territory of Medium-High.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 84 
 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High 
19. 
The E-mobility Financing Platform aims to support the acceleration of India’s EV sector 
as a key mechanism in decarbonizing the transport sector. By enhancing the availability of 
credit and by introducing new financial solutions in the EV market that accept operational 
performance and other risks, the programme seeks to make EV ownership more attractive, help 
OEMs recycle capital faster and cause electric vehicles to become the preferred choice and mode 
of transport among fleet operators.  
20. 
Financing solutions provided by the Platform will aim to create a paradigm shift within 
the Indian context by supporting the private sector to drive forward the e-mobility sector which 
can serve as an example for other similar markets. The Platform is expected to directly cause 9.5 
MtCO2eq in emissions reductions. Moreover, by demonstrating the commercial viability of the 
EV sector and financing critical EV infrastructure, the Platform can help catalyse a sector that 
would result in even greater emission reductions outside the Platform envelope and support a 
growth pathway that is consistent with national climate strategies. In this way, the paradigm 
shift potential is embedded in the potential for scaling up the sector and replication of the EV 
financing tools across India, and possibly other developing countries that could benefit from e-
mobility gains.  
21. 
By 2027, India will be the most populous country on the planet with nearly 1.5 billion 
people. At the same time India’s middle class is set to grow rapidly from around 80 million 
today to 580 million people by 2025. This growth is expected to drive significant demand for 
transportation capacity, creating a substantial opportunity to meet this growth with lower 
carbon options to the combustion engine. This opportunity is reflected at the passenger, 
commercial and mass transport subsectors of mobility. This transition will require the supply of 
finance targeting EVs and finance for the infrastructure of e-mobility. According to the funding 
proposal, the estimated size of the EV finance market is expected to reach USD 50 billion in 
2030. The Platform could serve a paradigm-shifting role by demonstrating financial viability, 
attracting new sources of capital to the sector and funding infrastructure improvements.  
22. 
The Platform also has high potential for replicability. The proposal aims to develop a 
leasing solution to address the existing barriers. Leasing as a model for the EV sector in India 
has several advantages. First, the residual value and other perceived risks of EV ownership are 
absorbed by the Platform as opposed to end users. This could accelerate take-up of leasing but 
more importantly from a paradigm-shifting perspective, demonstrate for customers the 
difference between actual financial risk and perceived risk. Second, leasing allows EV 
acquisition costs to be spread over a longer tenor. In this way, leasing mitigates EV acquisition 
barriers associated with the higher upfront cost of most EVs.  
23. 
The Platform also intends to contribute to greater knowledge-sharing in India by the 
accredited entity regularly engaging with Indian government institutions (national and state 
level) and providing inputs on how to increase the effectiveness and impact of policies/ 
regulations enacted. According to MAAML, they along with various MAM and Platform 
representatives will work with the Government to slowly bring down the subsidies and other 
tax incentives over time as the sector achieves maturity and substantial crowding in of private 
capital which would help achieve parity across various segments of the e-mobility value chain.  
24. 
The Platform will also work with several large OEMs, to provide leasing solutions to the 
EV operators. These financial solutions priced at attractive rates along with long tenors will 
assist counterparties in de-leveraging their balance sheets and recycling their limited capital, 
thereby encouraging further investments in local technological advancements. The Platform will 
also provide capital to other actors in the EV value chain, as the market evolves, especially in the 
areas of charging infrastructure.  
25. 
By supporting the long-term growth of the EV sector, the Platform should contribute to 
reducing the need for concessional or public funding over time. For instance, the financing of 
accelerated deployment of charging infrastructure can reduce behavioural barriers (such as

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 85 
range anxiety for consumers). Supporting key infrastructure has been shown to be a leading 
contributor to greater EV market penetration in more mature markets. 
26.
By raising capital in local markets and engaging with local financial institutions as well
as international and national equity providers, the Platform could contribute to familiarizing
and embedding new finance providers in the e-mobility sector in India.
27.
The proposed financing platform also brings to India MAM’s best practices on
incorporating climate due diligencein the financing of the e-mobility sector. From the
perspective of managing climate-related physical (e.g., flooding, elevated temperatures) and/or
transition risks which can affect their subprojects under the financing programme, MAAML is
aware of such risks and together with the broader Macquarie Asset Management has the
experience to manage it. When the independent TAP asked MAAML for more information, they
responded that “MAM incorporates climate-related physical and transition risk in its diligence
of each of its portfolio companies to ensure that these risks are integrated into business
planning.”1 More broadly, the Macquarie Group reports under the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (TCFD).2
28.
Overall paradigm shift potential is assessed as High. There are of course risks regarding
an actual paradigm shift around transport in India, particularly relating to behavioural biases
toward EV purchases and the need for continued government support. However, considering
the size and scale of opportunity for India and the realistic possibility of pushing this large, high
GHG emitting sector onto a low carbon pathway we can attribute an assessment of High.
1.3 
Sustainable development potential 
 Scale: Medium-High 
29.
Social and Gender benefits: The funding proposal states that gender policy will be
embedded at the Platform level. The policy will include commitment to gender analysis in the
assets/projects funded by the Platform. For instance, the programme aims to promote universal
access and safety measures for women, children and people with disabilities including proper
lighting, in-vehicle cameras, vehicle monitoring systems and other safety measures, especially in
buses. According to the funding proposal, the Platform will seek to encourage the engagement of
people of all ages as stakeholders in the design, development and implementation of strategies
and activities to be financed. The policy will also outline how gender metrics will be monitored,
evaluated, and assessed. The Platform intends to collaborate with local and international
stakeholders and partners to address systemic and structural barriers to gender equality in
local communities.
30.
Health benefits: The Indian transport sector has a high percentage of vehicles with low
standards for emissions and suffers from significant levels of traffic congestion. For these
reasons (among others) the transport sector in India is linked with emissions of pollutants such
as fine particulate matter known to have a damaging impact on human health. The elevated
levels of emitted air pollutants have resulted in India having 21 of the world’s top 30 most
polluted cities. It is estimated that over 84 per cent of India’s population is exposed to high
concentrations of air pollution resulting in over 2 million deaths annually and significant
associated healthcare (approx. 5.4 per cent of GDP). The transition to electric vehicles,
especially in urban areas, can reduce air pollution. This is particularly important considering the
expected growth of the overall transportation sector. If future growth is concentrated around
internal combustion engine technologies, then the already dangerous levels of pollution can
significantly worsen health outcomes.
31.
Economic co-benefits: The Platform is expected to create an estimated 100 new direct
jobs at the Platform level. Greater job creation is expected to come from increased investments
in the e-mobility space which should indirectly lead to new jobs across the sector. According to
1 A summary of Macquarie’s supplier governance policy. 
2 A summary of Macquarie’s supplier governance policy.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 86 
 
Indian government statements, the EV sector is expected to create 10 million jobs in the coming 
decades. Additionally, as per a recent Niti Aayog report, the European Climate Foundation has 
estimated that any reduction in oil demand by more efficient electric cars is expected to create 
500,000 to 850,000 more domestic jobs by 2030. The report explains that oil production and 
distribution have exceptionally low employment intensity of just four jobs per million euros 
value added compared to 24 jobs per million euros in the general economy. Therefore, any shift 
in expenditure from buying imported oil to other expenditure choices would generate 
additional employment.  
32. 
India’s middle income class group is expected to increase to 300 million households by 
2030 (from 158 million) and the number of urban residents overall is expected to top 600 
million. The e-mobility Platform will primarily target the public buses and corporate fleet 
segments which are mainly used by middle income groups and urban residents. Through its 
investments, the programme aims to improve the safety, reliability and affordability of the 
transportation sector leading to an increased adoption rate among urban residents and middle-
income groups.  
33. 
The Indian government’s push for EVs is linked with its stated intent to enhance energy 
security as well as reduction of GHG emissions. Since the early 2000s, India’s crude oil imports 
have risen steeply with 40 per cent of total oil consumption coming from the transport sector. 
Oil imports contributed USD 102 billion to the trade deficit in 2020 covering over 80 per cent of 
the country’s oil needs. An increase in the penetration of EVs directly and indirectly through this 
programme will decrease India’s oil import requirement as well as corresponding GHG 
emissions. 
34. 
Social and environmental co-benefits: The independent TAP clarified if the funding 
proposal has a negative list of suppliers or if it has undertaken an assessment of potential risk 
on EV battery component sources (i.e., lithium, cobalt, magnesium, etc.) that are said to be 
engaged in child labour, human rights abuse, and environmentally unsustainable extraction 
activities. The AE has responded that they “have have not done a detailed assessment of the 
source of battery materials imported or sourced in India as there are a number of suppliers and 
given the nascency of the market, the profile is not static,” and that they “do not have an existing 
list of suppliers that would be automatically excluded. The risk identified is to highlight the 
known risk in the industry that should be considered as part of our ESS [environmental and 
social safeguards] risk assessment for each sub-project and supplier. MAM and Macquarie have 
existing, robust policies and procedures on upholding supplier governance that will be applied 
at the Platform.”3  
35. 
Alignment to Sustainable Development Goals: The funding proposal programme has the 
potential to promote and accelerate the country’s National Development Agenda to implement 
United Nations Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 as mirrored in the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
36. 
The independent TAP assesses this programme as having a medium-high sustainable 
development potential with significant social, economic and health co-benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
Needs of the recipients   
 
 
               Scale: Medium-High 
37. 
India’s average temperature rose by 0.7°C since the last century resulting in extreme 
weather events and putting pressure on the country’s already scarce resources thereby 
threatening the livelihood of millions of people. India’s average temperatures are projected to 
continue to rise under the relevant Representative Concentration Pathway scenarios resulting 
in increased frequency and intensity of climate events. These events are expected to 
determinately impact the economic and social well-being of India if there is no change to 
 
3 A summary of Macquarie’s supplier governance policy.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 87 
 
current climate mitigation policies. The most severe impacts are expected to be borne by low 
and middle-income groups, women, children, and the elderly. Around 28 per cent of the 
population or 364 million people live below the national poverty line of USD 2 per person per 
day.  
38. 
Considering the above, there is a recipient need to undertake low or zero carbon and 
climate resilient infrastructure investments. According to the funding proposal, India needs 
~USD 2.5 trillion of investment between 2015 and 2030 to meet its NDC by 2030. Public funds 
will not suffice to finance the required climate action. Initiatives such as the Platform are needed 
to fill the finance gap by directly mobilizing private sector funds into climate-friendly sectors 
like e-mobility and funding a more rapid maturation of the sector to indirectly unlock additional 
private sector finance. In a post COVID-19 scenario, there will be an even greater need for the 
private sector to drive capital flow in the e-mobility sector.  
39. 
India has made a commitment to growing the e-mobility sector and has put in place 
several incentive and financial support programmes. However, according to the funding 
proposal, India’s EV transition will require a cumulative capital investment of USD 266 billion in 
the coming decade to fund vehicles, charging infrastructure, and batteries. This analysis 
suggested that by 2030 the market size for financing EVs in India has the potential to be USD 50 
billion. It will be necessary to attract a large amount of finance that will be critical to address 
existing barriers to finance flows and to demonstrate the investability of the sector. The 
Platform will help overcome some of these financing barriers including (1) high upfront costs; 
(2) unwillingness of banks and financial institutions to take EV asset risks; and (3) low loan to 
value ratios (among other barriers).  
40. 
The independent TAP assesses this programme as rated Medium-High in terms of needs 
of recipients. 
 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
41. 
MAAML and the broader MAM teams have had extensive engagement with India’s 
national designated authority regarding the proposed e-mobility programme. It secured the no-
objection letter for the funding proposal from the Government of India on 15 September 2021. 
42. 
This programme directly contributes to India’s NDC targets of reducing carbon 
emissions from 2005 to 2030 by 35 per cent including through transforming 30 per cent of all 
vehicles to EVs. EV promotion has been supported by significant policy development at both the 
national and state levels. The Government of India has already committed subsidies of up to 
USD 1.4 billion to enable the accelerated roll-out of EVs under the Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) Phase II scheme. Where appropriate the 
Platform will participate in the FAME scheme and other government policies and initiatives 
which include requirements for a pre-defined level of domestic component manufacturing. 
43. 
The Platform is aligned with India’s climate priorities and strategy. It directly 
contributes to India’s NDC GHG emissions reduction targets. It is complimentary to and aligned 
with publicly funded programmes to increase the e-mobility sector, including India’s FAME I 
and II.  
44. 
The funding proposal provided evidence of support across various government entities 
and other relevant stakeholders including leading domestic OEMs, bus operators, charge 
infrastructure providers, and Non-Banking Financial Institutions.  
45. 
We assess the country ownership of the funding proposal as High.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 88 
 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
               Scale: Medium-High 
46. 
The nascent e-mobility sector represents a significant opportunity to reduce GHG 
emissions at scale in India and place the country on a transportation development path that 
avoids locking in fossil-fuel based technologies for many decades. This transition to EVs will 
require a significant amount of capital and a willingness for early investors to address 
infrastructure barriers and demonstrate the financial viability of the sector. Notwithstanding 
country buy-in reflected in strong government support, the market requires additional 
intervention from concessional capital to help the market mature to where it can readily attract 
large-scale commercial investments. Commercial investors currently do not have the risk 
appetite to deploy the capital at the pace required given the real and perceived investment risks 
outlined in the funding proposal.  
47. 
The Platform aims to provide financing solutions in the market such as operating and 
finance leases through a new investment vehicle in India. GCF capital will sit in a ‘first-loss’ 
position which provides a cushion to the potential downside investment risks for commercial 
investors. The ratio of GCF and non-GCF funding and the amount of GCF funding has been sized 
based on the perceived risk appetite of potential investors including what level of downside risk 
can be accepted by these types of investors. The funding proposal provides that GCF will 
contribute the first USD 50 million in equity at first financial close with the remaining GCF funds 
being committed alongside and subject to third-party commercial investor commitments. GCF’s 
capital will be provided in the form of an equity instrument which is able to take a higher risk 
position in the investment structure in line with GCF’s risk appetite. Further, the involvement of 
GCF will not only increase the amount of capital invested in the sector but also allow the 
Platform to provide financing solutions not currently available at scale in the market (i.e., a 
higher risk appetite than current financiers are able to provide). 
48. 
The Platform is expected to be funded by a combination of equity and debt. From our 
review of the funding proposal and discussions with the AE and Secretariat team, we have a 
reasonable level of comfort that there is commercial investor interest in the Platform as 
designed and that MAM has the capacity to raise the commercial funds alongside the GCF 
contribution. Capital provided by GCF will serve to crowd into the Platform commercial 
investors that would otherwise have overlooked the opportunity to invest in the e-mobility 
sector in India due to their risk appetite and nascency of the sector, among other reasons.  
49. 
In terms of efficiency of impact, the funding proposal has set a fundraising target of USD 1,478 
million in commercial debt and equity. This represents USD 1,278 million in additional co-financing 
to GCF financing. The Platform is expected to have a positive catalytic effect with a co-financing ratio 
of GCF funds of at least 1: 6.4. In other words, each GCF dollar invested should mobilize at least 6.4 
dollars in co-financing through commercial and private investors. The leverage effect beyond the 
anticipated investments of the programme through capacity-building is likely to lead to an even 
higher mobilization. The leasing solution is still nascent in India. If the Platform proves that this 
business model can work in the country, then private sector investors will be able to see the 
opportunity and enter the market.  
50. 
The estimated cost per tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent is USD 21.0 based on the 
requested GCF amount of USD 200 million.  
51. 
The funding proposal is assessed with a rating of Medium-High in terms of efficiency and 
effectiveness.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.03 
Page 89 
 
II.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
52. 
Based on the assessment above, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal.  
53. 
We note that GCF funds will be pooled into a limited partnership through the accredited 
entity (MAAML), which will be the investor of record. The success of the investment proposal 
and its climate impact will depend on multiple factors including: 
• 
setting up a financial organization in India with a robust management team; 
• 
securing all remaining regulatory approvals from the India’s Central Bank to provide 
finance lease and other credit solutions; 
• 
successfully raising commercial equity into the Platform and being able to access/raise 
debt at the levels described in the funding proposal to leverage its Platform equity; and 
• 
The Platform products finding market acceptance and sufficient investable 
opportunities to support the target returns of commercial investors and GCF. 
54. 
The success of the Platform will depend on the above factors and others identified 
by the Secretariat. The independent TAP encourages the Secretariat to build in enough legal 
and governance flexibility in final deal documentation to be able to adapt to commercial 
realities if the expected parameters turn out to be materially different. Similarly, based on 
these numerous factors, the funding proposal programme will require close ongoing 
monitoring during the implementation phase.

=== PAGE 94 ===
Macquarie Infrastructure & Real Assets 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
Gender Assessment for 
E-Mobility Financing 
Program 
Final Report 
13 April 2022 
Project No.: 0601402 
www.erm.com 
 
                              92

=== PAGE 95 ===
Document details 
The details entered below are automatically shown on the cover and the main page footer. 
PLEASE NOTE: This table must NOT be removed from this document. 
Document title 
Gender Assessment for E-Mobility Financing  Program 
Document subtitle 
Final Report 
Project No. 
0601402 
Date 
13 April 2022 
Version 
1.0 
Author 
ERM India Private Limited 
Client Name 
Macquarie Infrastructure & Real Assets India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
Document history 
 
 
 
ERM approval to issue 
 
Version 
Revision 
Author 
Reviewed by 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Final 
1.0 
Karishma 
Sharma 
Reela Mishra, 
Ajay Pillai 
Ajay Pillai 
13.04.22 
Approved as final 
report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              93

=== PAGE 96 ===
Signature Page 
 
13 April 2022 
 
 
Gender Assessment for E-Mobility Financing  
Program 
 
Final Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ajay Pillai 
Partner 
 
 
 
 
Reela Mishra 
Principal Consultant 
 
 
ERM India Private Limited 
Building 10 B, 
3rd Floor, DLF Cyber City, 
Gurgaon, NCR – 122002 
 
Tel: 91 124 417 0300  
Fax: 91 124 417 0301 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2022 by ERM Worldwide Group Ltd and/or its affiliates (“ERM”).  
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form,  
or by any means, without the prior written permission of ERM. 
 
                              94

=== PAGE 97 ===
CONTENTS 
1. 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
A brief overview of the ‘Dedicated E-Mobility Program’ ................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Objective and Scope of work ......................................................................................................... 1 
1.3 
Applicable Reference Framework .................................................................................................. 2 
1.3.1 
Need for Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan ................................................ 2 
1.3.2 
GCF’s Gender Policy .................................................................................................... 2 
1.4 
Methodology .................................................................................................................................. 3 
1.4.1 
Kick off call with MAM ................................................................................................... 4 
1.4.2 
Detailed Gender Assessment ....................................................................................... 4 
1.4.3 
Formulation of the Program-level Gender Action Plan .................................................. 5 
2. 
THE BROADER GENDER LANDSCAPE IN INDIA .................................................................... 6 
2.1 
Demographic Profile ...................................................................................................................... 6 
2.1.1 
Educational Attainment ................................................................................................. 7 
2.1.2 
Enrolment and Dropout Statistics .................................................................................. 8 
2.1.3 
Workforce Participation ................................................................................................. 9 
2.2 
Health .......................................................................................................................................... 11 
2.3 
Gender Institutional Architecture and Government Schemes targeted at Women’s development
 ..................................................................................................................................................... 11 
2.4 
Climate Change Impacts on Women in India ............................................................................... 12 
2.4.1 
Impacts of Pollution ..................................................................................................... 12 
3. 
SECTOR SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT ......................................................................................... 14 
3.1 
Gender Dimensions of Urban Transport ...................................................................................... 14 
3.2 
Women safety in Public Transport ............................................................................................... 15 
3.3 
Impact on Female Workforce Participation due to Public Transportation .................................... 17 
3.4 
Gender and Employment in the Transportation Sector ................................................................ 17 
3.5 
Good Practice Examples in Transportation Sector ...................................................................... 18 
4. 
KEY AREAS OF INTERVENTION ............................................................................................. 20 
 
APPENDIX A 
GENDER ASSESSMENT OF SUB-PROJECTS 
 
List of Tables 
Table 2.1  
GER for males and females in India, 2015-16 ................................................................. 8 
Table 2.2  
Educational attainment data per 1000 distribution of population above 5 years ............. 9 
Table 2.3  
Key Areas of Intervention ............................................................................................... 20 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 
Principles of GCF's Gender Policy ................................................................................... 3 
Figure 2.1  
Adult Female Literacy rate (India and the rest of the world) ............................................ 8 
Figure 2.2 
Fewer Women Are Participating in the Paid Workforce ................................................ 10 
Figure 2.3  
Where Women Reported Sexual Harassment Takes Place .......................................... 15 
Figure 2.4 
What Makes Women Feel Unsafe ................................................................................. 16 
 
                              95

=== PAGE 98 ===
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘MAAML’ or ‘AE’), has 
developed a Funding Proposal (‘FP’) for submission to the Green Climate Fund (‘GCF’), to seek their 
investment in a dedicated electric mobility (e-mobility) program focusing on India (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Program’). AE is part of Macquarie Asset Management (‘MAM’), one of the 4 operating 
business groups of Macquarie Group.  
MAM is is a global specialist asset manager with assets under management at 31 December 2021 of 
AUD 750.1 billion, aiming to deliver positive impact for everyone. MAM provides investment solutions 
to clients across a range of capabilities, including infrastructure & renewables, real estate, agriculture 
& natural assets, asset finance, private credit, equities, fixed income and multi-asset solutions 
ERM India Private Limited (ERM) has been appointed by MAM, to conduct a Gender Assessment 
Study and to develop a Gender Action Plan. The Gender Assessment Study and Gender Action Plan 
for the Program forms part of GCF’s requirements for all Funding Proposals. This document presents 
the Gender Assessment. 
1.1 
A brief overview of the ‘Dedicated E-Mobility Program’ 
MAM is looking to partner with GCF and other co-investors to establish an India-focused electric 
mobility program to facilitate decarbonisation of the road transport sector through rapid scale-up of the 
electric vehicles sector in the country.  
The Program will look to provide financing to private sector counterparties across the e-mobility value 
chain (BEV and FCEV) such as e-buses, 2/3/4 wheeler segments, supporting infrastructure & 
services like charging infrastructure, vehicle scrapping and after-sales services.  
The Program will comprise of three main activities as outlined in the Funding Proposal presented to 
the GCF: 
1) Establishment of a financing platform in India (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Platform’), including 
its legal entity, policies, procedures and broader governance. 
2) Providing financing by the Platform to corporate counterparties in the e-mobility space, which 
involves upfront due diligence and structuring as well as ongoing monitoring. 
3) Sale of the Platform (to facilitate GCF and other investors exit) with the expectation that the 
Platform will continue to operate in the market. 
For the purposes of this Program, ‘sub-projects’ will refer to each transaction at the Platform level 
where a commitment of financing is made to a counterparty in the e-mobility space. Please see the 
Gender Action Plan for more details.  
1.2 
Objective and Scope of work 
The objective of the assignment is to undertake a Gender Assessment and formulate a Gender Action 
Plan for the Program with consideration of its targeted sectors. The scope of the exercise includes:  
◼ 
assessment of general social baseline conditions in India in which the Platform will operate; 
◼ 
focused interventions that are in practice for the transport and e-mobility sectors from a gender 
perspective; 
◼ 
identification of areas that can be best targeted by the Platform for gender mainstreaming 
activities; and   
◼ 
formulation of a Gender Action Plan for the Program that highlights key performance indicators 
and timelines.   
                              96

=== PAGE 99 ===
The reference framework for the exercise was taken to be the GCF Guidance Note (Form 09 updated 
1 February 2019). 
1.3 
Applicable Reference Framework 
The applicable reference framework for the assignment is presented below: 
■ 
applicable national legislation and regulations pertaining to social and gender aspects; 
■ 
GCF Manual on Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Platform Projects1; and 
■ 
GCF Gender Toolkit and Guidance Note (Form 09). 
1.3.1 
Need for Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
Gender mainstreaming is central to the GCF’s objectives and guiding principles. The aim is to address 
it continually by engaging women and men of all ages as stakeholders in the design, development 
and implementation of strategies and activities to be financed. The GCF Governing Instrument states 
that: “The Fund [GCF] will strive to maximize the impact of its funding for adaptation and mitigation 
promoting environmental, social, economic, and development benefits, taking not only a gender-
sensitive, but a gender responsive approach.” 
Gender mainstreaming, as defined by the United Nations Economic and Social Council, refers to a 
strategy for making women’s, as well as men’s, concerns and experiences integral dimensions of 
policies and programs in all political, economic and social spheres. Gender mainstreaming is essential 
to ensure that women and men benefit equally from a certain system, and inequality is not 
perpetuated. 
There is still a heavy linking of the term “gender” with “women’s issues”; however, the evolved 
understanding on gender and gender mainstreaming is that Gender represents equality of both the 
sexes.  
However, GCF has established on the basis of prevalent practices and past experiences that women 
and girls are disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change and associated severe 
weather events. Women’s mortality from climate-related disasters is higher than that of men, and 
climate-induced impacts due to natural disasters like floods and earthquakes exacerbate women’s 
poverty and unpaid domestic and care work burdens. Gender inequality, exacerbated by climate 
change, is linked, as are other development areas, to vulnerability and risks. The greater vulnerability 
of women to climate change stems from societal norms and discrimination that result in the 
imbalanced division of labour, lower incomes, and lesser livelihood opportunities; less access and 
control over land and other productive assets; fewer legal rights; lesser mobility and lesser political 
and professional representation.  
1.3.2 
GCF’s Gender Policy 
The GCF Board adopted the Gender Policy and Action Plan in March 2015 and an update to this 
policy was issued in February 2019, to respond to a fast-changing landscape related to gender in the 
context of climate change. Its rationale is rooted in the GCF’s mandate to encourage a paradigm shift 
towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways. The updated policy emphasizes 
gender responsiveness rather than gender sensitivity. Being gender-responsive means that instead of 
only identifying gender issues or ensuring a “do no harm” approach, a process will substantially help 
to overcome historical gender biases. Gender responsive approaches are essential to this, 
including decisions and actions by women and men.  
 
GCF’s Gender policy aims to: 
1 Published in 2017 
                              97

=== PAGE 100 ===
◼ 
Achieve greater, more effective, sustainable, and equitable climate change results, outcomes, 
and impacts, through the adoption of a gender sensitive approach 
◼ 
Build resilience to climate change equally for men and women, as well as to ensure that men 
and women equally contribute and benefit from activities supported by the Fund 
◼ 
Address or mitigate risks for women and men associated with adaptation and mitigation 
activities financed by the Fund; and 
◼ 
Reduce the gender gap of social, economic, and environmental vulnerabilities exacerbated by 
climate change. 
 
For the purposes of this Gender Equality Policy, GCF requires that women and men, including 
marginalized and vulnerable groups, will be provided with an equal and equitable opportunity to be 
fully and effectively engaged in meaningful consultations and decision-making throughout the project 
cycle. 
 
The GCF’s Gender Policy is based on the following six Fundamental principles. 
Figure 1.1 
Principles of GCF's Gender Policy 
 
Source: Green Climate Platform Proposal Toolkit 2017 
 
The GCF’s paradigm shift is rooted in the acknowledgement of women’s critical role in climate 
responses, as agents of change sharing in the benefits, and, in several cases, disproportionately 
affected by its negative impacts. Marginalised communities also bear disproportionate negative 
outcomes and are also included in this shift. 
 
According to GCF, “Gender assessment refers to methods used to understand relationships between 
men and women, their access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they face relative to 
each other. A comprehensive gender analysis/assessment entails the examination of the different 
roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of women and men, boys and girls in a given project/context. 
Gender analysis needs to take place early in the planning process so that an understanding of gender 
roles and power relations is built into the project.” 
1.4 
Methodology 
In order to achieve the above-mentioned scope, the following methodology has been adopted. 
                              98

=== PAGE 101 ===
1.4.1 
Kick off call with MAM 
ERM organised an Inception call with the Client to understand the current investment context, get a 
general understanding of the planned working of the Platform and expected investments. ERM also 
discussed the role of MAM in the Program as the investment manager, applicability of an ESMS, a 
Gender Policy or any other ongoing/proposed interventions that will be undertaken by the Program 
that may particularly focus on addressing gender related aspects. 
1.4.2 
Detailed Gender Assessment 
A desk-based research of aspects related to women in India and specially in urban mobility has been 
undertaken to understand the nature and extent of data and studies capturing aspects like female 
urban ridership, challenges faced by urban females due to limited mobility and while using public 
transport, general scenario of employment of women and specifically in the urban transportation 
sector.  
1.4.2.1 National Context guided by GCF Guidance Note  
An assessment of the nationwide gender related baseline scenario and associated impacts, risks, 
opportunities and trends in this sector was undertaken using secondary data.   
Key steps followed for the assessment are: 
◼ 
Profiling the social and development status of women and men (education, literacy, work force 
participation, unemployment, role in formal/informal economy, division of labour, access to 
resources and opportunity, decision making roles and capacity, as relevant) based on secondary 
data at the national level 
◼ 
An assessment of the legal status, beliefs, perceptions, prevalent gender stereotypes, as relevant 
for the key sectors 
◼ 
An assessment of relevant issues like gender-gap, inequality, gender-specific vulnerabilities (with 
respect to climate change adaptation, social, socio-economic factors, technical capacity, and 
resource access etc.) has been undertaken based on relevant secondary literature and published 
research.  
Please note: In the absence of latest data on gender issues such as employment and literacy in the 
transport sector? the report has relied on Census of India, 2011 data and has supported the findings, 
wherever possible with other latest available studies. 
1.4.2.2 Establishing a Baseline Scenario for Gender Mainstreaming in E-mobility  
The assessment has sought to identify a baseline scenario for gender issues in the e-mobility sector 
and ultimately identify where the Program could best implement gender-based interventions.  
Given the lack of data on gender and e-mobility sector, especially in developing countries, the report 
has relied on secondary review, data and analysis available for gender and transportation sector in 
general. It should also be noted that there is a general lack of gender disaggregated data on urban 
mobility and hence also in the e-mobility sector.  
Consequentially, there is little available research on strategies, interventions and case studies on 
specific preferences (of women and men, young and old, or those with disabilities) regarding urban 
public transport usage, sector employment trends, health and safety, ergonomics, or accident risks. 
Sex-disaggregated data has been provided where available.  
Whilst this is one limitation of the Gender Assessment, collecting sex-disaggregated data is also an 
identified area for improving gender sensitivity in this sector. 
                              99

=== PAGE 102 ===
1.4.2.3 Stakeholder Engagement 
Specific stakeholder engagement as part of this gender assessment has not been completed. This is 
primarily because the proposed Platform has not yet been established and the broad scope of the 
proposed transactions involve multiple e-mobility sectors and are not based in a specific region in 
India. It is proposed that targeted, gender-focused stakeholder engagement is completed once the 
Platform is established to build upon the desk-based assessment and interventions outlined in the 
Gender Action Plan. Please refer to the Gender Action Plan for more details. 
1.4.3 
Formulation of the Program-level Gender Action Plan 
The Gender Action Plan has been formulated to include strategies and action items identified for the 
Platform. The action plan includes key indicators and timelines, for effective monitoring of outcomes. 
1.4.3.1 Limitations in development of Action Plan 
◼ 
The Platform is not yet established, including the defined policies, procedures and governance. 
Actions have been identified to integrate gender mainstreaming frameworks as part of this 
establishment. 
◼ 
There is limited ability to set baseline scenarios given the lack of data available in the sector, the 
broad mandate across sectors and geography, and the Platform is not yet established so there is 
no benchmarking applicable of its existing practices. Activities have been outlined to support 
establishment of baseline. 
 
 
                              100

=== PAGE 103 ===
2. 
THE BROADER GENDER LANDSCAPE IN INDIA 
The Constitution of India conveys a powerful mandate for equality and rights of women in its 
Preamble, Fundamental Rights, and Duties and also provides for specific provisions for affirmative 
actions. India is also a signatory to a number of UN Conventions, primarily Convention on Elimination 
of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), Beijing Platform for Action and Convention 
on Rights of the Child where the commitment of the nation to protect and empower its women and 
girls is quite pronounced. The recent endorsement by India, of the ambitious 2030 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) will further change the course of development by addressing the key 
challenges such as poverty, inequality, and violence against women, which is critical for the global 
success of the goals as well. 
However, according to the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report 20212, India has 
seen its gender gap widen from 66.8% in 2019 to 62.5% in 2020. It now ranks at 140 out of 156 
countries. Similarly, according to the Human Development Index (HDI) report prepared by United 
Nations Development Programme in 2020, India was placed at 123rd position in the Gender Inequality 
Index. This is largely due to women’s inadequate representation in politics, technical and leadership 
roles, decrease in women’s labour force participation rate, poor healthcare, lagging female to male 
literacy ratio and income inequality. However, like most of the developing countries, India struggles 
with gender inequality issues beyond just equal economic growth and access to educational resource 
opportunities. Gender inequality exists in the form of socially constructed, predefined gender roles 
firmly anchored in India’s sociocultural fabric that has deep cultural and historical roots. Sociocultural 
influences have spill-over effects across all domains, including workforce ratio, and social and political 
contexts.  
Further, the COVID-193 pandemic has raised new barriers to build inclusive and prosperous 
economies and societies. In addition to the pressures of providing care in the home, the crisis has 
halted progress towards gender parity in several economies and industries. As per the Global Gender 
Gap Report 2021, preliminary evidence suggests that the health emergency and the related economic 
downturn have affected women more severely than men, partially re-opening gaps that were being 
closed. 
This section provides a broad baseline at the national level to set up a context for the gender scenario 
in the country at large and bring out the differences with respect to overall development indicators 
(demography, education, and health for example) and various policies introduced by Government of 
India to address the differences. Specific aspects of the focus sector, comprising of urban public 
transport, ridership, safety and risk, worker participation, other travel needs, gaps, and related aspects 
are included in the subsequent section. 
2.1 
Demographic Profile 
In India, as per Census 2011, the total population is 1,210.8 million with a decadal population growth 
rate of 17.7%. The decadal population growth of males has been registered as 17.1% and for females 
has been registered as 18.3%. It has also been established through the Census 2011 data that about 
31.1% of Indian population lives in urban areas; while the rest live in rural areas.  
The sex ratio (number of females per 1,000 males), in the country as per Census 2011 is 943 and has 
improved from a figure of 933 in 2001. In rural areas, the sex ratio has increased from 946 females 
per 1,000 males to 949 females per 1000 males and the corresponding increase in urban areas has 
been of 29 points from 900 to 929 females per 1000 males. The gender balance in the country is 
2 This report benchmarks the evolution of gender-based gaps among four key dimensions of Economic Participation and 
Opportunity, Educational Attainment, Health and Survival, and Political Empowerment and tracks progress towards closing 
these gaps over time. 
3 Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus. The World Health 
Organization declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on 30 January 2020, and a pandemic 
on 11 March 2020. 
                              101

=== PAGE 104 ===
skewed towards males as depicted from the sex ratio figures and the general socio-cultural 
environment in the country. One of the reasons for this difference can be attributed to the trend of 
migration of males in search of employment from villages to nearby towns and cities, while their 
families continue to stay in their native place. 
The share of youth in the total population has been continuously increasing from 30.6% in 1971 to 
34.8% in 20114. The percentage of male youth population to total male population follow the pattern 
of overall youth and was also on a steady rise till 2011, but the share of female youths to total female 
population showed a slight decrease in 2011 which may have been due to a declining sex ratio during 
this period.  
2.1.1 
Educational Attainment 
 
According to the 2011 Census of India, the overall adult literacy rate was 73%. The literacy rate for 
females and males were 64.63% and 80.9% respectively. According to the Global Gender Gap 
Report 2021, almost one third of women are illiterate (34.2%) compared to 17.6% of men in India.  
The trend continues despite intervention by the government such as Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009. This gap is attributable to a combination of social, economic, and 
cultural factors. Even as the benefits of female education will lead to a more productive workforce, 
lower fertility and lower infant mortality rates, the costs such as tuition fees, transport, and school 
supplies as well as opportunity costs of forgone child labour, which are privately borne by households, 
continue to influence this choice. The underinvestment in women’s schooling results in lower literacy 
and lower educational attainment, and further, to lower employability for semi-skilled and skilled jobs. 
Social restrictions on women’s mobility also prevents an educated woman from entering the labour 
force and supporting the household financially. 
 
The figure below shows the glaring difference in India’s female literacy, not only with the developed 
countries but also with middle- and lower-income countries like Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe. According 
to this, female literacy in India is 22 percentage points below the world average 5. These numbers are 
a reminder that India is still a long way from meeting Goal 4 of the UN SDGs (Sustainable 
Development Goals) of ensuring “inclusive and equitable quality education” and “lifelong learning 
opportunities for all” by 2030.  
 
4 http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Youth_in_India-2017.pdf 
5 https://www.firstpost.com/india/indias-female-literacy-has-gone-up-but-still-22-percentage-points-behind-world-average-
education-among-young-women-rising-7197631.html  
                              102

=== PAGE 105 ===
Figure 2.1  Adult Female Literacy rate (India and the rest of the world) 
Source: Gender Disparity in Literacy, world Bank. https://www.firstpost.com/india/indias-female-literacy-has-gone-up-but-still-
22-percentage-points-behind-world-average-education-among-young-women-rising-7197631.html  
2.1.2 
Enrolment and Dropout Statistics 
 
According to a study conducted by the Statistics division of Department of Higher Education, Ministry 
of Human Resource Development in the year 2015-16, the Gross Enrolment Ratio6 status of 
population in India as per the various levels of education are presented in Table 2.1 below. 
Table 2.1  
GER for males and females in India, 2015-16 
Gender 
Primary 
Upper Primary 
Elementary 
Secondary 
Higher Secondary 
Boys 
97.83 
88.72 
94.53 
79.16 
55.95 
Girls 
100.69 
97.57 
99.59 
80.97 
56.41 
Total 
99.21 
92.81 
96.91 
80.01 
56.16 
Source: District Information System for Education Study – 2015-16 
 
The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) for girls at the primary level stood at 100.6 compared with nearly 
97.8 for boys. At the upper primary level, the GER for girls has been reported as 97.5 against 88.72 
for boys. The higher GER for girls again reflects the positive change in the country where increasing 
number of families are signing up for the education of girls at least up to elementary level. The GER 
and educational attainment figures reduce significantly at the secondary and higher secondary levels 
and the major reason for non-enrolment at higher levels as been reported as "not interested in 
education" for rural males & females, whereas for urban India, "financial constraints" as the major 
reasons for non-enrolment7. 
 
6 The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) for a class-group is the ratio of the number of persons in the class-group to the number of persons in the 
corresponding official age-group. 
7 http://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/reports_and_publication/statistical_publication/social_statistics/Chapter_3.pdf 
                              103

=== PAGE 106 ===
Supporting this is a survey report from Teen Age Girls (or the TAG report)8,9, released by Nanhi Kali 
in 2018, a project by the Naandi Foundation, which works with adolescent girls. This report noted that 
one in five teenage Indian girls is currently not studying and the dropout rate increases with age. 
Nearly every second teenage Indian girl believes boys have better opportunities to pursue education 
and work, and only one in five believes that boys can do as much household work as themselves. 
For higher education, the student enrolment statistics given by All India Survey on Higher Education 
(AISHE) 2014-15, shows that the highest number of students are seen to be enrolled at 
Undergraduate level. Out of the total students enrolled, 79% students are enrolled in Undergraduate 
level. Second to the Undergraduate, 11% students are enrolled in Post Graduate level10. 
Table 2.2  
Educational attainment data per 1000 distribution of population 
above 5 years 
Level of Education 
Rural 
Urban 
Total 
 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Literate without Schooling 
8 
6 
5 
6 
7 
6 
Up to Primary 
377 
336 
285 
280 
349 
319 
Upper Primary 
173 
130 
157 
143 
168 
134 
Secondary 
118 
80 
150 
133 
128 
96 
Higher Secondary 
71 
45 
114 
102 
85 
62 
Diploma 
11 
5 
30 
14 
17 
8 
Graduation 
37 
18 
126 
96 
64 
42 
Post-Graduation and above 
8 
4 
43 
35 
18 
14 
Source: http://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Women%20and%20men%20in%20india-
2017%20Mail.pdf 
2.1.3 
Workforce Participation 
According to the Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) (2017-18), Ministry of Statistics and 
Implementation, India, India’s workforce has fewer women than it did six years ago: no more than 
18% of women in rural areas are employed, compared to 25% in 2011-12. However, in urban areas, 
the percentage of women in salaried jobs has increased from 35.6% in 2004 to 52.1% in 2017 but 
continue to be under-represented compared to their presence in self-employed or casual work 11. 
Figure 2. presents participation of women in workforce from 1993 to 2017.   
8 https://www.nanhikali.org/pdf/TAG-Report.pdf  
9 The survey asked girls aged 13-19 years questions on nine topics including educational and health status, basic life skills, agency and 
empowerment within and outside the home and aspirations.  
10 http://mospi.nic.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Youth_in_India-2017.pdf 
11 Women Workers in India: Labour Force Trends, Occupatonal Diversificaton and Wage Gaps Bidisha Mondal, Jayati Ghosh, 
Shiney Chakraborty and Sona Mitra, March 2018.  
                              104

=== PAGE 107 ===
Figure 2.2 
Fewer Women Are Participating in the Paid Workforce 
 
Source: Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 2017-18 
 
As per literature reviews, there are various reasons for this decline including social and cultural 
barriers to women's employment and household work expectations from women (particularly 
mothers). Notably, another key reason is the lack of reliable, safe, and cheap public transportation, as 
per the study by the Institute of Transportation and Development and the NGO, Jagori, shows. This is 
further discussed in detail in Section 3 below.  
 
Further, various government policy interventions have also not been very helpful (See section 2.3). 
Women also withdraw from the workforce due to an ‘income effect’, that is an increase in the 
husband’s income which pushes up the household income.  It is also understood that women are 
withdrawing from the workforce to pursue higher education, while others contend that there is a lack 
of good jobs for women12,13.  
 
In addition, the burden of unpaid work falls disproportionately on women in India because tasks such 
as cooking, cleaning, fetching water and firewood are highly gendered. Patriarchal norms dictate that 
women also perform care work, validate men’s failure to assume domestic responsibilities and thus 
entrench women’s unequal social status14 
 
According to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) data, Women in 
India currently spend up to 352 minutes per day on domestic work, 577% more than men (52 minutes) 
and at least 40% more than women in South Africa and China.  
 
According to the same report Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) (2017-18), 24.5% of women were 
part of the labour force, which means they are either employed or looking for work, as compared to 
75.5% of men. However, as per the survey by Business Standard (2020)15, after lockdown was 
imposed, 13% fewer women than a year ago were employed or looking for jobs, compared to 2% 
fewer men. The lockdown affected urban women more than rural women.  
12 Why is female labour force participation declining so sharply in India? / Steven Kapsos, Evangelia Bourmpoula, Andrea 
Silberman ; International Labour Office.2014.  
13 Female labour force participation in India and beyond. Ruchika Chaudhary and Sher Verick October 2014  
14 Oxfam India’s second India Inequality Report, ‘Mind The Gap – The State of Employment in India’, 2019. 
15 https://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/covid-impact-women-workforce-disappearing-most-affected-in-urban-india-
120121500259_1.html  
                              105

=== PAGE 108 ===
2.2 
Health  
Health is one of the important indicators defining the status of development of a nation. Its 
improvement is characterised by lower incidences of deaths and diseases and an improvement in the 
overall health indicators, including maternal mortality rates and infant mortality rates. 
In India, infant mortality rate16 (disaggregated by sex and place of residence) has been reported as 37 
per 1000 live births which is comparatively higher than the urban total of 25 per 1000 live births and 
lower than the rural total 41 per 1000 live births. In case of females, the infant mortality is higher in the 
rural area with a figure of 43 per 1000 live births than in urban areas of 28 per 1000 live births. The 
female infant mortality has been higher than male mortality rate which highlights a certain bias 
prevalent in the society, more so in the rural areas. The percentage change in the average level of 
infant mortality between 2004-06 and 2014-16 at the national level has declined by 36.7%. 
Reproductive, maternal, new-born, child and adolescent health services and national programs to 
curb incidences of diseases such as polio, HIV, TB, and leprosy have played pivotal roles in improving 
health outcomes for the Indian population. There are noteworthy improvements in health indicators 
such as life expectancy, infant mortality rate (IMR) and maternal mortality rate (MMR) due to 
increasing penetration of healthcare services across the country, extensive health campaigns, 
sanitation drives, increase in the number of government and private hospitals in India, improved 
immunisation, and growing literacy. Initiatives such as Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakarm, Janani 
Suraksha Yojana17. During 2011 to 2015, the percentage of urban mothers who received medical 
attention at the time of delivery has increased from 87.9% to 93.5% and from 60.7% to 74.2% for rural 
mothers. 
2.3 
Gender Institutional Architecture and Government Schemes targeted at 
Women’s development 
At the national level the Ministry of Women and Child Development acts as a nodal agency for 
working towards realization of constitutional and international commitments to gender equality and 
social justice in India. State Resource Centres for Women under the National Mission for 
Empowerment of Women (NMEW) provides support to the respective State/UT Women and Child 
Development Department for coordination and implementation of the various policies and regulations. 
They are further supported by Panchayats (in rural areas) and Urban local bodies. Civil society 
organizations, associations, and federations also provide inputs and help in implementation and 
monitoring of policies and programmes impacting women.  
There are various gender focused legal regulations in India that aim to address the vulnerabilities and 
cultural biases associated with both the genders, through provision of certain measures that support a 
safe and equal professional platform for women. These regulations are presented below. 
◼ 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1973 provides for payment of equal remuneration to men and women 
workers for the same work of similar nature without any discrimination. In order to ensure social 
security to the workers including women in the unorganised sector, the Government has enacted 
the Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act 2008.  
◼ 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 and The Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act, 2017 regulate 
employment of women in certain establishments for a certain period (26 weeks) before and after 
childbirth and provides for maternity and other benefits. 
◼ 
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act 
(POSH), 2013 has been enacted, which covers all women, irrespective of their age or 
employment status and protect them against sexual harassment at all workplaces both in public 
and private sector, whether organised or unorganised. 
16 Infant Mortality Rate is defined as the infant deaths (less than one year) per thousand live births 
17 http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/file/NHP%202018.pdf  
                              106

=== PAGE 109 ===
The Government of India has been launching programmes like Beti Padhao, Beti Bachao campaign 
(launched in 2015) for improving the Gender Parity Index (GPI)18 by promoting survival, protection, 
and education of girls. It aims to address the issue of declining child sex ratio through a mass 
campaign targeted at changing social mind set and creating awareness about the criticality of the 
issue. Furthermore, Mahila E-Haat has been launched by the Government in 2016 for promoting 
women entrepreneurs, with the objective to provide an e-marketing platform by leveraging technology 
for showcasing products made, manufactured and sold by women entrepreneurs, SHGs and/or 
NGOs. 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), 200519 is one of the 
important schemes launched in India which ensures participation by women in the economic activity 
by stipulating minimum 33 per cent participation by women.  
2.4 
Climate Change Impacts on Women in India 
One of the biggest challenges that we are facing in 21st century is climate change.  As per the latest 
report of the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), human activities 
have already caused warming of 1.0 degree Celsius as compared to pre-industrial times. By 2030, or 
latest by mid-century, global warming is likely to reach 1.5 degrees Celsius. Thus far, with a 1°C rise 
in global temperatures, India has already experienced extreme weather events such as floods in 
Kerala, wildfires in Uttarakhand and heat waves in the north and the east, demonstrating its 
vulnerability. Its impacts vary among regions, generations, age, classes, income groups, and 
gender20. However, climate change exacerbates existing structural and social gender inequalities in 
ways that has led women and girls to experience climate change the worst and first.  
 
The IPCC (International Panel on Climate Change) found that gender inequalities are further 
exaggerated by climate-related hazards, and they result in higher workloads for women, occupational 
hazards indoors and outdoors, psychological and emotional stress, and higher mortality compared to 
men. 
 
It is not only in India but worldwide, women have less access than men to resources such as land, 
credit, agricultural inputs, decision-making structures, technology, training and extension services that 
would enhance their capacity to adapt to climate change21. As per one of the reports by United 
Nations22, women represent a high percentage of poor communities that are highly dependent on 
local natural resources for their livelihood, particularly in rural areas where they shoulder the major 
responsibility for household water supply and energy for cooking and heating, as well as for food 
security.  
2.4.1 
Impacts of Pollution 
 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO)23, air, noise pollution is a global environmental 
health emergency and India sits on the frontline of this global crisis. Fourteen of the world’s 20 most 
polluted cities are still found in India and an estimated 99.9 percent of India’s population live in areas 
where air pollution exceeds WHO air quality guidelines. In 2019, air pollution was estimated to be 
18 Gender Parity Index (GPI) in education is a valuable indicator which reflects the discrimination against girls in access to 
educational opportunities. 
19 Mahatma Gandhi Employment Guarantee Act 2005, is an Indian labour law and social security measure that aims to 
guarantee the 'right to work' 
20 https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/womenin-shadow-climate-change 
21 Aguilar, L., 2008. "Is there a connection between gender and climate change?", International Union for Conservation of 
Nature (IUCN), Office of the Senior Gender Adviser.  
22 https://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/climate_change/downloads/Women_and_Climate_Change_Factsheet.pdf 
23 https://www.who.int/health-topics/air-pollution#tab=tab_1  
                              107

=== PAGE 110 ===
responsible for 1.6 million premature deaths in India and $95 billion USD in economic losses (3 
percent of India’s GDP24).  
2.4.1.1 Transportation, Pollution and Gender  
Vehicle transport is a key source of air and noise pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in Indian 
cities, and one in which power dynamics, occupational differences, as well as socioeconomic and 
cultural differences related to gender shape exposure for women and men.  
Mobility Patterns 
As per various studies, 25gender inequalities often shape women’s and men’s mobility and use of 
transport globally and in India. If a family owns a car, the male head of the household is more likely to 
use it, leaving women and children to rely on alternatives, mainly walking and public transport. As per 
census of India,201126a gendered comparison of five large cities in India showed, on average, 37 
percent of women walked to work compared with 27 percent of men. Data from the Delhi morning 
rush hour demonstrates the implications of walking near roadways for exposure to increased levels of 
air pollution.  
Occupational Differences 
As per a study by WHO27 in India (especially in rural areas), women are more vulnerable to roadway 
emissions because they have reduced lung function due to indoor air pollution from domestic duties, 
such as the use of biomass fuels for cooking. As per a study conducted in 201328 cited found the risk 
of chronic respiratory morbidity among street sweepers was 4.24 times higher than that in the 
comparison group, and the risk increased significantly with increasing length of service. Women in the 
informal sector often also work in street vending or minding small retail shops that are frequently 
located in high-traffic roadsides where they have greater exposure to emissions. These women may 
be forced to choose between the increased incidence of respiratory disorders if they vend on busier 
streets or the increased risk of gender-based violent attacks on quieter streets.  
 
 
 
 
24 https://www.forbes.com/sites/dishashetty/2020/12/22/air-pollution-cost-india-368-billion-in-2019/?sh=57a3a5405c70  
25 https://www.itdp.org/publication/women-transport-indian-cities/  
26 https://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011census/B-series/B_28.html  
27 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-and-health  
28C hronic Exposure to Dust and Lung Function Impairment:. A Study on Female Sweepers in India 
S Smilee Johncy1, G Dhanyakumar1, Kanyakumari1, T Vivian Samuel2 
                              108

=== PAGE 111 ===
3. 
SECTOR SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT 
As discussed above, the focus of the Program will be to provide financing to counterparties across the 
e-mobility value chain such as e-buses, 2/3/4 wheeler segment, support infrastructure & services like 
charging infrastructure, vehicle scrapping and after sales services.  
 
Through review of secondary literature and experience of projects within e-mobility space, it is 
understood that gender related issues in the e-mobility sector are common to those in the broader 
mobility sector in India, including gender-based violence and harassment, economic disparity, and 
appropriate and safe transport options.  
 
The recent flow of capital in safe and well-designed transport infrastructure can help increase 
economic empowerment of women by improving mobility, access to better avenues of employment, 
education, and healthcare. For example, introduction of new electric bus fleets over recent years is 
helping state governments enhance the safety measures for women and elderly on such buses by 
mandating inclusion of specific safety features such as provision of first aid kits and fire extinguishers 
or ensuring proper in-bus lighting at all times in the concession agreements with operators. 
  
As a result, there is a strong belief that growth of the e-mobility sector can lead to changes to gender 
dimensions by supporting safer public transportation options. Moreover, as a new industry there is 
potential to promote the implementation of gender inclusive design and practice, as well as applying 
broader workforce policies such as bridging the pay gap, involvement of more technically qualified 
women, opening more avenues of employment for women.   
 
However, there is lack of study and research in gender disaggregated use of sustainable 
transportation. For example, there is less data to understand if women use more electric vehicles than 
traditional fuel vehicles. This study therefore relies on data on general use of transportation and 
employment in the transportation sector.  
 
Subsequent sections describe in detail the gender issues prevalent in the urban mobility and 
transportation sectors. 
3.1 
Gender Dimensions of Urban Transport 
The recently announced Green Urban Mobility Scheme (GUMS) expects to invest around INR 
700,000 million over 2018–2023 to promote use of sustainable transportation. The central 
government has initiated schemes to invest in urban transport and infrastructure and created 
indicators and service level benchmarks to establish a city’s baseline and goal for improvement29.  
 
Transportation planning and design are commonly regarded as “gender neutral.” It is assumed that 
transport projects equally benefit both men and women and that there are no significant differences 
between travel needs and patterns of either gender30. However, for these same reasons urban 
transport investments are largely “gender blind” with a limited understanding of the interrelationships 
between gender and transport inequities. This is intensely rooted in community-driven gender roles 
with economic, social and livelihood influences in the Indian society where women are invariably 
responsible for household chores and taking care responsibilities of children and elders, making the 
mobility needs of women and men heterogeneous.  
 
Men and women have also been found to use public transportation very differently, noted in a 
December 2017 report, Women and Transport in Indian Cities, by the Institute for Transportation & 
Development Policy (ITDP) and Safetipin. For instance, women tend to combine multiple destinations 
29 Women and Transport in Indian Cities. A Policy Brief. December 2017.ITDP. Safetypin 
30 https://thecityfix.com/blog/why-it-is-key-to-include-gender-equality-in-transport-design-jyot-chadha-vishal-ramprasad/ 
                              109

=== PAGE 112 ===
within one trip, for example to pick up groceries on the way back from office or drop a child off to 
childcare on the way to work. While men use transport services largely to travel to work and return. 
The same study points out that, in metropolitan cities in India, women travel shorter distances, with 
most preferring to walk or take the bus to work. Men seem to have greater choice across modes of 
transport including bicycles, two-wheelers, and four-wheelers. Further across Indian cities, women 
form only 22% of people who travel for work.   
According to the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) 2016 data, more than 60% of rural and 
urban households use the bus as their main mode of public transportation, followed by auto-rickshaw, 
taxi, railways, and cycle rickshaw. While women’s bus transport modal shares vary from 25% in 
Mumbai to 37% in Bhopal, women are more dependent on public transport than men are, especially 
when they are from lower-income groups. In Mumbai, women undertook 45% more trips by bus than 
by train, which increased to 67% for households with incomes less than INR 5,000 per month, as per 
a study by World Bank in 2011. In Delhi, 34% of women commuted to work by bus compared to 25% 
of men, whereas the corresponding figures for Chennai were 34% for women and 22% for men as per 
Census 2011 data. 
3.2 
Women safety in Public Transport 
Sexual harassment in public places is rampant and based on a 2010 study of 5,010 women and men 
in Delhi by the NGO Jagori an overwhelming concern of 85.4% women fear a violent physical attack 
and even rape. Almost two out of three women reported facing sexual harassment between two to 
five times over the previous year. The harassment occurred day and night, in places secluded and 
crowded with most being reported from buses, public transport and roadsides. 
Another report by ActionAid, released in 2016, found that 79% of women surveyed had experienced 
some form of harassment in public. 
Figure 3.1  Where Women Reported Sexual Harassment Takes Place 
Source: http://www.jagori.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/Baseline-Survey_layout_for-Print_12_03_2011.pdf 
110

=== PAGE 113 ===
Figure 3.2 
What Makes Women Feel Unsafe 
 
Source: http://www.jagori.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/Baseline-Survey_layout_for-Print_12_03_2011.pdf 
 
Ola Mobility Institute conducted a survey of 43,486 people in 20 cities around India in 2018 along 52 
criteria. 91% of women felt that public transport was very unsafe or somewhat unsafe. Though 
gruesome incidents of violence against women have received attention in mainstream media, this 
data suggests that most women may face harassment such as verbal abuse, staring, groping, 
catcalls, whistling and molestation. When women use public transport, 96% prioritize affordability, 
coverage, frequency, safety, and comfort31. 
The lack of safety in public transportation limits women's access to better educational and 
professional opportunities, ultimately reducing their quality of life as well as having a negative impact 
on the economic and social growth32. 
In India, the challenge of ensuring women’s safety using urban transport came to fore after the death 
of a woman in Delhi in December 2012, which is termed as ‘Nirbhaya Case’. The Government of India 
created the Nirbhaya Fund between 2013–16 to implement schemes for improving women’s security. 
Further, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has approved the setting up of a unified system 
at the national and state levels (City Command and Control Centre) for Global Positioning System 
(GPS) tracking through emergency buttons and video recording in public transport vehicles in 32 
cities33. It has been understood that majority of the funding by Government of India under the 
‘Nirbhaya Scheme’ was spent on CCTV cameras for improved surveillance. However, the limited 
success-rate of such measures has brought out other specific measures to improve women’s safety, 
such as better lighting at bus stops and terminals and gender-specific planning of infrastructure and 
services. It has been highlighted that there is a need to include women’s issues within the general 
decision-making framework and not as an additional feature or cost item for the transit agency34. 
The Ministry of Road Transport has mandated all taxis, buses, and public transport vehicles (barring 
three-wheelers) to install GPS tracking and panic buttons mandatorily from 1st April 2018.  
31 https://olawebcdn.com/ola-institute/ola_women_and_mobility.pdf  
32 https://unleash.org/solutions/asha-2/ 
 
33 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322330719_Women_and_Transport_in_Indian_Cities 
34 https://india.uitp.org/articles/women-in-public-transport-urban-mobility-india-2018 
                              111

=== PAGE 114 ===
3.3 
Impact on Female Workforce Participation due to Public Transportation 
According to a 2017 study by the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDS), women 
in urban India turn down better employment opportunities further away from home in favour of lower-
paid local opportunities as the public transport system is often unreliable or unaffordable.  In a 
developing country like India, women often rely on some form of public transport as their only choice 
of motorised transport. It is therefore important that they perceive public transport as being safe and 
secure.  
 
In over two decades preceding 2013, female labour force participation in India fell from 34.8% to 
27%.35 As per a 2016 study by FIA Foundation,36 women are more affected than men when access to 
employment, education or basic services are located far away from their residences.  
 
Women are more dependent on public transport than men, especially when they are from lower-
income groups, according to the ITDS report. Across cities, on average, 37% of women, compared to 
27% of men, walk to work and 30% of women as compared to 25% of men use public transport.37 
 
3.4 
Gender and Employment in the Transportation Sector 
According to the International Labour Organization, transport is one of several sectors that has 
traditionally been regarded as having limited scope for women to participate in the workforce and 
largely considered a masculine profession. There is limited gender disaggregated data on the sectoral 
employment data which reflects that limited thought is being given towards improving the participation 
of women in the sector. The latest study from 2005 showed that 6.85% of women were employed in 
the transportation sector in India compared to 19% of men38. According to a World Bank report39, 
women constituted only 12.5% of the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply & Transport (BEST) Undertaking 
Committee and 1% of its engineers in 2010. When BEST attempted to induct female bus conductors, 
it was recorded that all of them requested to be shifted to desk jobs. Similarly, the Delhi Transport 
Corporation (DTC) has 245 women conductors and only one female driver40. 
Women face multiple challenges including accessing vocational training specific to transport sector 
jobs. For example, the requirements pertaining to driving licenses are passed on informally from older 
male family members to younger ones. Moreover, the upfront investment associated with training 
programs may be a barrier for resource-poor women. In DTC, drivers are required to hold a valid 
heavy motor vehicle license for at least three years and a public service vehicle (PSV) badge issued 
by the licensing authority, which is a major entry barrier. Additionally, when women are qualified for 
the jobs, insidious gendered assumptions regarding their suitability for the job can prevent them from 
breaking into the transport sector (Azad Foundation and University of Western Ontario 2014)41. 
Harassment and threats by commuters and colleagues, and lack of public toilet facilities are additional 
barriers discouraging them to participate in the transport sector. Encouraging women in non-
traditional occupations requires institutions to create a conducive environment. Simultaneously, 
women’s presence at different levels in public transport authorities has the potential of mainstreaming 
gender within the organization by bringing women’s issues to the fore in its services and 
infrastructure. 
Under-representation of women in the transport sector leads to a low visibility of women’s 
perspectives, and the differences in transport needs and patterns do not become apparent. Higher 
35 https://www.indiaspend.com/why-indian-workplaces-are-losing-women-our-nationwide-investigation-begins-53927  
36 https://www.fiafoundation.org/media/224027/safe-and-sound-report.pdf  
37 https://www.indiaspend.com/in-indian-cities-women-travel-slow-men-in-a-rush-32171  
 
39 A GENDER ASSESSMENT OF MUMBAI’S PUBLIC TRANSPORT. MUMBAI, JUNE 2011 
40 (Kaul and Shrivastava, Safety of Women in Public Spaces in Delhi: Governance and Budgetary Challenges 2017). 
41 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Sonal_Shah11/publication/322330719_Women_and_Transport_in_Indian_Cities/links/5b7f9f134585151fd12
e7a0d/Women-and-Transport-in-Indian-Cities.pdf?origin=publication_detail  
                              112

=== PAGE 115 ===
participation of women in the planning and design process is therefore increasingly necessary. A 
commitment to gender mainstreaming must include gender awareness and capacity-building 
programs for policy and decision makers to completely understand and appreciate gender-related 
issues42. 
3.5 
Good Practice Examples in Transportation Sector 
The following provides some good practice examples in transportation sectors and various 
government interventions in gender and transportation. It should be noted that these interventions 
have been implemented directly by companies or governments and not by intermediaries (like the 
Platform) and so the activities cannot be copied by the Platform. However, these provide examples of 
where key issues have been identified for interventions. 
Box 3.1 
Good Practice Examples in Transportation Sector – Safetypin 
Description: SafetiPin is a map based mobile phone application, designed to make communities 
and cities safer by providing safety related information collected by users and by trained auditors. 
At the core of the app is the Women’s Safety Audit (WSA), a participatory tool for collecting and 
assessing information about perceptions of urban safety in public spaces. The audit is based on 
nine parameters: 
◼
Level of lighting
◼
Openness (sight lines)
◼
Visibility (overhanging trees, high walls etc)
◼
Level of crowding or emptiness
◼
Security (agents)
◼
Walk/ footpath
◼
Availability of public transport,
◼
Usage of the public space (for instance is it male dominated or mixed) and
◼
Feeling/ emotional response to the space (some time also called “eyes on the street”).
Safetipin conducted audits to assess the safety of the city of Delhi since August 2013 and collected 
more than 7,000 data points that can be used by the city to improve the safety, such as replace 
lightings that no longer work, repairing broken footpaths and cutting overhanging trees.  
Box 3.2 
Good Practice Examples in Transportation Sector – Gender 
Sensitization Trainings, India 
Gender Sensitization Trainings, India 
Description: Sensitization for women´s issues among public transportation employees as 
transportation plays an essential role for changing behaviour. 
An example, as described by ITDP (2017), is the training conducted with the Delhi Transport 
Cooperation that includes role-plays as a basis for discussions about gender issues in transport, as 
well as After Trainings Support. Since 2012, a mental health organization in Delhi conducts those 
trainings and has by now trained over 100,000 transportation employees. 
Box 3.3: 
Initiative by Government in India to Improve Public Transportation 
◼
In Kerala, She-Taxi, the all-woman taxi service is like other taxi aggregators but only hires
women drivers. The customer care centre tracks the vehicle with a GPS device. Police,
42 https://thecityfix.com/blog/why-it-is-key-to-include-gender-equality-in-transport-design-jyot-chadha-vishal-ramprasad/ 
113

=== PAGE 116 ===
relatives, and friends of the passenger can also monitor the cab using the system. There are 
separate switches in the car for drivers and passengers to send distress signals to the centre. 
The service is initiated by the state social justice department, which started it under Gender 
Park, a new institution launched by the department to empower women through livelihood 
creation. The drivers own their vehicles. (She Taxi 2013).Shimla City in Himachal Pradesh has 
new low-floor buses with each bus having three CCTV cameras. Two of them face two 
entrances from inside and one outside on the rear of the bus. The buses have been made more 
spacious with wider passageways, wider windowpanes, and lower entry/exit doors. 
◼ 
In 2016, Maharashtra introduced the Tejaswini buses, which were ladies’ special buses running 
during peak hours with women drivers and conductors 
 
Box 3.4:  
Driving employment opportunities – Safeway Concessions  
Safeway Concessions is currently a MAM-managed company acquired in 2018 by MAM 
investors from National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). 
Safeway Concessions owns and operates a portfolio of 9 toll roads (687 kms) across the states of 
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat in India.  
Last year, it piloted a program to recruit women from local areas to work as toll collectors at toll 
plazas, a profession which has primarily been male dominated. Under the pilot program, more than 
40 females have been employed who operate during day shift at three of the ten toll collection 
plazas. The initiative has played pivotal role in empowering local women both in terms of providing 
access to additional income and improving their livelihood. 
In hiring this new demographic workforce, the company considered the following: 
◼ 
Put in place an all-female shift organized around daytime hours for enhanced safety  
◼ 
Male toll collectors were redeployed to comparable jobs to create open roles for the daytime 
shift. 
◼ 
The all-female shift ensured the new hires felt appropriately supported by female colleagues in 
a largely male dominated environment.  
◼ 
New facilities (e.g., female bathroom and changing rooms) were put in place to accommodate 
the new workforce demographic and is now a standard facility in the designs of new toll plaza 
constructions for the company. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              114

=== PAGE 117 ===
4. 
KEY AREAS OF INTERVENTION 
Based on this Gender Assessment, the following areas for gender mainstreaming 
have been identified, taking into consideration: 
◼ 
the key issues affecting women both generally and specifically within the e-mobility/ transport 
sector as outlined in this assessment;  
◼ 
the intermediation role of the Platform; and  
◼ 
the proposed investment sectors of the Platform. 
These may be updated over time as the sector develops and the Platform is active in identifying 
further areas to incorporate gender mainstreaming. 
Table 4.1  
Key Areas of Intervention  
Key issue 
identified in 
gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or 
risk 
Actions to address issues identified 
Employment 
opportunities 
Limited opportunities for 
women to participate in 
the growth of the e-
mobility sector through 
increased access to 
employment 
opportunities within the 
sector  
Provide employment opportunities at the Platform level to 
grow skills within the e-mobility financing industry that is set 
to grow and apply fair hiring practices. 
Start an internship program providing young women 
opportunities to gain experience in e-mobility financing 
space. 
Review relevant policies of counterparty including statutory 
(e.g. anti-discrimination) and company (e.g. D&I or relevant 
recruiting policies), and other D&I and gender related 
company practices. 
Limited sex-
disaggregated data 
Track relevant candidate gender data through application vs 
hiring process and identify/mitigate any bias if identified. 
Track skills gaps of applicants which can feed into the 
internship program design. 
Gender-blindness, 
adequate 
transportation 
infrastructure to 
reach services 
(education, 
training) 
Limited number of 
services designed for 
women incorporating 
women’s specific needs 
Identify opportunities to work with private bus companies or 
corporates which support women-focused services (such as 
women-only buses, school services etc), or working with the 
counterparties to develop initiatives. 
Women’s specific 
requirements not 
adequately incorporated 
into project-design 
Upfront gender assessment to identify whether there are 
opportunities to optimise the placement of charging points 
for increased use of EVs by women wherever applicable 
(e.g. considering well-lit areas, public areas). 
Periodic consultation with women’s groups (e.g. women 
drivers associations, self-help groups for women from low 
                              115

=== PAGE 118 ===
Key issue 
identified in 
gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or 
risk 
Actions to address issues identified 
income background, NGOs working on women 
employment) to identify potential risks and opportunities. 
Limited sex-
disaggregated data to 
improve gender 
sensitivity in the sector 
or sub-sectors 
Design robust plan for collection of relevant sex-
disaggregated data for each sub-project on transport usage, 
and collate the data to understand areas of improvement. 
 
(Note: sex-disaggregated data will be collected for relevant 
sub-projects relating to use of vehicles. However, as the 
sub-projects have not yet been identified, the actual data to 
be collected will be finalised as part of the investment 
approval of each sub-project. Any collection of sex-
disaggregated data privacy regulations including collection 
and storage of sensitive data, as relevant and required) 
Gender Based 
Violence and 
Harassment 
(GBVH) 
Facilities around 
transport hubs and 
vehicles (e.g. poor 
lighting, unsupervised 
spaces, absence of 
emergency buttons, etc.) 
Conduct prior due diligence of counterparties to review their 
existing policies and procedures for management of GBVH 
issues, including existing education programs, safety 
measures, trainings, and grievance mechanisms. 
Require projects to include adequate design and 
maintenance of lighting and CCTV cameras (or other 
relevant safety features at charging infrastructure points). 
Require reporting/representation from counterparties that 
the vehicles are aligned with safety requirements as 
mandated by authorities/relevant concession agreements. 
Reporting of GBVH incidents for vehicles financed by the 
Platform. 
Be involved in stakeholder consultations by public and 
private entities around the design of concessions or vehicles 
to provide views and data on relevant and improved safety 
features. Target should be set on number of consultations 
conducted per year on gender aspects. 
Behavioural aspects 
(e.g. physical violence 
and sexual harassment, 
lack of clear codes of 
conduct for employees, 
etc.) 
Require counterparties to install surveillance cameras and 
adequate security measures. 
Review training programs periodically delivered by 
counterparties to drivers and transport workers on gender 
sensitivity and how to report and refer incidents of GBVH. 
Where counterparties do not have existing training 
programs, offer relevant training for drivers and other 
employees on gender sensitivity and how to manage 
incidents of GBVH. 
                              116

=== PAGE 119 ===
Key issue 
identified in 
gender 
assessment 
Description of issue or 
risk 
Actions to address issues identified 
Use transport infrastructure such as signage and tickets to 
disseminate messages and create awareness around 
GBVH more broadly in communities and public spaces. This 
will be undertaken through counterparties. 
Women’s 
involvement in 
decision making 
Due to societal and 
cultural practices, 
women are less likely to 
be involved in decision 
making which may 
exacerbate gender 
blindness in project 
design 
Promote women’s involvement at a corporate level: 
■ 
Platform Board composition 
■ 
Monitor Board composition of counterparties 
Ensure women and vulnerable groups have an active role in 
project and sector level stakeholder consultations. 
Need for capacity 
building and 
knowledge 
dissemination for 
gender 
considerations in 
the e-mobility 
sector 
Awareness of gender 
mainstreaming may be 
limited in the 
transportation, e-mobility 
and financing sectors 
Opportunities for capacity building at both the Platform and 
for counterparties through trainings and workshops to 
increase awareness of gender sensitivity. Promote multi-
stakeholder discussions to integrate gender considerations 
across the sector. 
Limited availability of 
sex-disaggregated data 
in the e-mobility space 
Ensure each sub-project collects sex-disaggregated data 
which can be used to identify risks, mitigants and 
opportunities. 
Knowledge sharing of 
lessons learned is 
limited 
Promote examples of lessons learned through data 
collection or sub-project implementation through thought 
leadership or otherwise to contribute to developing best 
practice.  
 
 
 
 
                              117

=== PAGE 120 ===
APPENDIX A 
GENDER ASSESSMENT OF SUB-PROJECTS  
 
 
                              118

=== PAGE 121 ===
The Platform will undertake specific gender assessment of sub-projects as part of the counterparty 
and sub-project due diligence (included in ESMS) prior to financing. The gender assessment will 
include review against equal access and benefits, identifying risks and mitigants, identifying 
opportunities for gender mainstreaming, what sex-disaggregated data will be collected and 
assessment of the counterparty. 
During screening and due diligence gender-related data will be collected and analysed to determine 
whether the sub-project qualifies under the Platform’s gender policies and identify business 
performance gender opportunities and risks. Gender-related data and information will be gathered 
from the potential counterparty for analysis to determine whether gender gaps present opportunities 
that may impact performance and affect the sub-project operations and financials.  
The following checklist is to be completed by counterparties during the due diligence stage. Its aim is 
to enable the Platform to understand the current level of internal gender diversity and inclusion, to 
identify initiatives that support women entrepreneurs, and acknowledge efforts to serve women clients 
and users. 
For the avoidance of doubt, any data collection, storage and utilisation of sex-disaggregated data will 
be compliant with local data privacy laws. 
Table A1 
Gender specific due diligence questionnaire 
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
1. 
 
Leadership 
Does the board and/or senior management 
have strong oversight and a clear 
governance process to support gender 
diversity and inclusion? Are any initiatives 
in place to promote women in leadership? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
What is the gender composition of the 
Board?  
 
 
2. 
 
Workforce 
Are there specific policies and programmes 
to support inclusiveness of both men and 
women at work? If so, what are they? For 
example, specific HR policies that go 
beyond basic regulatory requirements (e.g. 
childcare support, flexible work, gender 
targets for construction and maintenance, 
standardised pay rates for each role). 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
Building on recent and/or existing data, are 
there differences between the 
roles/responsibilities/functions/levels/grades 
undertaken by men and women in the 
workforce, including permanent, contracted, 
seasonal staff as well as contractor 
construction and maintenance staff? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
Does the company collect and monitor 
gender-disaggregated staff data (e.g. 
average salary, turnover, absenteeism, 
retention, and promotion)? How is the data 
analysed and to what extent is data used 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
                              119

=== PAGE 122 ===
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
for decision-making on gender-related 
efforts (e.g. to better serve women clients)? 
What training or skills development 
schemes are in place to address existing or 
emerging skills gaps? 
 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
3. 
 
Gender 
based 
violence and 
harassment 
governance 
Has the company identified GBVH risks and 
are these reflected in the company’s risk 
management system? 
Has GBVH been reflected in company 
policy, including a clear definition of GBVH 
(either as a separate policy or integrated 
into wider policies)? 
Has the company developed clear codes of 
conduct that prohibit all forms of GBVH?  
Are GBVH policies and codes of conduct 
available to workers and external 
stakeholders in accessible formats? 
Is mandatory training on GBVH and 
company policies and procedures provided 
to all workers of all grades, including 
contractors and security personnel, as well 
as induction training for new recruits? 
 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
4. 
 
Grievance 
mechanisms 
and reporting 
Are confidential grievance mechanisms in 
place where reports and concerns related 
to GBVH can be raised? 
Are accessible reporting channels available 
to workers, community members and 
service users, including anonymous 
options? 
Are procedures in place to respond to 
reports of GBVH when they are made, 
including clear investigation procedures 
that focus on the safety and wellbeing of 
survivors? Have trained investigators been 
identified? 
Have reports of GBVH been made and how 
have they been handled? 
Is additional specialised training provided to 
members of staff with specific 
responsibilities for GBVH prevention and 
response? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
                              120

=== PAGE 123 ===
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
Has company leadership publicly 
committed to taking reports seriously? 
 
5. 
 
Equal 
opportunity 
Are recruitment procedures in place, with 
interview panels staffed by at least two 
people? Are candidates' identities checked 
at interview and are references requested?  
Are written procedures in place for 
performance appraisals, promotions and 
any performance-related pay (if 
applicable)? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
6. 
 
Project 
design 
Have gender issues been identified as part 
of the project development? 
Have these issues been incorporated into 
project design and implementation plan? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
7. 
 
Safety 
features and 
requirements 
Have all required and safety features been 
incorporated in to the EVs, charging 
infrastructure or project design? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
8. 
 
Stakeholder 
consultations 
Have women and vulnerable people been 
involved in the stakeholder consultation 
process for this project? Have women had 
the opportunity to raise potential issues in 
the project’s design and implementation? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
9. 
 
Dedicated 
services 
Does the company offer any community 
engagement programme supporting 
women’s adoption and use of the 
company’s infrastructures or services?  
Has the counterparty identified any 
opportunities to provide services dedicated 
to supporting women or gender 
mainstreaming? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
10.  
Procurement 
Are clauses included in contracts 
committing contractors and suppliers to 
adhere to company codes of conduct? 
Is information provided to contractors and 
suppliers about company grievance 
mechanisms for reporting GBVH? 
Is GBVH included in workplace safety 
assessments, including worker 
accommodation and transportation? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
                              121

=== PAGE 124 ===
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
11.  
Products/ 
services 
Does the company collect and monitor 
gender-disaggregated data on demand, 
service usage and/or customer 
segmentation? For example, related to 
access, availability, affordability, feasibility, 
and satisfaction. 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
If demand, service usage and/or customer 
segmentation data is collected, how is this 
data analysed and to what extent it is used 
for decision-making related to planning, 
design, marketing, sales, pricing, service(s) 
and distribution? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
 
 
                              122

=== PAGE 125 ===
ERM has over 160 offices across the following 
countries and territories worldwide 
Argentina 
Australia 
Belgium 
Brazil 
Canada 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
France 
Germany 
Ghana 
Guyana 
India 
Indonesia 
Ireland 
Italy 
Japan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Malaysia 
Mexico 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
The Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Norway 
Panama 
Peru 
Poland 
Portugal 
Puerto Rico 
Romania 
Russia 
Senegal 
Singapore 
South Africa 
South Korea 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland  
Tanzania 
Thailand 
UAE 
UK 
US 
Vietnam 
ERM India Private Limited 
3rd Floor, Building 10 B 
DLF Cyber city, 
Gurgaon - 122 002 
Tel:-0124-4170300 
www.erm.com 
123

=== PAGE 126 ===
Macquarie Infrastructure & Real Assets 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
Gender Action Plan for E-
Mobility Financing Program 
Final Report 
Date: 13 April 2022 
Project No.: 0601402 
www.erm.com 
 
                              124

=== PAGE 127 ===
Document details 
The details entered below are automatically shown on the cover and the main page footer. 
PLEASE NOTE: This table must NOT be removed from this document. 
Document title 
Gender Action Plan for E-Mobility Financing Program 
Document subtitle 
Final Report 
Project No. 
0601402 
Date 
13 April 2022 
Version 
1.0 
Author 
ERM India Private Limited 
Client Name 
Macquarie Infrastructure & Real Assets India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
Document history 
 
 
 
ERM approval to issue 
 
Version 
Revision 
Author 
Reviewed by 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Final 
1.0 
Karishma 
Sharma 
Reela Mishra, 
Ajay Pillai 
Ajay Pillai 
13.04.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              125

=== PAGE 128 ===
Signature Page 
 
13 April 2022 
 
 
Gender Action Plan for E-Mobility Financing 
Program 
 
Final Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ajay Pillai 
Partner 
 
 
 
 
Reela Mishra 
Principal Consultant 
 
 
ERM India Private Limited 
Building 10 B, 
3rd Floor, DLF Cyber City, 
Gurgaon, NCR – 122002 
 
Tel: 91 124 417 0300  
Fax: 91 124 417 0301 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2022 by ERM Worldwide Group Ltd and/or its affiliates (“ERM”).  
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form,  
or by any means, without the prior written permission of ERM. 
 
                              126

=== PAGE 129 ===
CONTENTS 
1.
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
A brief overview of the ‘Dedicated E-Mobility Program’ ................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Objective and Scope of work ......................................................................................................... 1 
1.3 
Applicable Reference Framework .................................................................................................. 2 
1.3.1 
Need for Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan ................................................ 2 
1.3.2 
GCF’s Gender Policy .................................................................................................... 2 
1.4 
Methodology .................................................................................................................................. 3 
1.4.1 
Kick off call with MAM ................................................................................................... 4 
1.4.2 
Detailed Gender Assessment ....................................................................................... 4 
1.4.3 
Formulation of the Program-level Gender Action Plan .................................................. 5 
2.
GENDER ACTION PLAN ............................................................................................................. 6 
2.1 
Implementation of Gender Action Plan .......................................................................................... 6 
2.1.1 
Impact & Outcome Statement ....................................................................................... 6 
2.1.2 
Definition of Sub-Projects and Counterparties .............................................................. 7 
2.1.3 
Limitations ..................................................................................................................... 7 
2.1.4 
Roles & Responsibilities ............................................................................................... 8 
2.1.5 
Costs & Budgets ........................................................................................................... 9 
2.1.6 
Grievance Mechanism .................................................................................................. 9 
2.2 
Gender Action Plan ...................................................................................................................... 10 
APPENDIX A 
GENDER ASSESSMENT OF SUB-PROJECTS 
List of Tables 
Table 2.1 
GAP Implementation – Roles and Responsibilities ......................................................... 8 
Table 2.2 
Indicative Budget for Implementation of GAP .................................................................. 9 
Table 2.3 
Gender Action Plan (GAP) ............................................................................................. 10 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 
Principles of GCF's Gender Policy ................................................................................... 3 
127

=== PAGE 130 ===
1.
INTRODUCTION
Macquarie Alternative Assets Management Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘MAAML’ or ‘AE’), has 
developed a Funding Proposal (‘FP’) for submission to the Green Climate Fund (‘GCF’), to seek their 
investment in a dedicated electric mobility (e-mobility) program focusing on India (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Program’). AE is part of Macquarie Asset Management (‘MAM’), one of the 4 operating 
business groups of Macquarie Group.  
MAM is is a global specialist asset manager with assets under management at 31 December 2021 of 
AUD 750.1 billion, aiming to deliver positive impact for everyone. MAM provides investment solutions 
to clients across a range of capabilities, including infrastructure & renewables, real estate, agriculture 
& natural assets, asset finance, private credit, equities, fixed income and multi-asset solutions 
ERM India Private Limited (ERM) has been appointed by MAM, to conduct a Gender Assessment 
Study and to develop a Gender Action Plan. The Gender Assessment Study and Gender Action Plan 
for the Program forms part of GCF’s requirements for all Funding Proposals. This document presents 
the Gender Action Plan. 
1.1 
A brief overview of the ‘Dedicated E-Mobility Program’ 
MAM is looking to partner with GCF and other co-investors to establish an India-focused electric 
mobility program to facilitate decarbonisation of the road transport sector through rapid scale-up of the 
electric vehicles sector in the country.  
The Program will look to provide financing to private sector counterparties across the e-mobility value 
chain (BEV and FCEV) such as e-buses, 2/3/4 wheeler segments, supporting infrastructure & 
services like charging infrastructure, vehicle scrapping and after-sales services.  
The Program will comprise of three main activities as outlined in the Funding Proposal presented to 
the GCF: 
1)
Establishment of a financing platform in India (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Platform’), including
its legal entity, policies, procedures and broader governance.
2)
Providing financing by the Platform to corporate counterparties in the e-mobility space, which
involves upfront due diligence and structuring as well as ongoing monitoring.
3)
Sale of the Platform (to facilitate GCF and other investors exit) with the expectation that the
Platform will continue to operate in the market.
For the purposes of this Program, ‘sub-projects’ will refer to each transaction at the Platform level 
where a commitment of financing is made to a counterparty in the e-mobility space. Please see the 
Gender Assessment Report for more details.  
1.2 
Objective and Scope of work 
The objective of the assignment is to undertake a Gender Assessment and formulate a Gender Action 
Plan for the Program with consideration of its targeted sectors. The scope of the exercise includes:  
◼
assessment of general social baseline conditions in India in which the Platform will operate;
◼
focused interventions that are in practice for the transport and e-mobility sectors from a gender
perspective;
◼
identification of areas that can be best targeted by the Platform for gender mainstreaming
activities; and
◼
formulation of a Gender Action Plan for the Program that highlights key performance indicators
and timelines.
128

=== PAGE 131 ===
The reference framework for the exercise was taken to be the GCF Guidance Note (Form 09 updated 
1 February 2019). 
1.3 
Applicable Reference Framework 
The applicable reference framework for the assignment is presented below: 
■
applicable national legislation and regulations pertaining to social and gender aspects;
■
GCF Manual on Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Platform Projects1; and
■
GCF Gender Toolkit and Guidance Note (Form 09).
1.3.1 
Need for Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
Gender mainstreaming is central to the GCF’s objectives and guiding principles. The aim is to address 
it continually by engaging women and men of all ages as stakeholders in the design, development 
and implementation of strategies and activities to be financed. The GCF Governing Instrument states 
that: “The Fund [GCF] will strive to maximize the impact of its funding for adaptation and mitigation 
promoting environmental, social, economic, and development benefits, taking not only a gender-
sensitive, but a gender responsive approach.” 
Gender mainstreaming, as defined by the United Nations Economic and Social Council, refers to a 
strategy for making women’s, as well as men’s, concerns and experiences integral dimensions of 
policies and programs in all political, economic and social spheres. Gender mainstreaming is essential 
to ensure that women and men benefit equally from a certain system, and inequality is not 
perpetuated. 
There is still a heavy linking of the term “gender” with “women’s issues”; however, the evolved 
understanding on gender and gender mainstreaming is that Gender represents equality of both the 
sexes.  
However, GCF has established on the basis of prevalent practices and past experiences that women 
and girls are disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change and associated severe 
weather events. Women’s mortality from climate-related disasters is higher than that of men, and 
climate-induced impacts due to natural disasters like floods and earthquakes exacerbate women’s 
poverty and unpaid domestic and care work burdens. Gender inequality, exacerbated by climate 
change, is linked, as are other development areas, to vulnerability and risks. The greater vulnerability 
of women to climate change stems from societal norms and discrimination that result in the 
imbalanced division of labour, lower incomes, and lesser livelihood opportunities; less access and 
control over land and other productive assets; fewer legal rights; lesser mobility and lesser political 
and professional representation.  
1.3.2 
GCF’s Gender Policy 
The GCF Board adopted the Gender Policy and Action Plan in March 2015 and an update to this 
policy was issued in February 2019, to respond to a fast-changing landscape related to gender in the 
context of climate change. Its rationale is rooted in the GCF’s mandate to encourage a paradigm shift 
towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways. The updated policy emphasizes 
gender responsiveness rather than gender sensitivity. Being gender-responsive means that instead of 
only identifying gender issues or ensuring a “do no harm” approach, a process will substantially help 
to overcome historical gender biases. Gender responsive approaches are essential to this, 
including decisions and actions by women and men.  
GCF’s Gender policy aims to: 
1 Published in 2017
129

=== PAGE 132 ===
◼ 
Achieve greater, more effective, sustainable, and equitable climate change results, outcomes, 
and impacts, through the adoption of a gender sensitive approach 
◼ 
Build resilience to climate change equally for men and women, as well as to ensure that men 
and women equally contribute and benefit from activities supported by the Fund 
◼ 
Address or mitigate risks for women and men associated with adaptation and mitigation 
activities financed by the Fund; and 
◼ 
Reduce the gender gap of social, economic, and environmental vulnerabilities exacerbated by 
climate change. 
 
For the purposes of this Gender Equality Policy, GCF requires that women and men, including 
marginalized and vulnerable groups, will be provided with an equal and equitable opportunity to be 
fully and effectively engaged in meaningful consultations and decision-making throughout the project 
cycle. 
 
The GCF’s Gender Policy is based on the following six Fundamental principles. 
Figure 1.1 
Principles of GCF's Gender Policy 
 
Source: Green Climate Platform Proposal Toolkit 2017 
 
The GCF’s paradigm shift is rooted in the acknowledgement of women’s critical role in climate 
responses, as agents of change sharing in the benefits, and, in several cases, disproportionately 
affected by its negative impacts. Marginalised communities also bear disproportionate negative 
outcomes and are also included in this shift. 
 
According to GCF, “Gender assessment refers to methods used to understand relationships between 
men and women, their access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they face relative to 
each other. A comprehensive gender analysis/assessment entails the examination of the different 
roles, rights, needs, and opportunities of women and men, boys and girls in a given project/context. 
Gender analysis needs to take place early in the planning process so that an understanding of gender 
roles and power relations is built into the project.” 
1.4 
Methodology 
In order to achieve the above-mentioned scope, the following methodology has been adopted. 
                              130

=== PAGE 133 ===
1.4.1 
Kick off call with MAM 
ERM organised an Inception call with the Client to understand the current investment context, get a 
general understanding of the planned working of the Platform and expected investments. ERM also 
discussed the role of MAM in the Program as the investment manager, applicability of an ESMS, a 
Gender Policy or any other ongoing/proposed interventions that will be undertaken by the Program 
that may particularly focus on addressing gender related aspects. 
1.4.2 
Detailed Gender Assessment 
A desk-based research of aspects related to women in India and specially in urban mobility has been 
undertaken to understand the nature and extent of data and studies capturing aspects like female 
urban ridership, challenges faced by urban females due to limited mobility and while using public 
transport, general scenario of employment of women and specifically in the urban transportation 
sector.  
1.4.2.1 National Context guided by GCF Guidance Note  
An assessment of the nationwide gender related baseline scenario and associated impacts, risks, 
opportunities and trends in this sector was undertaken using secondary data.   
Key steps followed for the assessment are: 
◼ 
Profiling the social and development status of women and men (education, literacy, work force 
participation, unemployment, role in formal/informal economy, division of labour, access to 
resources and opportunity, decision making roles and capacity, as relevant) based on 
secondary data at the national level 
◼ 
An assessment of the legal status, beliefs, perceptions, prevalent gender stereotypes, as relevant 
for the key sectors 
◼ 
An assessment of relevant issues like gender-gap, inequality, gender-specific vulnerabilities (with 
respect to climate change adaptation, social, socio-economic factors, technical capacity, and 
resource access etc.) has been undertaken based on relevant secondary literature and published 
research.  
Please note: In the absence of latest data on gender issues such as employment and literacy in the 
transport sector? the report has relied on Census of India, 2011 data and has supported the findings, 
wherever possible with other latest available studies. 
1.4.2.2 Establishing a Baseline Scenario for Gender Mainstreaming in E-mobility  
The assessment has sought to identify a baseline scenario for gender issues in the e-mobility sector 
and ultimately identify where the Program could best implement gender-based interventions.  
Given the lack of data on gender and e-mobility sector, especially in developing countries, the report 
has relied on secondary review, data and analysis available for gender and transportation sector in 
general. It should also be noted that there is a general lack of gender disaggregated data on urban 
mobility and hence also in the e-mobility sector.  
Consequentially, there is little available research on strategies, interventions and case studies on 
specific preferences (of women and men, young and old, or those with disabilities) regarding urban 
public transport usage, sector employment trends, health and safety, ergonomics, or accident risks. 
Sex-disaggregated data has been provided where available.  
Whilst this is one limitation of the Gender Assessment, collecting sex-disaggregated data is also an 
identified area for improving gender sensitivity in this sector. 
                              131

=== PAGE 134 ===
1.4.2.3 Stakeholder Engagement 
Specific stakeholder engagement as part of this gender assessment has not been completed. This is 
primarily because the proposed Platform has not yet been established and the broad scope of the 
proposed transactions involve multiple e-mobility sectors and are not based in a specific region in 
India. It is proposed that targeted, gender-focused stakeholder engagement is completed once the 
Platform is established to build upon the desk-based assessment and interventions outlined in the 
Gender Action Plan. Please refer to the Gender Action Plan for more details. 
1.4.3 
Formulation of the Program-level Gender Action Plan 
The Gender Action Plan, as presented in this document, has been formulated to include strategies 
and action items identified for the Platform. The action plan includes key indicators and timelines, for 
effective monitoring of outcomes. 
1.4.3.1 Limitations in development of Action Plan 
◼ 
The Platform is not yet established, including the defined policies, procedures and governance. 
Actions have been identified to integrate gender mainstreaming frameworks as part of this 
establishment. 
◼ 
There is limited ability to set baseline scenarios given the lack of data available in the sector, the 
broad mandate across sectors and geography, and the Platform is not yet established so there is 
no benchmarking applicable of its existing practices. Activities have been outlined to support 
establishment of baseline. 
 
 
                              132

=== PAGE 135 ===
2. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN 
This Gender Action Plan has been developed based on understanding developed through review of existing 
baseline scenario in India on gender related aspects, study of relevant research done in the field of urban 
public transport, especially from a gender perspective and discussions with MAM.  
The Action Plan is at Platform level and covers components of the program at high-level. As the Program is 
still in proposal stage and the electric urban mobility sector is also set to evolve rapidly from its current, 
nascent stage, there will be need for measures to adapt and lessons to be incorporated efficiently in 
subsequent stages. 
As a strategy, where secondary research has brought out the issue of lack of data on useful aspects, the 
Action Plan recommends generation of good quality data to make subsequent phases and projects in this 
area more impactful.  
2.1 
Implementation of Gender Action Plan 
The overall outcome of the Gender Action Plan is to develop greater knowledge of gender sensitivity and 
mainstreaming activities within the e-mobility sector, including greater skills developed by Platform staff, and 
improved attitudes towards integration of gender-related interventions by other stakeholders within the 
sector. 
The Plan will be implemented based on the timelines identified in Table 2.3.   
2.1.1 
Impact & Outcome Statement  
 
Impact Statement: 
 
E-mobility Financing Program aims to leverage the GCF and commercial capital to accelerate 
decarbonisation of the Indian economy by focusing on electrification of the road transport sector. This will be 
enabled by supporting faster adoption of electric vehicles and growth of associated infrastructure in the 
country. The focus of the program will be to provide capital to private sector business opportunities across 
the e-mobility value chain such as e-buses, 2/3/4 wheeler segment, support infrastructure & services like 
charging infrastructure. 
 
The Program aspires to:   
◼ 
Creation of new jobs and stimulate economic activity with a corollary of empowering women and 
reducing gender bias.  
◼ 
Enhancement of economic activities, livelihoods, and empowerment of women through increased 
generation of participatory and inclusive employment opportunities. 
◼ 
Improved access to safer transportation options for women due to design, adoption of inclusive and 
gender-responsive public transport systems and related solutions. 
 
Outcome Statement: 
 
Through the current proposed systems and mechanisms, the Platform will seek to contribute to achieving the 
following gender-responsive outcomes with gender-disaggregated sub-project level impacts: 
◼ 
Formal employment and improved livelihoods for women through generation of jobs by the Platform and 
counterparties at sub-project level line in with the growth of the e-mobility. 
◼ 
Empowerment of local communities, including women and girls, through training, awareness, and 
capacity building, to build more gender-inclusive and responsive sub-projects (transportation systems). 
                              133

=== PAGE 136 ===
◼ 
Building self-reliance among women and girls through increased use of public transportation by 
addressing safety concerns around using mass transport options and improving ‘gender blind’ 
transportation systems. 
◼ 
Reductions in gender violence, increase gender equity, and economic activities for women and girls 
through the Platform Level Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory sub-
project safeguards, gender assessment and action plan, and gender-responsive project designs. 
2.1.2 
Definition of Sub-Projects and Counterparties 
The Platform will provide financing to counterparties in the e-mobility space (also referred to as a 
‘transaction’) across the value chain including buses, four-wheelers, two- and three-wheelers, charging 
infrastructure and others. Key characteristics of the sub-projects include: 
◼ 
physical assets in the e-mobility space are involved (e.g., financing a set number of electric buses). 
◼ 
vehicles or charging points will be operated by the counterparty. 
◼ 
the relationship between the Platform and the counterparty will be governed by a financing agreement 
that will place certain obligations on both parties. 
◼ 
vehicles financed may not be dedicated to a specific route but rather used by the counterparty generally. 
This may limit site specific diligence. 
For the avoidance of doubt: 
◼ 
the Platform is designed to be a financing intervention. Sub-projects will not involve the design or 
development of broader transportation interventions except (where relevant) for providing input on the e-
mobility sector development from a financing perspective (outside the scope of a sub-project). 
◼ 
The Platform will not be involved in the day-to-day operation of vehicles or charging infrastructure. 
◼ 
the Platform will not be involved in the design or manufacturing of vehicles. 
Given the financing nature of the Platform it will not be responsible for the primary development and 
implementation of each sub-project. Instead, the Platform will provide financing (governed by financing 
documentation such as lease or loan contracts) to Counterparties, defined as entities who will be responsible 
for the day-to-day operation of sub-projects.  
Examples of counterparties include: 
◼ 
A bus operating company which is bidding for a new electric bus tender issued by a state government 
for the provision of new e-buses to service an urban area, 
◼ 
A private bus company operating a route between two major cities, 
◼ 
A company constructing a number of new charging points to support the increased penetration of e-
vehicles in a new area, 
◼ 
A large corporate company providing a fleet of cars to their employees. 
2.1.3 
Limitations 
◼ 
Baseline data: There is no baseline provided as most activities require the Platform to be established. 
For other activities, there is limited data available in the sector and the mandate of the program is 
broad in geographic and sector scope across e-mobility making data available very general and not 
context specific. There are activities in the action plan which relate to increasing data availability and, 
where applicable, setting sex-disaggregated baselines and targets. For the avoidance of doubt, any 
data collection, storage, and utilisation of sex-disaggregated data will be compliant with local data 
privacy laws. 
                              134

=== PAGE 137 ===
◼ 
Stakeholder engagement: The Action Plan is designed based on the desk-based Gender Assessment. 
It is intended that stakeholder engagement will be undertaken once the Platform is established basis 
which further actions may be included in the Plan. 
◼ 
Intermediary role: As a financing intervention, the Platform will not be able to directly implement 
activities regarding the operation of the electric vehicles. However, this is mitigated through upfront 
diligence and structuring by the Platform as part of a transaction and by activities flowed through to the 
financing counterparty. 
◼ 
Sub-Projects not yet defined: The Platform has not yet identified specific sub-projects that will be 
financed by the Platform given it is not yet established. As a result, actions for sub-projects cannot be 
fully defined at this stage (such as gender assessment for each sub-project for which sex-
disaggregated data will be collected).  
◼ 
Existing skills, attitudes and practices: The impact of some activities may be impacted by the existing 
context which may limit the outcomes. For example, there may not be sufficient number of women 
skilled or interested in roles in the e-mobility sector due to cultural attitudes towards women working in 
male-dominated sectors. Whilst the Action Plan can implement activities to promote more 
opportunities and equality, the outcomes may be impacted.  
2.1.4 
Roles & Responsibilities  
The primary responsibility of implementation of the Gender Action Plan is with the Gender Specialist who will 
report to the Platform CEO and Board. However, other stakeholders will be involved in different parts of the 
Action Plan. This is outlined at a high level below however responsibilities for specific actions are outlined in 
Table 2.3. 
Table 2.1  
GAP Implementation – Roles and Responsibilities 
Role 
Responsibility 
Gender specialist 
■ 
Lead implementation of Gender Action Plan within Platform staff 
Accredited Entity 
■ 
Review and monitor the implementation of the Gender Action Plan through 
reporting received from the Executing Entities (including Platform). 
■ 
Review progress against targets and any significant updates to the Gender 
Assessment or Action Plan 
Investment Manager (MAM) 
and Macquarie India 
Advisory co (IAC) 
■ 
Provide guidance with expertise from MAM where required to develop and 
implement best practices based on experience in other jurisdictions, sectors or 
transactions 
Platform Board 
■ 
Responsibility for causing the implementation of the Gender Action Plan 
■ 
Responsibility for establishing and maintaining governance frameworks 
■ 
Monitor implementation of Gender Action Plan from management reporting 
Financing counterparties 
■ 
Financing counterparties will be required to meet obligations in their financing 
documentation, including those that relate to gender-mainstreaming interventions 
and reporting obligations outlined in this Gender Action Plan 
 
                              135

=== PAGE 138 ===
2.1.5 
Costs & Budgets 
The budget required to support implementation of the gender action plan is based on indicative estimates 
summarized below. These are included in the financial analysis of the Programme. 
Other items in the Action Plan are considered to be transaction specific costs (e.g. environmental and social 
assessments, gender assessments) will be borne by the financing counterparty in line with other transaction 
costs (such as legal fees etc.). These will be included once the sub-project level plans have been 
concretized and activities have been identified.  
Table 2.2 
Indicative Budget for Implementation of GAP 
Sl No. 
Cost Head 
Budget (INR) 
Budget (USD) 
1. 
 
Employment of Gender specialist, including time spent 
on various activities outlined in Gender Action Plan 
50,00,000 p.a. 
66,667 p.a. 
2. 
 
Capacity building training programs on annual basis (for 
10 years) for Platform staff and counterparties 
20,00,000 p.a. 
27,000 p.a. 
3. 
 
Stakeholder engagement, consultations, survey, data 
collection and analysis at Platform and sub-project level 
on annual basis 
30,00,000 p.a. 
40,500 p.a. 
4. 
 
Internship program (including on-costs and training) 
24,00,000 p.a.  
32,000 p.a.  
 
2.1.6 
Grievance Mechanism 
An activity level grievance mechanism will be established once the Platform is established. The means of 
access will be published on the GCF and AE’s websites.  
Grievance mechanisms are also available through the Accredited Entity and GCF: 
Accredited Entity 
Macquarie Integrity Office 
https://www.macquarie.com/au/en/disclosures/whistleblower-policy.html  
integrityoffice@macquarie.com  
Green Climate 
Fund 
File a complaint | Independent Redress Mechanism | Green Climate Fund 
 
 
 
 
                              136

=== PAGE 139 ===
2.2 
Gender Action Plan 
The Platform will initially focus on B2B transactions in the sub-sectors outlined however if the Platform provides financing to other sub-sectors within the e-
mobility value chain (including B2C, or B2SME as defined by Indian regulations) then some of the actions may not apply and applicable actions may be 
identified to apply to the sub-projects in line with the GCF Gender Policy and the impact and outcome statements in the Gender Action Plan. 
It is also recommended that Investment manager discuss these aspects with all its potential counterparties and other relevant business partners at the time of 
their initial interactions to understand how best to integrate these requirements as part of contractual agreements, for effective implementation of the Action 
Plan.  
The data on Gender impacts at the Platform level will be a collation of the reported data from the counterparties. Thus, it is important to ensure that the data 
from counterparties is consistent, temporally aligned and comparable, across reporting categories, based on the indicators selected by Platform. For the 
avoidance of doubt, any data collection, storage and utilisation of sex-disaggregated data will be compliant with local data privacy laws. 
Table 2.3  
Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
 
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
1) 
Employment opportunities  
Impact: Contribute towards ensuring women have equal opportunities to work in the e-mobility industry, including fair hiring, safe work environments, and opportunities to 
build relevant skills for increased participation. Formal employment opportunities for women in turn work to reduce gender bias and shift societal attitudes towards women at 
work. 
                              137

=== PAGE 140 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
1.1 
Due diligence of 
gender-related 
practices of 
financing 
counterparty 
Review relevant policies of counterparty 
including statutory (e.g. anti-
discrimination) and company (e.g. D&I or 
relevant recruiting policies), and other 
D&I and gender related company 
practices. 
Number of 
counterparties with 
policies meeting 
required practice 
100% of 
counterparties  
Assessment 
completed before 
each sub-project (see 
6) Investment 
Procedures of this 
action plan) 
Gender specialist 
1.2 
Capacity 
building of 
financing 
counterparties 
Provide capacity building workshops to 
counterparties to identify ways to 
incorporate gender considerations into 
company policies, practices, product 
design and operations. 
Percentage of 
counterparties 
involved in workshops 
provided 
All major 
counterparties to 
attend the workshop 
at least once during 
their relationship with 
the Platform 
Capacity building 
workshops offered 
annually to 
counterparties 
Gender specialist 
1.3 
Platform hiring 
Fair and gender inclusive hiring practices 
applied in line with MAM and GCF’s 
policies, and learnings captured to 
promote further actions.  
Sex-disaggregated 
candidate data on 
applications vs. hired 
to identify/mitigate 
against any bias but 
also identify any skills 
gaps 
Metrics captured on 
100% of candidates 
First data reporting to 
Board within 2 years 
of Platform 
establishment (to 
allow for data to be 
collected) 
Gender specialist and 
Platform 
Management 
Percentage of women 
hired at the Platform 
25% of staff 
employed at the 
Platform are women 
Within 5 years of 
Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist and 
Platform 
Management 
1.4 
Skills 
development 
Implement an internship program 
providing young women opportunities to 
gain experience in the e-mobility finance 
space. Use data collected on hiring above 
to support focus areas for the program. 
Number of interns 
completing the 
program 
At least five over five 
years (1/year), 100% 
women 
5 years 
Gender specialist 
                              138

=== PAGE 141 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
2) 
Gender Blindness in Transportation infrastructure 
Impact: Contribute towards improving gender sensitivity in project design such that transportation the e-mobility sector reduces gender-blindness and promotes gender 
mainstreaming. Projects to contribute to providing adequate and safe infrastructure to reach essential services (education, health and training) to improve women’s 
participation in society.  
2.1 
Women focused 
services 
Identifying opportunities to work with 
private bus companies which support 
women-focused services (such as 
women-only buses, school services etc), 
or working with the counterparties to 
develop initiatives. 
Number of initiatives 
supported across e-
mobility segment 
2 dedicated initiatives 
(each initiative likely 
to involve multiple 
vehicles) 
Within first 4 years of 
Program 
implementation 
Gender specialist 
2.2 
Optimising 
charging 
infrastructure 
locations 
Upfront gender assessment to identify 
whether there are opportunities to 
optimise the placement of charging points 
for women’s use of EV (e.g. considering 
well-lit areas, areas visited most by 
women, institutions for women, etc.)  
Proportion of 
charging 
infrastructure projects 
with gender 
considerations 
identified and 
incorporated into 
project design 
100% of sub-projects 
in the charging 
infrastructure sub-
sector  
Gender assessment 
completed prior to 
investment approval 
of sub-project 
Gender specialist 
                              139

=== PAGE 142 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
2.3 
Consultation 
with women’s 
groups  
Periodic consultation with women’s 
groups (e.g. women drivers associations, 
self-help groups for women from low 
income background, NGOs working on 
women employment) to identify potential 
risks and opportunities in the e-mobility 
space and reduce gender blindness in 
project design. These consultations can 
also be held relating to specific sub-
projects in coordination with 
counterparties, during project planning 
stage. 
Meeting or other 
communication with 
women’s groups 
1 / year with each of 
at least 4 women’s 
groups with a national 
remit / focus (and 
connections to 
regional and other 
organisations), plus 
additional 
consultations with 
regional and/or sector 
focused groups as 
determined by sub-
projects 
Engagement with 
national groups within 
6 months of Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist 
2.4 
Involvement in 
regulation and 
policy 
development 
Platform to use knowledge and learnings 
from due diligence, data collection and 
sub-projects to be involved in stakeholder 
consultations driven by governments for 
regulations or new tenders in the e-
mobility space to include gender-specific 
actions such as highlight the need for the 
safety features to be included or scaled-
up in public bus concessions and the 
need for the design of transport routes to 
incorporate gender sensitivity (including 
collection and release of data on 
women’s transport patterns). 
Gender specific 
issues identified when 
responding to broader 
stakeholder 
consultations  
100% responses 
developed by 
Platform to include 
gender-specific 
issues 
Ongoing throughout 
the Platform life 
Gender specialist 
                              140

=== PAGE 143 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
3) 
Gender-based violence and harassment (GBVH)  
Impact: Improve and maintain e-mobility projects and vehicles to mitigate against gender-based violence and harassment, particularly on public transport and in public 
spaces through implementing safety features and building capacity and awareness amongst stakeholders. Increased safety should lead to greater use of public 
transportation amongst women and girls which build self-reliance. 
3.1 
Standards of 
counterparties 
Conduct prior due diligence of 
counterparties to review their existing 
policies and procedures for management 
of GBVH issues, including existing 
education programs, safety measures, 
trainings and grievance mechanisms. 
Number of 
counterparties with 
policies meeting best 
practice 
100% of 
counterparties  
Assessment 
completed before 
each sub-project 
investment approval 
(see 6) Investment 
Procedures of this 
action plan) 
Gender specialist, 
Platform staff 
3.2 
E-vehicles meet 
safety standards 
aiming to 
combat GBVH 
Require reporting/representation from 
counterparties that the vehicles are 
aligned with safety requirements as 
mandated by authorities/relevant 
concession agreements, such as 
surveillance cameras, panic buttons etc. 
Reporting or 
representations 
received from 
counterparties that 
the safety 
requirements are in 
place. Requirement to 
be included in 
financing 
documentation. 
100% vehicles 
financed by the 
Programme to be in 
compliance with 
safety features 
annually 
Annually 
Counterparties to 
provide reporting 
 
Platform 
management to 
monitor compliance  
                              141

=== PAGE 144 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
3.3 
Safety features 
incorporated 
into project 
design 
Request information from counterparties 
as part of upfront due diligence on how 
safety features which address GBVH 
have been incorporated in the project 
design. For example, require projects to 
include adequate design and 
maintenance of lighting and CCTV 
cameras (or other relevant safety 
features) at charging infrastructure points) 
Sub-project gender 
assessment including 
details on features 
addressing GBVH. 
100% relevant sub-
projects to 
incorporate adequate 
safety features 
Assessment 
completed before 
each sub-project 
investment approval 
(see 6) Investment 
Procedures of this 
action plan) 
Gender specialist, 
counterparties 
involved in project 
design 
3.4 
Training and 
capacity of 
employees of 
counterparties 
Review training counterparties deliver 
periodically to drivers and transport 
workers on gender sensitivity and how to 
report and refer incidents of GBVH. 
Where counterparties do not have 
existing training, offer relevant training for 
drivers and other employees on gender 
sensitivity and how to manage incidents 
of GBVH. 
Training provided to 
employees of 
counterparties. 
100% counterparties 
to provide or be 
provided with training 
for employees on 
gender sensitivity and 
GBVH at least once. 
Once in the lifetime of 
a relationship with the 
counterparty 
Gender specialist 
3.5 
Reporting on 
incidents 
Annual reporting of GBVH incidents for 
vehicles financed by Platform. 
Reporting covenant 
included in financing 
documentation 
100% compliance 
from counterparties to 
provide reporting 
Annually for each 
sub-project during 
financing term 
Counterparties to 
provide reporting 
 
Platform 
management to 
monitor compliance 
3.6 
Reporting on 
usage of safety 
features 
Where possible and relevant, require the 
collection of data on usage of panic 
buttons or other safety features. 
Reporting covenant 
included in financing 
documentation 
100% compliance 
rom counterparties to 
provide reporting 
Annually for each 
sub-project during 
financing term 
Counterparties to 
provide reporting 
 
Platform 
management to 
monitor compliance 
                              142

=== PAGE 145 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
3.7 
Policy 
development 
(combined with 
2.4) 
Be involved in stakeholder consultations 
by public and private entities around the 
design of concessions or vehicles to 
provide views and data on relevant and 
improved safety features.  
Gender specific 
issues identified when 
responding to broader 
stakeholder 
consultations  
100% responses 
developed by 
Platform to include 
gender-specific 
issues 
Ongoing throughout 
the Platform life 
Gender specialist 
3.8 
Public 
awareness 
Use transport infrastructure such as 
signage and tickets to disseminate 
messages and create awareness around 
GBVH more broadly in communities and 
public spaces.  
Materials 
disseminated in 
vehicles or 
infrastructure 
financed by the 
program  
25% of relevant 
vehicles financed by 
the Platform  
Reach target within 5 
years of Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist, 
financing 
counterparties to 
support 
implementation  
4) 
Women’s involvement in decision making  
Impact: More women in decision making roles in the e-mobility space and involved in project design to increase gender sensitivity into the sector and specific projects 
4.1 
Governance of 
the Platform 
Women to be involved in key decisions of 
the Platform 
Sex-disaggregated 
data on Board of the 
Platform 
At least 1 at all times 
from Board 
establishment 
From inception 
Accredited Entity 
4.2 
Governance at 
financing 
counterparties 
Requesting the split of women / men in 
Board in the organisation. 
Reporting of sex-
disaggregated data 
on Board of each 
financing 
counterparty included 
in financing 
documentation 
100% of financing 
counterparties have 
at least 1 woman on 
their Board 
Within 5 years of 
financing provided 
Counterparties to 
provide reporting 
                              143

=== PAGE 146 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
4.3 
Stakeholder 
consultation 
Require stakeholder engagement 
activities at project level through project 
information meetings, ESIA consultations, 
etc., with records of attendees maintained 
by gender and ensure that consultations 
by counterparties, reports voices risks 
and benefits of men, women and 
vulnerable groups. 
Stakeholder 
engagement 
summarised for each 
sub-project 
Involvement of 50% 
women and 
vulnerable groups in 
each stakeholder 
consultation  
Prior to approval of 
each sub-project  
Gender specialist 
5) 
Capacity Building & Knowledge Dissemination   
Impact: Increased awareness of gender-based issues through capacity building, increased sex-disaggregated data to develop potential learnings and opportunities. 
Promote gender mainstreaming within the e-mobility space amongst all stakeholders.  
5.1 
Platform staff 
capacity building 
Mandatory training on implementing of 
gender policy, gender mainstreaming and 
sensitivity.  
Training module 
developed and 
disseminated 
100% of employees 
attend a relevant 
training 
Within 12 months of 
setting up the 
Platform 
Gender specialist 
5.2 
Capacity 
building of 
counterparties 
Platform to conduct in-house workshops 
offered to all counterparties to develop 
sensitivity and responsiveness policies 
and procedures to identify actions they 
could take within their business, 
especially for smaller counterparties. 
Training module 
developed and 
disseminated 
100% of 
counterparties to 
attend a training 
during life of their 
financing  
During Platform life, 
first training delivered 
within 12months of 
first transaction 
Gender specialist 
                              144

=== PAGE 147 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
5.3 
Increase data 
available  
Design robust plan for collection of 
relevant sex-disaggregated data for each 
sub-project on use of the transport, and 
collate the data to understand areas of 
improvement. This could include data on 
travel preferences, usage of transport in 
the e-mobility space, impact on health 
outcomes, cost to access services or 
otherwise.  
(Note: sex-disaggregated data will be 
collected in 100% of sub-projects relating 
to use of the vehicles. However, as the 
sub-projects have not yet been identified, 
the actual data to be collected will be 
finalised as part of the investment 
approval of each sub-project) 
Number of sub-
projects where sex-
disaggregated data is 
collected 
100% sub-projects to 
collect sex-
disaggregated data 
Data confirmed to be 
collected included in 
Gender Action Plan 
for each sub-project 
(prior to investment 
approval) and 
included as a 
reporting covenant (at 
investment execution) 
Gender specialist, 
counterparty to collect 
the data 
5.4 
Data collection 
and maintenance 
Database established and maintained at 
the Platform level based on regular inputs 
of sex-disaggregated data from 
counterparties. Data collected can be 
used to develop other actions from the 
Platform or counterparties, refine due 
diligence of counterparties, develop 
thought leadership or otherwise to 
improve gender sensitivity in sub-projects 
and e-mobility. 
Database established 
1 comprehensive 
database established 
Within 12 months of 
Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist 
                              145

=== PAGE 148 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
5.5 
Sectoral 
guidelines 
Develop sectoral guidelines on gender 
mainstreaming for Platform investments 
for use by staff on key issues and 
potential interventions that could be 
implemented by the Platform in upfront 
due diligence or financing documentation 
Initial guidelines to 
be established 
informed by gender 
assessment and 
stakeholder 
consultations 
Guidelines developed 
for 4 sub-sectors 
Within 12 months of 
Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist 
5.6 
Investor 
reporting 
Annual reporting to investors to include  
uniform gender reporting indicators for 
the Platform. Gender reporting based on 
sex-disaggregated data to also be 
included on a sub-project basis.  
Annual investor 
reports 
100% compliance 
with incorporation of 
gender reporting 
indicators to investors 
Metrics developed 
within 12 months of 
Platform 
establishment 
Gender specialist 
5.7 
Knowledge 
sharing – 
workshops 
Workshops bringing together e-mobility 
industry participants to discuss 
opportunities to improve gender in e-
mobility 
Workshop organised 
by Platform with 
multi-stakeholder 
involvement 
50% of attendees to 
be women 
Within 4 years of 
Platform 
establishment (to 
allow for development 
of underlying data to 
support) 
Gender specialist 
5.8 
Thought 
leadership 
Aim to organise or participate in thought 
leadership (published article or otherwise) 
related to gender, climate and e-mobility. 
Thought leadership 
published  
2 thought leadership 
pieces 
First within 2 years of 
Platform 
establishment (to 
allow for development 
of underlying data to 
support) 
Gender specialist 
6) 
Investment Procedures  
Impact: Integrated of gender considerations into the investment process of the Platform to identify gender-related risks, mitigants and opportunities in sub-projects 
                              146

=== PAGE 149 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
6.1 
Gender policy 
Adopt a Gender Policy at the Platform. 
The policy will reflect the MAAML-GCF 
Gender Policy which will include 
alignment to the GCF Gender Policy such 
as commitment to gender analysis in 
investments under the program, 
monitoring and evaluation of gender 
equality where possible, collection of sex 
disaggregated data where possible, and 
collaboration with local and international 
organizations beneficiaries where 
possible. The Gender Policy shall be 
communicated to all the Program’s 
employees. 
Board adoption of 
Gender Policy 
Communication to 
100% of the 
employees subject to 
approved Gender 
Policy by the Board 
Within 9 Months of 
setting up the 
Platform 
The Platform Board 
will have ultimate 
responsibility for the 
establishment and 
maintenance of the 
Gender Policy 
 
Gender Specialist to 
be involved in 
development of 
Gender Policy 
6.2 
Sub-project 
Gender 
assessment 
The investment due-diligence process by 
the Platform will include gender sensitivity 
assessment for each financing 
instrument. (Appendix A – Gender 
Assessment). 
Gender Assessment 
approved as part of 
Investment approval 
for relevant sub-
projects 
100% sub-projects to 
have a Gender 
Assessment 
At investment 
approval of each 
relevant sub-project 
Gender specialist, 
Platform staff 
6.3 
Sub-Project 
Gender Action 
Plan 
Gender Action Plan for each sub-project 
to be developed based on the Gender 
Assessment. This will include at a 
minimum the sex-disaggregated data that 
will be collected, any reporting covenants 
that are expected, and/or trainings to be 
provided. 
Gender Action Plan 
approved as part of 
Investment approval 
for each sub-project 
100% sub-projects to 
have a gender action 
plan  
At investment 
approval of each 
relevant sub-project 
Gender specialist, 
Platform staff 
                              147

=== PAGE 150 ===
# 
Activity 
Actions 
Indicators 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
6.4 
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Plan 
Drive preparation of project level 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM), 
with women as separate stakeholder 
category. SEPs to ensure that 
consultations are culturally appropriate 
and conducted in gender responsive 
manner, with vulnerable groups also 
represented.  
Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan 
approved as part of 
Investment approval 
for each sub-project 
100% sub-projects to 
have a stakeholder 
engagement 
At investment 
approval of each 
relevant sub-project 
Gender specialist 
6.5 
Board reporting 
Platform Board to receive annual report 
on implementation of Gender Policy and 
this Gender Action Plan, including 
compliance of counterparties as well as 
costs vs. budget of implementing the plan 
to ensure sufficient resource allocation. 
Annual report to 
Platform Board 
100% compliance 
with reporting 
obligations to Board 
Annually (first report 
within 12 months of 
Platform 
establishment) 
Gender specialist, 
Platform Board 
 
  
 
                              148

=== PAGE 151 ===
APPENDIX A 
GENDER ASSESSMENT OF SUB-PROJECTS  
 
 
                              149

=== PAGE 152 ===
The Platform will undertake specific gender assessment of sub-projects as part of the counterparty 
and sub-project due diligence (included in ESMS) prior to financing. The gender assessment will 
include review against equal access and benefits, identifying risks and mitigants, identifying 
opportunities for gender mainstreaming, what sex-disaggregated data will be collected and 
assessment of the counterparty. 
During screening and due diligence gender-related data will be collected and analysed to determine 
whether the sub-project qualifies under the Platform’s gender policies and identify business 
performance gender opportunities and risks. Gender-related data and information will be gathered 
from the potential counterparty for analysis to determine whether gender gaps present opportunities 
that may impact performance and affect the sub-project operations and financials.  
The following checklist is to be completed by counterparties during the due diligence stage. Its aim is 
to enable the Platform to understand the current level of internal gender diversity and inclusion, to 
identify initiatives that support women entrepreneurs, and acknowledge efforts to serve women clients 
and users. 
For the avoidance of doubt, any data collection, storage and utilisation of sex-disaggregated data will 
be compliant with local data privacy laws. 
Table A1 
Gender specific due diligence questionnaire 
S.N
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
1. 
Leadership 
Does the board and/or senior management 
have strong oversight and a clear 
governance process to support gender 
diversity and inclusion? Are any initiatives 
in place to promote women in leadership? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
What is the gender composition of the 
Board?  
2. 
Workforce 
Are there specific policies and programmes 
to support inclusiveness of both men and 
women at work? If so, what are they? For 
example, specific HR policies that go 
beyond basic regulatory requirements (e.g. 
childcare support, flexible work, gender 
targets for construction and maintenance, 
standardised pay rates for each role). 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
Building on recent and/or existing data, are 
there differences between the 
roles/responsibilities/functions/levels/grades 
undertaken by men and women in the 
workforce, including permanent, contracted, 
seasonal staff as well as contractor 
construction and maintenance staff? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
Does the company collect and monitor 
gender-disaggregated staff data (e.g. 
average salary, turnover, absenteeism, 
retention, and promotion)? How is the data 
analysed and to what extent is data used 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
150

=== PAGE 153 ===
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
for decision-making on gender-related 
efforts (e.g. to better serve women clients)? 
What training or skills development 
schemes are in place to address existing or 
emerging skills gaps? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
3. 
 
Gender 
based 
violence and 
harassment 
governance 
Has the company identified GBVH risks and 
are these reflected in the company’s risk 
management system? 
Has GBVH been reflected in company 
policy, including a clear definition of GBVH 
(either as a separate policy or integrated 
into wider policies)? 
Has the company developed clear codes of 
conduct that prohibit all forms of GBVH?  
Are GBVH policies and codes of conduct 
available to workers and external 
stakeholders in accessible formats? 
Is mandatory training on GBVH and 
company policies and procedures provided 
to all workers of all grades, including 
contractors and security personnel, as well 
as induction training for new recruits? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
4. 
 
Grievance 
mechanisms 
and reporting 
Are confidential grievance mechanisms in 
place where reports and concerns related 
to GBVH can be raised? 
Are accessible reporting channels available 
to workers, community members and 
service users, including anonymous 
options? 
Are procedures in place to respond to 
reports of GBVH when they are made, 
including clear investigation procedures 
that focus on the safety and wellbeing of 
survivors? Have trained investigators been 
identified? 
Have reports of GBVH been made and how 
have they been handled? 
Is additional specialised training provided to 
members of staff with specific 
responsibilities for GBVH prevention and 
response? 
Has company leadership publicly 
committed to taking reports seriously? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
                              151

=== PAGE 154 ===
S.N 
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
5. 
 
Equal 
opportunity 
Are recruitment procedures in place, with 
interview panels staffed by at least two 
people? Are candidates' identities checked 
at interview and are references requested?  
Are written procedures in place for 
performance appraisals, promotions and 
any performance-related pay (if 
applicable)? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
6. 
 
Project 
design 
Have gender issues been identified as part 
of the project development? 
Have these issues been incorporated into 
project design and implementation plan? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
7. 
 
Safety 
features and 
requirements 
Have all required and safety features been 
incorporated in to the EVs, charging 
infrastructure or project design? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
8. 
 
Stakeholder 
consultations 
Have women and vulnerable people been 
involved in the stakeholder consultation 
process for this project? Have women had 
the opportunity to raise potential issues in 
the project’s design and implementation? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
9. 
 
Dedicated 
services 
Does the company offer any community 
engagement programme supporting 
women’s adoption and use of the 
company’s infrastructures or services?  
Has the counterparty identified any 
opportunities to provide services dedicated 
to supporting women or gender 
mainstreaming? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
10.  
Procurement 
Are clauses included in contracts 
committing contractors and suppliers to 
adhere to company codes of conduct? 
Is information provided to contractors and 
suppliers about company grievance 
mechanisms for reporting GBVH? 
Is GBVH included in workplace safety 
assessments, including worker 
accommodation and transportation? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
11.  
Products/ 
services 
Does the company collect and monitor 
gender-disaggregated data on demand, 
service usage and/or customer 
segmentation? For example, related to 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
 
                              152

=== PAGE 155 ===
S.N
Parameter 
Questions 
Response 
Remarks 
access, availability, affordability, feasibility, 
and satisfaction. 
If demand, service usage and/or customer 
segmentation data is collected, how is this 
data analysed and to what extent it is used 
for decision-making related to planning, 
design, marketing, sales, pricing, service(s) 
and distribution? 
Yes ☐ 
No ☐ 
153

=== PAGE 156 ===
ERM has over 160 offices across the following 
countries and territories worldwide 
Argentina 
Australia 
Belgium 
Brazil 
Canada 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
France 
Germany 
Ghana 
Guyana 
India 
Indonesia 
Ireland 
Italy 
Japan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Malaysia 
Mexico 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
The Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Norway 
Panama 
Peru 
Poland 
Portugal 
Puerto Rico 
Romania 
Russia 
Senegal 
Singapore 
South Africa 
South Korea 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland  
Tanzania 
Thailand 
UAE 
UK 
US 
Vietnam 
ERM India Private Limited 
3rd Floor, Building 10 B 
DLF Cyber city, 
Gurgaon - 122 002 
Tel:-0124-4170300 
www.erm.com 
154
