=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20085
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20085
creationDate: D:20220425195618+09'00'
modDate: D:20220425195618+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
16 – 19 May 2022 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Provisional agenda item 5 
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
25 April 2022 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package for FP184 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled " Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project 
(VCCRP)"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Secretariat’s assessment;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
f) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
103 
Secretariat’s assessment 
104 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
117 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
127 
Gender documentation 
129

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project 
(VCCRP) 
Country(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Accredited Entity: 
Save the Children Australia 
Date of first submission: 
2021-08-13 V.1 
Date of current submission  
2022/03/31   
Version number 
v7 (B.32)

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE b 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
45 % 
48 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
45 % 
48 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
10 % 
4 % 
A.5. Epected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Indicate greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emission reductions or 
removals in tCO2eq over total 
lifespan of the 
project/programme2 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
200,157 total direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
90,157 direct 
beneficiaries 
110,000 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
33% of direct 
beneficiaries 
vis-à-vis total 
population 
40% of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
vis-à-vis total 
population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
32,650,440 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
26,182,878 USD 
 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period. 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
 26,182,878 
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
6 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
12 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
 
9/7/2021 
 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards to assess 
your FP category. 
 
C  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Entity: Government of Vanuatu acting through its Ministry of Climate Change 
(MoCC) 
Country of registration: Vanuatu 
Ownership type: Government 
 
Entity: Save the Children Vanuatu (SCV) 
Country of registration: Vanuatu 
Ownership type: non-profit organisation  
 
The MoCC & SCV will co-Execute the project 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
1. Vanuatu leads the world disaster risk index as the country with the highest disaster risk score of 49.74, 
indicating it is the most highly exposed to natural hazards4. A global analysis of countries affected by the 
impacts of climate-related events (e.g. tropical cyclones, floods, heat waves) ranked Vanuatu 8th 
globally, based on losses per GDP percentage between 1999 and 20185. These risks are evident in the 
recent and repeated hazards that Vanuatu has experienced, including TC Pam (2015), El Niño drought 
(2016), marine heatwave (2016), TC Hola (2018), TC Harold (2020) and regular flooding during heavy 
rainfall and tropical cyclones. These events have resulted in significant damage to infrastructure and 
livelihoods (with TCs Harold and Pam causing loss equivalent to 61% and 64% GDP, respectively).

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
2. The current available evidence indicates that the most significant climate change challenges facing 
communities in Vanuatu are due to increasing frequency and/or intensity of extreme events: 
1. Temperature: air and sea (minimum, mean and maximum daily temperatures and events such as 
heatwaves).  
2. Rainfall patterns (increased duration of dry periods, changing frequency and intensity of extreme 
rainfall and ENSO-associated rainfall). 
3. Tropical cyclones (increased intensity including severe wind and waves, and intense rainfall and 
flooding). 
3. The vulnerability of communities in Vanuatu to these climate hazards is driven by the country’s 
geography and heavy dependence on natural resources for subsistence and income. Other factors that 
contribute to the country’s vulnerability are a narrow economic base, a weak developing economy 
(recently graduated from LDC status, but likely to be pushed back to it by the economic impacts of 
COVID-19), poor inter- and intra-island communication and transport networks, and a decentralized and 
dispersed population often isolated during disaster events (due to the country’s vast ocean territory, with 
widely spread and sparsely populated islands). 
4. The Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project (VCCRP) will support highly vulnerable rural 
communities across 29 Area Councils in Vanuatu to increase their resilience to climate variability and 
change by implementing targeted adaptation actions and facilitating decentralized governance 
structures that enable rural populations to adapt to changing climate trends and reduce disaster risk. 
The project’s adaptation package provides a menu of actions to support households and communities to 
address key drivers of climate change vulnerability, minimize exposure and sensitivity and build 
resilience to unavoidable impacts. The adaptation package includes community-based, locally-led 
actions focused on minimizing sensitivity of food systems (agriculture and fisheries), reducing 
dependence on vulnerable income-generating resources through alternative livelihood options, 
improving access to critical services and addressing social inequities that exacerbate climate 
vulnerability. The adaptation package will also support communities to maintain healthy ecosystems and 
restore degraded habitats, to fortify food and livelihood security and reduce vulnerability to climate 
change-driven disasters, to enhance resource management and build adaptive governance systems.  
5. The project’s goal statement is that IF vulnerable remote and rural communities in Vanuatu access and 
utilize locally-relevant climate information, integrate climate risks into community planning processes, 
and are supported to implement priority adaptation actions; THEN they will be more resilient to the 
impacts of increasing climate variability, extremes and change on their food security and livelihoods; 
BECAUSE their exposure and vulnerability to hazards will be reduced and their adaptive capacity 
increased. 
6. The project will work to achieve this goal via activities under three interlinked components:  
1. Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support local resilience to 
climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate information and early 
warnings 
2. Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community adaptation needs to 
create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways (adaptation package) 
3. Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive governance systems at the 
local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages 
 
7. The project will directly reach 90,157 people in 19,556 households and 282 communities across all six 
provinces (33% of the total population or 43% of the rural population) and a further 110,000 people 
indirectly (a further 40% of total population or 52% of the rural population). By working directly with 
communities and indirectly via building governance capacity, the project will reach almost all rural 
communities. Further, the adaptation package approach gives communities options to select the most 
appropriate and effective adaptation actions and provides ownership of the solutions that minimize 
vulnerability and build on local knowledge, skills and innovation. 
 
4 Behlert et al (2020) World Risk Report (2020) Available here 
5 Eckstein et al. (2020) Global Climate Risk Index 2020: Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related loss events in 2018 and 1999 to 2018. Available 
here

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
6 Government of Vanuatu (2015) Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030. Available here 
7 Behlert et al (2020) World Risk Report (2020). Available here 
8 Government of Vanuatu (2015) Post-disaster needs assessment: Tropical Cyclone Pam, March 2015. Available here 
9 Andrew et al. (2019) Coastal proximity of populations in 22 Pacific Island Countries and Territories. Available here 
10 Johnson et al. (2020) Chapter 10: Impacts of climate change on marine resources in Pacific Island region. Available here 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Baseline conditions 
8. The Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy (2016-2030)6 states that the country 
is “one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change and disaster risks”, while the 
2020 World Risk Report ranked Vanuatu as the most at-risk country to disasters7.  
9. Vanuatu is characterized by mostly mountainous volcanic islands with steep catchments leading to 
narrow coastal plains vulnerable to flooding, storm inundation and sea-level rise. The country’s tropical 
climate can vary considerably each year due to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle and other 
drivers, with extreme weather and climate variability within and between years. In the last five years, 
Vanuatu has experienced at least one cyclone every year and substantial impacts, with two category 5 
intensity cyclones causing catastrophic damage (TC Pam 2015 and TC Harold 2020). The estimated 
economic loss and damages from TC Pam in 2015 were 64% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
(approximately USD 450 million)8. Vanuatu is also exposed to geological hazards – earthquakes, 
tsunamis and landslides. 
10. The country’s population of approximately 272,000 (2016 mini census) is spread over 68 islands and 
75% of people live in rural and often remote communities. With 94% of the population living within 5 km 
of the coast and 60% living within 1 km of the coast9, coastal environments and natural resources play a 
vital role in the subsistence and commercial life of ni-Vanuatu. This long traditional connection and 
dependence on natural resources stems from the fact that 65 of the 83 islands that make up the 
Vanuatu archipelago have been inhabited for thousands of years. This has enabled the country’s people 
to acquire a profound understanding of their land, sea and climate. Generational knowledge, combined 
with the expertise that results from being primary managers and beneficiaries of natural resources, is a 
keystone to local livelihoods, cultural identity, and the ability of dispersed rural populations to cope with 
disasters10. However, an increasingly unpredictable climate is challenging the limits of local and 
traditional experience, while threatening significant national and community level impacts into the future. 
This is further compounded by a likely future in which extremes (like tropical cyclones) are more intense, 
resulting in more damage to local farming systems. More diversified and climate-resilient food security 
and livelihood strategies will help offset the impacts of these extremes.  
11. The national government in Vanuatu is democratically elected and has oversight of all climate change 
matters through the Ministry of Climate Change. Sub-national governance in Vanuatu consists of six 
Provincial Government Councils which is sub-divided into Area Councils. As of 2020, there are 71 Area 
Councils present throughout Vanuatu however all national statistics are based on the previous 66 Area 
Councils. Area Councils have a varying number of communities (averaging around 9), and each 
community should have a Community Disaster and Climate Change Committee (CDCCC) to guide both 
adaptation and disaster preparedness and response. In practice, many communities do not have a 
CDCCC in place, or if they do, they are often not fully functional. More broadly, Vanuatu has responded 
positively to climate change challenges from a governance perspective and has established the National 
Advisory Board (NAB) on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction (CCDRR) with primary 
responsibility for coordinating and mainstreaming climate change policies, programs and projects and 
linking to a whole-of-government approach. 
12. While CDCCCs are the primary mechanism for adaptation planning at the local level, they have no 
independent legal status. They are established by mandate from the MoCC’s National Disaster 
Management Office (NDMO). Their structure, roles and responsibilities and ways of working outlined in 
the MoCC publication ‘CBDRR Handbook’, NDMO (2017). Members of CDCCCs are appointed in line 
with requirements outlined in the Handbook. Membership should conform to the Handbook’s 
composition and is based on voluntary self-nomination followed by a community vote. Under the 
Handbook guidelines, each CDCCC must include the following representatives: a community leader; a

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
11 Maynard, J., Heron, S., van Hooidonk, R., Tracey, D. (2018) Past and projected future impacts of coral bleaching on the reefs of Vanuatu. Report to the Secretariat of the 
Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), Apia, Samoa (19 pp). Available here.  
12 Government of Vanuatu (2007) National Adaptation Programme of Action. Available here.  
youth representative; a representative of people with disabilities; and a local government representative 
(from a local health clinic or school). There is no requirement for gender balance, but this will be 
required under VCCRP processes. 
Vanuatu’s climate and recent trends 
13. Vanuatu has a predominantly hot, humid, tropical climate, with year-round rainfall. There are two main 
seasons: a warm wet season, influenced by the northwest monsoon, between November and April; and 
a cool drier season, influenced by southeast trade winds, from May to October. Vanuatu’s climate varies 
considerably from year to year due to El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and other drivers; with 
extreme weather and climate variability within and between years, including tropical cyclones, floods 
and storm surges (often associated with tropical cyclones), and droughts.  
14. Meteorological records for Vanuatu are maintained by the Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards 
Department. There are, however, gaps in the historical data record as a result of ongoing challenges 
with digitizing the paper record, the dearth of monitoring stations to capture current trends, and the 
general paucity of research into Vanuatu’s climate. Despite this, there are clear observed trends in the 
data, including: 
• 
The observed warming trend is clear and ongoing, and, relative to an early baseline of 1850-1900, 
Vanuatu has experienced around +0.3 °C warming compared to the 1986-2005 period; 
• 
Sea surface temperature (SST) varies seasonally and has been observed to be increasing over 
recent decades, with a strong link between SST and air temperature trends on the small islands. 
SST is an important factor that can influence the location of primary productivity zones and 
availability of food, composition of species, the migration of species, the severity of storms and 
cyclones, ocean salinity, and the overall health of marine ecosystems. Increase in SST has also 
been observed around Vanuatu with the rate of change in annual average SST between 0.3 and 
0.4 °C per decade11. There is little spatial variation in Vanuatu in the annual trend. This annual 
trend is consistent with the global average of 0.33 °C per decade; 
• 
There are no clear trends in seasonal or annual rainfall over Vanuatu since 1907. Over this period, 
there has been substantial variations in rainfall from year to year but little change in extreme daily 
rainfall or total rainfall; 
• 
Tropical cyclones (TC) most commonly affect Vanuatu during the warm wet season, between 
November and April. Over the 42-year period to 2010, 101 tropical cyclones developed or crossed 
into the Vanuatu Exclusive Economic Zone, or an average of 24 cyclones per decade. The number 
of cyclones varies from year to year, with none in some seasons but up to six in others. Over this 
period, cyclones occurred in El Niño, La Niña and neutral years. In the recent past, Vanuatu has 
experienced two category 5 cyclones (TC Pam in 2015 and TC Harold in 2020) with estimated 
economic loss and damage of approximately 64% of GDP for TC Pam and 61% GDP for TC 
Harold; 
• 
Wind and waves around Vanuatu do not vary significantly throughout the year, having constant 
wave heights and periods. Waves are influenced by the southern trade winds and movement of the 
South Pacific Convergence Zone. They display some variability from year to year with ENSO and 
the Southern Annual Mode. Waves come mainly from the south-east, consisting of trade wind 
generated waves and a component of swell propagated from storm events in the Southern Ocean. 
Wave heights are typically greater in the south at Aneityum than at Port Vila or in the north. 
15. A more detailed overview of Vanuatu’s climate and observed trends is in Section 4 of Annex 2. 
Climate change projections 
16. The Vanuatu National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA)12 states that the country is exposed to, 
and highly vulnerable to, nearly all conceivable impacts of climate change. These risks were re-

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
13 Government of Vanuatu (2015) Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030. Available here. 
14 CSIRO and BoM (2014) Climate Variability, Extremes and Change in the Western Tropical Pacific: New Science and Updated Country Reports, Vanuatu Chapter. 
Australian Bureau of Meteorology and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Available here. 
15 CSIRO and SPREP (2021) Current and future climate for Vanuatu: enhanced ‘NextGen’ projections: Technical Report. Available here.  
16 IPCC (2021) Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. 
Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In Press. 
17 In the RCP2.6 pathway, radiative forcing peaks at 3.0 Wm-2 before 2050 to then fall back to 2.6 Wm-2 by the year 2100. 
18 IPCC (2018) Impacts of 1.5ºC Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming 
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate 
change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
confirmed in the analysis undertaken to develop Vanuatu’s Climate Change and Disaster Risk 
Reduction Policy13.  
17. Climate change projections for Vanuatu have been delivered by the Pacific Climate Change Science 
Program (PCCSP) and the Pacific-Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning program 
(PACCSAP)14. The PCCSP and PACCSAP modelling is based on climate model simulations following a 
set of emissions scenarios that are consistent with certain socio-economic assumptions of how the 
future may evolve. There are many different global climate models and they each represent the climate 
slightly differently. An evaluation of 26 global models found that 24 best represent the climate in the 
Vanuatu region of the western tropical Pacific. These 24 models have been used to develop climate 
projections for Vanuatu.  
18. In 2019, CSIRO commenced the process of updating the PCCSP and PACCSAP projections (under the 
NextGen project), utilizing the same underlying data15. The updated projections confirm the findings of 
the PCCSP and PACCSAP projections on most indicators and introduce new developments and 
understanding of three key climate drivers in Vanuatu: extreme rainfall, tropical cyclones and sea level 
rise.  The NextGen findings are fully coincident with the headline findings of IPCC Working Group I for 
the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)16. In particular, trends in temperature, rainfall, ocean chemistry, sea 
level rise and extreme weather events are coincident between both publications, allowing for regional 
specificities (such as lower air temperature increase due to the weather systems being driven by the 
ocean environment).  
19. The two lowest emissions scenarios, RCP2.6 and RCP4.5, are below the current global emissions 
trajectory. According to AR5, in 2011 the total radiative forcing relative to 1750 reached 2.29 Wm-2 with 
high confidence. In AR6, by 2019 the radiative forcing had risen to 2.72 Wm-2, of which 0.34 Wm-2 was 
due to the increase in GHG concentrations in the atmosphere. Given this trend, RCP2.6 is unlikely to be 
achieved17, particularly when considering the pledges made to date on the 2021 update of the NDCs 
under the Paris Agreement. RCP4.5 is achievable if all current pledges are met and the remaining 
NDCs to be updated commensurately increase ambition – and that ambition continues to increase over 
time. 
20. As a nation highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, Vanuatu needs to protect its population from 
the hazards presented by the most plausible future climate using the precautionary principle 
(represented by RCP6.0), rather than an aspirational one (represented by RCP2.6) or even that which is 
possible if all current pledges are implemented (represented by RCP4.5).  
21. This is particularly the case as there remain significant uncertainties at the level of policy response and 
implementation globally (exemplified by the number of net-zero pledges made that lack a clear 
implementation framework or pathway to achievement). Therefore, the impact assessment for this 
project is based on the medium emissions scenario (RCP6.0) as an intermediary between the low 
emissions scenario (RCP4.5), which is recommended for the planet to avoid significant ecological 
tipping points18, and the very high emissions scenario (RCP8.5). There are two further considerations 
that make selection of any specific RCP a moot point in the context of this project: 
• 
The projected changes do not diverge in a significant way between the RCPs until around 
2040, so the shorter-term projections remain valid regardless of the RCP utilized. 
• 
The direction of change for all emissions scenarios is the same (e.g., higher temperatures, 
more concentrated rainfall), with increasing intensity depending on longer term trajectories. 
Application of the precautionary principle, as a matter of good governance, would then point to the 
use of a higher-rated RCP.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
19 Maynard et al. (2018). See footnote 11. 
20 Lenton, A., McInnes, K.L., O’Grady, J.G. (2015). Marine projections of warming and ocean acidification in the Australasian region. Australian Meteorological and 
Oceanographic Journal, 65(1), pp.1-28. 
22. Considering the above and the availability of scientific data on climate change forecasts and impacts 
specific to Vanuatu, the project design is informed principally by the medium emissions scenario 
(RCP6.0). Where available, impacts based on RCP4.5 are included. The project activities are also 
designed to be no-regrets adaptation actions – they will help increase resilience in the face of 
significant impacts, while still making sense in lower emissions scenarios, and even in a world without 
climate change impacts due to the target communities’ existing exposure and vulnerability to climate 
extremes. 
23. Under a medium greenhouse gas emissions scenario (RCP6.0), future climate conditions can be 
summarized as follows:  
• 
Increases in daily air temperatures are projected across all of Vanuatu for minimum, mean and 
maximum daily temperatures. Compared to 1995, temperature will be higher by 0.9-1.3°C by 2050, 
and 1.3-2.7°C by 2090 (high confidence);  
• 
Extreme air temperatures will reach higher levels and become more frequent. By 2040, the 
current 1-day maximum occurring once every 20 years will occur every 2 years (high confidence);  
• 
Increases in sea surface temperatures will mean reefs around Vanuatu will experience conditions 
that exceed thermal thresholds known to cause coral bleaching (above 29.5°C) more often, but 
impacts will be spatially and temporally variable (high confidence)19;  
• 
Extreme sea surface temperatures (marine heatwaves) will occur more often, increasing from 
10% of the time currently to 25% of the time by 2040 (high confidence); 
• 
Projections of changes in rainfall amounts have low confidence, and trends are unclear given the 
very high climate variability in Vanuatu. There are a range of possible future trajectories, from 
wetter to drier, largely determined by future changes in the South Pacific Convergence Zone. This 
will pose challenges to planning and policy development, and therefore planning should consider 
both a wetter and a drier future; 
• 
Extreme rainfall will become more frequent and intense (high confidence). By 2040, the 1 in 100-
year event intensity will increase to 10-11%. This change is the same across all islands. 
Frequencies of current extreme events will increase by 1.2-2.5%; 
• 
The duration of dry periods (droughts) will become longer (low confidence). The 1 in 5-year event 
will likely lengthen from 19 days to 28 days;  
• 
Tropical cyclones are projected to be less frequent (decrease in cyclone formation) but more 
intense (medium confidence);  
• 
Sea level is estimated to be currently increasing by 6 mm/year since 1960. Models simulate an 
increase of up to 35 cm (15-35 cm) by 2050, with increases of up to 89 cm (30-89 cm) indicated by 
2090 (high confidence);  
• 
In 20 years’ time, it is projected that continued ocean acidification will result in seawater chemistry 
that is only marginally suitable for calcification, affecting reef accretion and structure on 80% of 
coral reefs around the world, including those in Vanuatu20.  
24. The current evidence indicates that the greatest climatic challenges facing communities in Vanuatu are 
due to increasing frequency and/or intensity of extreme events: 
• 
Temperature: air and sea (minimum, mean and maximum daily temperatures and events such as 
heatwaves);  
• 
Rainfall patterns (increased duration of dry periods, changing frequency and intensity of extreme 
rainfall and ENSO-associated rainfall); 
• 
Tropical cyclones (increased intensity, not frequency, predicted including severe wind and waves, 
and intense rainfall and flooding).

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
Temperature  
25. Projections for all emissions pathways indicate that the annual average air temperature and SST will 
increase in the future in Vanuatu, and the magnitude of projected change is similar for the next 20 
years under any plausible emissions pathway, but after 2040 there is growing and notable differences 
between low and high emissions pathways (Figure 1, below).  By 2050, under a medium emissions 
scenario (RCP6.0), this increase in temperature is projected to be in the range of 0.6-1.3°C, while 
under a Paris Agreement compatible scenario (RCP4.5) anticipated warming is 0.6-1.5°C. 
26. In Vanuatu, warming has occurred and is projected to continue occurring at a lower rate than the global 
average (+2°C of global warming results in +1.3 to +1.9°C in Vanuatu) due to the influence of the 
ocean. Step-like changes in air temperature have occurred in the past and are likely to happen in the 
future, and therefore planned adaptation actions should consider non-linear and unpredictable warming 
in the future. The warming trend in Vanuatu is clear (with at least 0.7°C average temperature increase 
to date) and very high confidence that this trend will continue for the foreseeable future regardless of 
the emissions scenario. 
 
Rainfall 
27. There is uncertainty around rainfall projections for Vanuatu as model outputs are not consistent. Some 
models suggest a slight increase in wet season rainfall and a decrease in dry season rainfall, however 
the overall projection is for little change. Wet and dry years will still occur in response to natural 
variability and regional drivers, e.g. ENSO. Projections show extreme rainfall days are likely to occur 
more often. Drought frequency is expected to decrease slightly by the end of the century.  
28. Preliminary results from the NextGen projections show that rainfall change is more uncertain than 
temperature change, and trends are less obvious given the very high climate variability. The average 
result from climate models is for a small change in the average rainfall annually. But there are a range 
of possible future trajectories, from wetter through to drier, largely determined by future change in the 
South Pacific Convergence Zone. Therefore, planned adaptation actions should consider the impacts of 
both increased incidence of extreme rainfall events and changes expected in seasonal rainfall (with 
implications for rain-fed agriculture). 
Figure 1. Historical and simulated surface air temperature time series for the region surrounding Vanuatu. The graph shows the anomaly (from 
the base period 1986-2005) in surface air temperature from observations (the GISS dataset, in purple), and for the CMIP5 models under the very 
high (RCP8.5, in red) and very low (RCP2.6, in blue) emissions scenarios. The solid red and blue lines show the smoothed (20-year running 
average) multi-model mean anomaly in surface air temperature, while shading represents the spread of model values (5-95th percentile). The 
dashed lines show the 5-95th percentile of the observed interannual variability for the observed period (in black) and added to the projections as 
a visual guide (in red and blue). This indicates that future surface air temperature could be above or below the projected long-term averages due 
to interannual variability. The ranges of projections for a 20-year period centred on 2090 are shown by the bars on the right for RCP8.5, 6.0, 4.5 
and 2.6 (CSIRO and BoM 2014, see footnote 14).

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
21 See Knutson et al (2020). Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to anthropogenic warming. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 101 (3). Available here.  
22 IPCC 2013, section 11.3.2.5.3 
23 IPCC 2021, section 11.1.7 
29. While the total annual quantum of rainfall may not change dramatically – or at least it isn’t currently 
possible to reliably project the direction of any change, people in Vanuatu will continue to live with 
significant rainfall variability and escalating extremes. Of particular concern is the likelihood that climate 
change will increase the variability of the country’s rainfall. This is especially true for the remote and 
rural populations the VCCRP will target, given their reliance on subsistence rain-fed agriculture, which 
is particularly susceptible to climate change induced changes in rainfall patterns, extreme rainfall 
leading to flooding, droughts, heatwaves, salinization, increases in evapotranspiration, seasonal 
variations, and reduction in freshwater availability. Under an RCP4.5 scenario, soil moisture is expected 
to decrease significantly, and potential evapotranspiration is increased, indicating significant stress on 
non-irrigated crops (see Figure 2, below).  These climate impacts are exacerbated by soil erosion and 
loss of soil fertility due to deforestation and environmental degradation. In order to ensure vulnerable 
remote and rural communities have increased resilience to climate change, it is important to develop 
and deliver adaptation actions in the agriculture sector that will help increase food security across a 
range of climate futures – from wetter to drier. The VCCRP activities will seek to do this. 
 
 
Tropical cyclones 
30. On a global scale, climate projections indicate there is likely to be a decrease in the number of tropical 
cyclones by the end of the 21st century. However, for cyclones that do occur, there is likely to be an 
increase in the average maximum wind speed by about 5%, an increase in rainfall intensity of about 
14% within 100 km of the cyclone centre, and a likely (around 13%) increase in the proportion of 
cyclones that reach very intense levels (category 4-5)21. This is coincident with the projected change in 
TC activity reported in AR5: “Negligible change in overall frequency. Significant (~15%) increase in 
number of Category 4–5 TCs”22. AR6 reports for “Projected changes at +2oC global warming”, 
compared to pre-industrial conditions, that there is “high confidence in a projected increase of TC rain 
rates at the global scale; the median projected rate of increase due to human emissions is about 14%”, 
and that there is “high confidence for an increase in the proportion of TCs that reach the strongest 
(Category 4-5) levels. The median projected increase in this proportion is about 13%”23. 
Figure 2. Espiritu Santo (left – west coast; 14.96 S - 166.65 E) and Tanna (right – 19.47 S - 169.34 E), monthly average precipitation, aridity 
potential and soil moisture, for the time period 2041-2070 relative to the period 1981-2010. Model CORDEX Australia - WWHYPE Ensemble 
Mean, RCP4.5 (SMHI, Climate Information, https://climateinformation.org/, accessed on 2021-07-20)

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
24 CSIRO and SPREP (2021). See footnote 15 
25 CSIRO and Bom (2014). See footnote 14 
26 SMHI, Climate Information, https://climateinformation.org/, last accessed: 2021-06-23 
27 Johnson et al. (2020). Chapter 10: Impacts of climate change on marine resources in the Pacific Island region. In: Climate Change Impacts in the Pacific, Lalit Kumar 
(Editor), Springer; Johnson et al. (2017) Chapter 11 – The Pacific Islands: Fisheries and Aquaculture and Climate Change. In: Philips B, Ramirez M (Editors) Climate 
Change Impacts on Fisheries & Aquaculture: a global analysis. Wiley Publications, New York, USA. 
28 Asch, R.G. et al. (2017) Future marine ecosystem drivers, biodiversity, and fisheries maximum catch potential in Pacific Island countries and territories under climate 
change. Marine Policy, 88: 285–294; Munday, P.L. et al. (2008) Climate change and the future for coral reef fishes. Fish and Fisheries, 9(3), 261-285. 
29 Bell et al. (2018) Adaptations to maintain the contributions of small-scale fisheries to food security in the Pacific Islands. Marine Policy, 88, 303-314. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.019. 
30 Gillett, R. and Cartwright, I. (2010) The Future of Pacific Island Fisheries. Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Noumea and the Forum Fisheries Agency, Honiara, 
110 pp. 
31. With regard to the implications of future projected climate change on tropical cyclones, the NextGen 
projections conclude that the “evidence suggests that for the southwestern Pacific as a whole, the total 
number of tropical cyclones may decrease over the century, but with an increase in the average 
intensity and an increase in the impacts of tropical cyclones through more intense rainfall and greater 
coastal inundation due to sea level rise.”24  
32. Annually, Vanuatu is affected by an average of 2.6 cyclones (ranging from 0-6 per year in recent 
decades). 29 of 71 tropical cyclones (41%) that have affected Vanuatu since 1981 have been severe 
(Category 3 or above)25. Even with a reduction in the total number, an increase in the average severity 
could prove catastrophic to the lives and livelihoods of people, particularly in remote and rural coastal 
location. 
Additional burden from climate change: food systems and livelihoods 
33. Due to about 80% of the population being dependent on subsistence agriculture, climate change poses 
a significant risk to Vanuatu’s agriculture sector and food security. Agricultural activities in Vanuatu are 
particularly susceptible to climate change induced changes in rainfall patterns, extreme rainfall leading 
to flooding, droughts, heatwaves, salinization processes, increases in evapotranspiration, seasonal 
variations, and reduction in freshwater availability. Under an RCP4.5 scenario, soil moisture is expected 
to decrease significantly, and potential evapotranspiration is increased, indicating significant stress on 
non-irrigated crops (see Figure 2, above, and Figures 3a and 3b, below)26. These climate impacts are 
exacerbated by soil erosion and loss of soil fertility due to deforestation and environmental degradation. 
34. Prolonged and intense rainfall, for example, damages seedlings and encourages conditions that 
promote diseases and pests. Droughts create additional thermal stress on plants. Projected air 
temperature increases are likely to reach the maximum heat tolerance thresholds of some staple crops 
and induce heat stress and crop failure, especially in traditional crops such as cassava, taro and yam. 
Communities on Torres islands, South Santo, South Malekula, Central Pentecost, Epi, Erromango, 
Aniwa and Aneityum, in particular, have reported impacts from increased temperatures and droughts 
on declining crop yields and lowered livestock productivity during the 2015-2016 El Niño period. 
35. Coastal fisheries also contribute significantly to food security, with the latest mini-census (2016) 
reporting that 60% of rural households engage in coastal fisheries activities. Climate change is 
expected to impact coral reef fish and invertebrate species in Vanuatu by altering their metabolic rates, 
growth, reproduction and survival27, resulting in changes to species abundance, distribution and 
sizes28. These changes will also have consequences for livelihoods, as they threaten the viability of 
fisheries in Vanuatu by 205029 and they may cause food insecurity. 
36. In the short-medium term, coastal fisheries in Vanuatu are also at critical risk from non-climatic 
pressures such as overfishing, and habitat degradation due to increasing populations, land use change 
and pollution.30 Climate change impacts further exacerbate these environmental and development 
issues.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional burden from climate change: disaster risk reduction 
37. Climate change adaptation (CCA) and disaster risk reduction (DRR) efforts share the aim of building 
the resilience of people, economies and natural resources to the impacts of climate change. Access to 
Climate Information Services (CIS) for local planning remains very limited. Early Warning Systems 
(EWS) for disaster risk are more widespread, but still sporadic. Key opportunities to enhance DRR at 
the community level in Vanuatu include supporting the integration of climate-related disaster risks and 
potential future climate change impacts into local planning and budgeting decisions, strengthening local 
level CIS and EWS to inform local decision making, developing educational and awareness materials in 
local language and supporting socially-inclusive community groups focused on local DRR and CCA.  
Figure 3a and b. Aridity potential (monthly mean) and soil moisture (monthly mean) showing change compared to historical period

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
31 ADB (2017) Food Security in Asia: Why Institutions Matter. Edited by Zhang-Yue Zhou and Guanghua Wan. Asian Development Bank Institute 
Research has shown31 that reduced food security is a key factor in driving increased rural and agrarian 
poverty. This in turn can trigger an increased dependence on global supply chains and aid, initially in rural 
areas where primary production occurs but also flowing through to urban markets. Lack of food security 
from climate impacts on the key subsistence agricultural and fishery sectors in rural Vanuatu, in the short-
term, will reduce the resilience of the population following climate-related disasters and increase the 
ongoing risk from climate change. Longer-term, unaddressed, it may also trigger broader societal 
changes, such as forced migration, crime and disease.  
Related projects/interventions 
38. There are several complementary projects in Vanuatu that are currently being implemented or in the 
design phase and due to commence in 2021/22. A full list of projects and their status is provided in 
Annex 2, and most relevant among those are: 
• 
Climate Information Service for Resilient Development in Vanuatu project, known as ‘Vanuatu 
Klaemet Infomesen blong Redy, Adapt mo Protekt’ (Van-KIRAP) – SPREP/GCF (FP035) 
• 
Vanuatu Coastal Adaptation Project (VCAP) – Phase 2 – UNDP/GEF 
• 
Melanesia Coastal and Marine Ecosystem Resilience to Climate Change Programme – IUCN/GCF 
(in development) 
• 
Expanding Conservation Areas Reach and Effectiveness (ECARE) in Vanuatu – IUCN/GEF  
• 
Pacific Ecosystem-based Adaptation to Climate Change (PEBACC) – Phase 2 – SPREP 
• 
Restoration of Ecosystem Services and Adaptation to Climate Change (RESCCUE) – SPC 
(completed) 
• 
Building Resilient Communities in Vanuatu Program – Vanuatu Red Cross 
• 
Institutional Strengthening for Pacific Island Countries to Adapt to Climate Change (ISAAC) Project 
– SPC/SPREP  
• 
Pacific nature-based solutions in the Pacific (Vanuatu) – New Zealand MFAT 
• 
Strengthening and scaling community-based approaches to Pacific coastal fisheries management 
in support of the New Song, known as the Vanuatu Pathways Project – Phase 2 – 
SPC/ACIAR/DFAT 
39. The VCCRP will complement these existing and emerging projects by building on the networks and 
capacity developed, implementing consistent approaches where relevant and extending the activities 
relevant to climate change adaptation of food systems and livelihoods to reach a greater number of 
vulnerable rural communities, including children, youth and women, in Vanuatu. 
40. Particularly close cooperation will be achieved with the GCF-supported Van-KIRAP (FP035) 
(particularly under Output 1.3) and the GEF-supported VCAP 2 (which will provide parallel finance via 
implementing aligned activities in other vulnerable Area Councils). The VCCRP will work closely with 
the Van-KIRAP team based at the Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department (VMGD) as well 
as those in-country and abroad with the Secretariat of the Pacific Environment Programme (SPREP) 
project team. Consultations with SPREP and the Government of Vanuatu have been undertaken to 
ensure the two projects are closely linked and mutually reinforcing. There are several key points of 
synergy between VCCRP and Van-KIRAP that will help enhance the impact of both projects. This is 
particularly related to VCCRP activities involving EWS (Output 1.2) and CIS (Output 2.2), which will 
compliment those of Van-KIRAP by supporting and scaling-up community-level activities where 
appropriate, such as those in Van-KIRAP Outcome 2 (sector-specific CIS development case studies) 
and Outcome 3 (customized communication, capacity development and outreach resource materials). 
See Table 2 in Annex 2 for more detail on specific points of alignment between the projects. Once Van-
KIRAP concludes, VCCRP will continue to work with VMGD to scale out updated CIS products to 
remote and rural communities. 
41. The Pacific Community (SPC) and the Vanuatu Department of Energy are in the process of developing 
a proposal to scale up the National Green Energy Fund (NGEF), building from a GCF Readiness

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
32 Pritchard, M. (2018) Yumi Stap Redi Long Klaemet Jenis: Ex-Post Evaluation Report of the Vanuatu NGO Climate Change Adaptation Program. Oxfam Australia. 
Available here. 
33 Burton (2004) Climate change and the adaptation deficit. In Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, paper 3, pp.25-33; and Frankhauser (2014) Understanding the 
adaptation deficit. In Global Environmental Change vol.27, pp.9-18. 
34 Pritchard, M. (2018) Yumi Stap Redi Long Klaemet Jenis: Ex-Post Evaluation Report of the Vanuatu NGO Climate Change Adaptation Program. Oxfam Australia. 
Available here. 
35 ACCRA (2011) Consultation document: The ACCRA Local Adaptive Capacity Framework. Available here. See also, Jones et al (2010) Towards a characterisation of 
adaptive capacity: a framework for analysing adaptive capacity at the local level, Overseas Development Institute. Available here.  
project. The VCCRP will work with the newly established NGEF Unit that was created through this 
Readiness proposal, in addition to the Department of Energy and DoCC, with regard to deploying 
appropriate renewable energy technologies under Output 1.2 (Climate-resilient agriculture for food 
security and livelihood development) and Output 1.4 (Climate-resilient food value chains established to 
support food security and livelihoods). A key point of coordination and collaboration between the 
projects will be VCCRP helping to develop a pipeline of demand for NGEF products through the 
provision of solar appliances to producer groups at community level and support to develop into 
MSMEs where possible. NGEF will be able to build from this base to provide further equipment as 
producer groups scale up to more formal enterprises. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
42. The VCCRP follows the Vanuatu Community Resilience Framework32. The Framework provides an 
overarching structure that focuses on meeting eight pre-conditions for climate-resilience and supports 
the closing of existing adaptation deficits33: 
1. All community members have their basic needs met,  
2. Access to a diverse, climate-resilient, set of livelihoods strategies, 
3. Ability to engage in fair, inclusive and forward-looking decision-making processes, 
4. Access to, and ability to utilize, traditional and scientific climate information,  
5. Ability to innovate and take risks, particularly with regard to livelihoods, 
6. Increased understanding of the changing context of shocks and stresses, and ability to take action 
to reduce risks, 
7. Strong in-community and external networks to share and draw on knowledge, resources and ideas, 
and 
8. Connected government at all levels that listens and is responsive to community needs, is 
innovative, and has strong leadership that is transparent and accountable. 
43. The Vanuatu Community Resilience Framework is a modified version of the Vanuatu Resilience 
Framework, developed under a previous community-based adaptation project34. This in turn was a 
modified version of the Local Adaptive Capacity Framework developed by government, NGOs and 
academic partners under the Africa Climate Change Resilience Alliance program35. The components of 
the framework are the base pre-conditions for climate-resilient communities in Vanuatu. The pre-
conditions are all inextricability interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The VCCRP will work to help 
ensure these pre-conditions are met as part of its approach to building community resilience via the 
adaptation packages approach (Component 2), along with increasing access to information, building 
understanding and supporting local level adaptation planning (Component 1), and ensuring a strong 
local-provincial-national connection and two-way flow of climate-relevant information and knowledge 
(Component 3).  
44. The project’s goal statement is that IF vulnerable remote and rural communities in Vanuatu access and 
utilize locally-relevant climate information, integrate climate risks into community planning processes, 
and are supported to implement priority adaptation actions; THEN they will be more resilient to the 
impacts of increasing climate variability, extremes and change on their food security and livelihoods; 
BECAUSE their exposure and vulnerability to hazards will be reduced and their adaptive capacity 
increased.  
45. The core climate problem the project seeks to address is that remote and rural communities in Vanuatu 
suffer an existing (and increasing) ‘adaptation deficit’ (high levels of exposure to frequent hazards and 
insecure access to key services undermines resilience). To address these deficits, the project will work 
to build local level adaptive capacity related to food security and livelihoods, based on a foundation of 
increased knowledge and understanding of climate change impacts, improved community-level

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
36 Smit et al (2001) Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable development and equity. In McCarthy et al (2001) Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the IPCC’s Third Assessment Report, p.881. Available here.  
37 Nurse et al (2014) Small islands, in Barros et al (Eds.) Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 1613-1654. 
adaptation planning, and enhanced national and sub-national government capacity to support priority 
adaptation actions.  
46. The project utilizes the IPCC’s definition of adaptive capacity, as articulated in the Third Assessment 
Report: “Adaptive capacity is the potential or ability of a system, region, or community to adapt to the 
effects or impacts of climate change. Enhancement of adaptive capacity represents a practical means 
of coping with changes and uncertainties in climate, including variability and extremes. In this way, 
enhancement of adaptive capacity reduces vulnerabilities and promotes sustainable development.”36 
The project’s understanding of adaptive capacity, and its measurement, is further elaborated in Annex 
23.  
47. The core of the project is focused on the adaptation packages under Component 2. The package is a 
suite of adaptation activities that address the main drivers of community vulnerability. These activities 
were identified through a national vulnerability assessment and stakeholder engagement process, and 
are aligned with the resilience framework (see Section B.3 and Annex 23). They form the basis of 
action for communities. The development of an adaptation package (or menu) gives communities 
options to select the most appropriate and effective adaptation actions and provides certainty that GCF 
investments are addressing the main drivers of climate vulnerability specific to the needs in each 
individual community.  
48. Participatory stakeholder involvement during implementation will allow for a tailored set of adaptation 
actions to be selected from the adaptation package, enhancing local ownership and promoting long-
term sustainability of the adaptation actions in each community. The focus on empowering communities 
to participate in, and lead, all stages of adaptation action, from selection to implementation, along with 
capacity building for government, will build strong ownership and buy-in to the project by all 
beneficiaries and help increase sustainability.  
49. The adaptation actions are designed to be implemented over the life of the six-year project and have 
flexibility to accommodate the specific climate change challenges and existing capacities within each 
community. Components of climate resilient agriculture and fisheries for food security outputs can be 
scaled up as needed to suit the local context.  
50. Adaptation activities have been developed considering structural disadvantages experienced by 
women, children and people living with a disability. This will ensure that sustainable climate resilient 
development pathways also promote social justice and equality in decision-making. The project will 
work through established local governance structures and will partner with local-level civil society 
organizations where available to maximize the appropriateness, ownership and sustainability of 
adaptation actions. 
51. This approach will ensure Vanuatu can shift from a fragmented (non-standard) approach in some 
locations, to a coordinated spatially inclusive and decentralized approach at all levels (government and 
community), with a focus on the most climate vulnerable communities. To assist this approach, the 
project will target Area Councils and apply an uptake scorecard to measure the level of effectiveness of 
adopted coordination mechanisms. 
52. Vanuatu faces many barriers that prevent the country from adequately addressing climate impacts 
without additional intervention. Vulnerability studies conducted for small island states, such as 
Vanuatu37 show that the costs of overall infrastructure and adaptation activities is a significant 
proportion of GDP, and well beyond the financial means of a developing economy (especially a SIDS 
and recently graduated LDC economy). In addition, baseline adaptive capacity is limited and is being 
further eroded by external factors such as fluctuating labour markets and population growth.  
53. Key barriers to effective and sustainable locally-led adaptation in Vanuatu identified during the project’s 
design process include:  
• 
Institutional capacity gaps at local, sub-national and national levels which hamper effective 
adaptation planning processes and implementation of adaptation actions;

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
38 Vanuatu National Statistics Office (2021) Food Security in Vanuatu: 2019-2020 NSDP Baseline Survey. Available here.  
39 Vanuatu National Statistics Office (2021) Household Income and Expenditure: 2019-2020 NSDP Baseline Survey. Available here.  
• 
Existing adaptation deficits (high exposure to frequent hazards and insecure access to services) 
impedes communities’ ability to engage in activities and reduces project impact; and  
• 
Low incentives for private sector entities to engage with remote rural communities to support 
increased market access and help diversify livelihoods.  
54. These socio-cultural-institutional barriers interact with the key climate change risks identified for 
targeted communities, which include direct biophysical impacts associated with climate drivers and 
flow-on socio-economic risks, including:  
 
55. Combined, these risks and barriers are undermining the viability of traditional livelihoods and food 
security in highly climate vulnerable communities. This is particularly the case for the ecosystems and 
ecosystem services these communities are highly reliant on, and why building the resilience of natural 
systems (GCF Outcome ARA4) is a critical component of the project. For the targeted communities, 
their livelihoods resilience (GCF Outcome ARA1) and food security (GCF Outcome ARA2) is 
inextricably interlinked with resilient and functioning ecosystems.   
56. Ni-Vanuatu have historically adapted to variability in climate and ocean conditions and hold strong 
traditional knowledge. While traditional knowledge will be valuable in dealing with the longer-term 
changes projected in climate, it is not sufficient alone and will need to be supplemented by 
contemporary science and knowledge. While there is credible scientific information available about 
climate change in Vanuatu, applying the information to decision-making for sectors is not 
straightforward. There are barriers to application both in terms of the provision of information, such as 
technological limitations and isolation, and also in terms of education to enable this information to be 
appropriately incorporated into management. As a result, climate information services are potentially 
misinterpreted by the public during decision making, if they are used at all.  
57. Villages currently experience food-security for 5-12 months of the year. The Government of Vanuatu’s 
2019-2020 NSDP Baseline Survey on food security found 30% of the rural population (65,330 people) 
are moderately or severely food insecure.38 Community members attribute current food insecurity to 
repeated use of agricultural plots (shortened fallow times), droughts and pests. Communities report that 
4-12 months are typically required to recover subsistence-agriculture after a tropical cyclone. The risks 
of food insecurity are further exacerbated by the increased demand for food resulting from the same 
rapid increase in population and increased reliance on imported and purchased (rather than locally 
produced) foodstuffs, which further poses a challenge for the traditionally subsistence-based (versus 
cash) economies of rural Vanuatu. Project activities will help reduce communities’ experience of hungry 
months and reduce the time required to regain food security post-disaster by increasing access to food 
preservation and processing for storage (reducing food losses) and markets. Household incomes in 
rural and remote areas are also highly reliant on food production, with income mainly sourced from the 
sale of primary produce.39  
58. The project will help to shift communities from a purely traditional knowledge-based approach to 
resource management to one which incorporates climate science into traditional community-based 
decision-making. The project offers adaptation solutions building on local knowledge, skills and 
innovation in the use of local resources, with a particular focus on the key sectors that underpin food 
security and livelihoods in Vanuatu – fisheries and agriculture. Vulnerable communities and 
ecosystems will be more resilient to the impacts of climate change if science-based information can be 
coupled with traditional knowledge and relationships. Importantly, the project will focus on a bottom-up 
approach that empowers communities to drive the solutions and build on their existing capacity to 
ensure long-term sustainability in the project’s approach to protecting the marine and agro-ecosystems. 
Project activities will promote behaviour changes among beneficiaries to help build resilient approaches 
to food security and livelihoods. Ongoing support from government and an increased local ability to

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
access and effectively utilize future flows of climate finance will help ensure these changes are 
sustainable, as will supporting producers to access alternative livelihoods and income streams derived 
from more resilient agriculture and fisheries processes.  
59. Immediate benefits will be achieved through community-level actions that address priority adaptation 
needs (including via increasing food security and diversifying livelihoods options), with a focus on 
addressing structural constraints to sustainable adaptation (specifically gender, age, disability, social 
inclusion and geography), increasing access to relevant and useable climate information and building 
adaptive governance systems. The actions will seek to reduce community vulnerability to current 
climate impacts. Medium-term benefits will be achieved through the participation and empowerment of 
communities and government by increasing knowledge and awareness of climate change and its 
effects, improving access to, and ability to use, climate information and manage knowledge, and 
strengthening local governance systems and processes to increase individual and community resilience 
to anticipated near-term climate change impacts. Long-term benefits will be achieved by working at 
local, sub-national and national levels to increase adaptive capacity and the ability to make forward-
looking decisions in the face of a range of climate futures. For communities to have sufficient adaptive 
capacity, local planning processes need to be climate-resilient, adaptation actions need to be costed 
and included in budgets, local-national linkages need to be strengthened and gender and social 
relations need to be transformed. The project’s theory of change is summarized in Figure 4, below. 
Impact and response chains for each climate driver and project output are provided in Figure 8.1, at the 
end of Section B.3, below.   
60. As noted above, the VCCRP will build on a range of previous adaptation projects implemented in 
Vanuatu, scaling up proven approaches to building climate resilient food security in remote and rural 
community and implementing innovative (for the context) approaches to food preservation and 
processing to minimize food losses and expand livelihoods options. The VCCRP will particularly build 
on the achievements of GCF FP035 – scaling out sector-relevant climate information services 
developed under FP035 to an additional 282 communities, creating a paradigm shift in climate-informed 
decision-making at the local level.  
61. The project will also result in increases across a range of economic, social, environmental and gender 
co-benefits, including: 
• 
Increasing the household incomes of rural communities through livelihoods diversification and 
increasing access to markets (co-benefit 1); 
• 
Increasing broad community health outcomes by ensuring communities have more secure access 
to locally-available nutritious foods (co-benefit 2); 
• 
Increasing access to education by ensuring fewer school days lost in the aftermath of extreme 
weather events through adaptation planning and enhanced DRR action (co-benefit 3); 
• 
Increasing the sustainability of ecosystem services by reducing reliance on vulnerable resources 
(e.g. reef fish) as a primary food source in rural coastal communities (co-benefit 4); 
• 
Increasing gender equality across all areas of community life – with a specific focus on ensuring 
women’s voices are heard in climate-related decision-making forums and that the gendered nature 
of climate change impacts is a key component of all climate and development planning at 
community and province levels (co-benefit 5); and 
• 
Increasing social inclusion across all areas of community life – with a specific focus on ensuring 
voices of traditionally underrepresented groups (e.g. youth, people with a disability) are heard in 
climate-related decision-making forums (co-benefit 6). 
62. For the project’s theory of change to be realized, a number of assumptions need to hold. These include: 
• 
Multiple project areas will not be affected simultaneously by significant climate-related disasters 
(category 5 cyclone, wave action, flood, drought, heatwave, etc.) during implementation and prior to 
key project activities being implemented;

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
• 
Relevant government departments will facilitate project access to national CIS and EWS systems 
(including FP035); 
• 
Provincial and local government staff will engage in strengthened climate responsive planning, 
budgeting and shock responsive social protection systems and formalize support for local level 
adaptation action;  
• 
Targeted communities demonstrate uptake of improved practices and see immediate and longer-
term benefits from project participation; 
• 
Locally-driven action will support management, rehabilitation and restoration of land use and 
fisheries measures considering climate risk to reduce exposure of farms and fisheries and increase 
the resilience of coastal and upland areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project theory of change

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
40 Government of Vanuatu (2020) The Vanuatu vulnerability assessment framework: A guide to sustainable and transparent climate resilience investment decisions. 
Available here. ` 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 3 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 3 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 4 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 5 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 6 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
63. The project is designed to minimize climate change vulnerability and maximize resilience among 
targeted rural and remote communities in Vanuatu. The activities are based on a solid understanding of 
community vulnerability to climate change and existing adaptive capacity derived from existing 
knowledge and research, and the results of a systematic approach to assessing and ranking the 
relative climate vulnerability of all Area Councils nation-wide. The national vulnerability assessment was 
conducted as part of the feasibility study which drew on available socio-ecological data for exposure to 
hazards, food and livelihood systems and knowledge on which community-level factors increase 
sensitivity and/or undermine adaptive capacity. Stakeholder consultation and field missions validated 
the results. The assessment used indicators for hazard, exposure, vulnerability and adaptive capacity 
(method details available in Annex 2) consistent with the National Vulnerability Assessment 
Framework40. 
64. The results provide a relative ranking of all Area Councils in Vanuatu from highest to lowest 
vulnerability to climate change, noting that all communities in Vanuatu are vulnerable to climate 
change. The results were used to identify suitable adaptation options and strategically target 
beneficiaries (i.e. those that are most vulnerable and marginalized). The results identified the main 
drivers (or sources) of vulnerability, which were used to identify a suite of adaptation actions that 
specifically address the main sources of vulnerability and provide a ‘menu’ or package of adaptations 
for implementation (outlined under Component 2, below). Suitable adaptation actions will be selected

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
from this ’menu’ (adaptation package) and implemented by beneficiary communities with support from 
government ministries and other procured parties to minimize vulnerability and build resilience to 
climate change. The national vulnerability assessment results are spatially variable and show both high 
and low vulnerable Area Councils exist on the same island and in each Province (see Figure 5 – a 
larger version of this map is at Annex 16), demonstrating the influence of local conditions (biophysical 
and socio-economic) and the need to tailor adaptation actions to the local context. 
65. The relationship of the components to each other and the overall approach for implementing them is 
summarized in Figure 6 below. Further detail on the vulnerability assessment process and resulting 
community targeting is provided in Annex 2 (Section 5.3) and Annex 23. 
66. The vulnerability assessment process drew on available data for climate and non-climate hazards, and 
knowledge on which community-level factors increase sensitivities or undermine adaptive capacity. 
Stakeholder consultations provided important data for this process. Using this knowledge, the 
assessment used indicators for: 
• 
hazard (climate and non-climate hazards); 
• 
exposure (shoreline geomorphology, 
topography/elevation);  
• 
sensitivity (population density and 
growth, dependence on fishing for food, 
dependence of crops for food, 
dependence on natural resources for 
income, condition of habitats, 
remoteness / accessibility); and  
• 
adaptive capacity (access to services, 
education levels, health index).  
67. Notably, indicators of climate change 
vulnerability are not all related to climate but 
are socio-ecological factors that influence 
the sensitivity of communities to climate 
change and their ability to adapt to future 
risks and change. Scoring criteria (low, 
medium or high) were developed for each 
indicator and data were reviewed by 
specialists who assigned scores for each 
indicator. 
68. The findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were then tested in a sample of communities 
across three provinces to ensure they 
reflected the reality of the challenges facing 
remote and rural communities in Vanuatu.  
69. The raw vulnerability rankings for each Area 
Council were then put through a 
prioritization process, accounting for recent, 
current and planned adaptation projects, 
government priorities, and cost of accessing 
/ delivering activities in each Area Council. 
70. This process resulted in a list of 29 Area 
Councils across all six provinces in which the project will work, reaching 282 communities and directly 
benefitting 90,157 people. All members of targeted communities are considered direct beneficiaries 
because the scale of activities will increase the climate resilience of all women, men, girls and boys in 
each targeted community (see Table 1, below). The full analysis and all data are available in Annex 23. 
Figure 5. National vulnerability assessment results for all Area 
Councils in Vanuatu, with targeted Area Councils identified. A larger 
version is at Annex 16.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
71. Implementation of the project, including the adaptations for communities to select and then apply 
locally, has been grouped into three main components: 
• 
Reducing exposure (to climate-related hazards); 
• 
Minimizing sensitivity (to climate change impacts); and 
• 
Building adaptive capacity (to current and projected climate change impacts). 
 
Table 1.  Target beneficiary numbers by Province and population and household numbers 
Province 
Area Councils (#)   
Population 
Communities (#)* 
Households (#) 
Tafea 
4 
21,534 
51 
3,868 
Sanma 
4 
10,618 
37 
2,325 
Torba 
3 
3,361 
15 
924 
Shefa 
6 
7,912 
35 
2,035 
Malampa 
8 
33,301 
99 
7,397 
Penama 
4 
13,431 
45 
3,007 
TOTAL 
29 
90,157 
282 
19,556 
*Community numbers are estimated from Vanuatu National Statistics Office data as they are not reported in the census. A range of very small 
villages have been combined with neighbouring villages to form communities for the purposes of effective project implementation and service 
delivery.  
72. Project activities are designed to respond to the needs and gaps identified through the vulnerability 
assessment and stakeholder engagement process, including: increasing local capacity to understand 
the implications climate change holds, generate locally-appropriate adaptation plans, and access and 
utilize up-to-date climate information and actionable early warnings; building  a flexible, scalable 
package of adaptation actions to build environmental resilience (via nature-based solutions), increase 
food security and diversify livelihood structures; and support enhanced system capacity at all levels to 
support local adaptation sustainably.  
73. These three components and outputs and activities are outlined below. The relationships between 
outputs are shown in Figure 8, below.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
Adaptation packages – approach and content 
74. The core intervention strategy of the project is delivery of the adaptation packages under Component 
2. Each package is a suite of adaptation activities that address the main drivers of community 
vulnerability (globally identified through a national vulnerability assessment and aligned with the 
resilience framework, finetuned through community consultations; see Annex 23). The development of 
a specific adaptation package gives communities options to select the most appropriate and effective 
adaptations and provides certainty that GCF investments are addressing the main drivers of climate 
vulnerability specific to the needs of each individual community. Activities in the adaptation package are 
designed to be modular and scalable. Specific activities can be increased, decreased or removed, 
depending on community circumstances. This makes the package approach tailored and highly 
transferable to the remaining communities in Vanuatu as well as to other contexts. 
75. Participatory stakeholder involvement during implementation will allow for a tailored set of adaptation 
actions to be selected from the adaptation package and increased local ownership, promoting long-
term sustainability of the adaptation actions in each community. The focus on empowering communities 
to participate in and lead all stages of adaptation, from selection to implementation to operation and 
maintenance, and capacity building for government, will build strong ownership and buy-in to the 
project by all beneficiaries and help the sustainability of the implemented actions. Final approval of 
Figure 6. Relationships between drivers of vulnerability and project activities. The inner-most ring characterizes the existing extreme 
weather and climate change challenges facing targeted communities. The second ring categorizes these challenges and their associated 
adaptation actions, represented in the third ring. The outer-most ring highlights cross-cutting issues that affect all categories of vulnerability 
and action.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
Community Adaptation Plans, which include the community’s specific adaptation package, will sit with 
the MoCC, as co-Executing Entity and link to national climate change policy processes.  
76. The adaptation actions are designed to be implemented over the six-year project and have flexibility to 
accommodate the specific climate change challenges and existing capacities within each community. 
Components of natural resource management and climate resilient agriculture and fisheries for food 
security and livelihoods can be scaled up as needed to suit the local context.  Each targeted 
community’s adaptation package will form part of their broader Community Adaptation Plan (the 
development of which the project will support under Component 1 activities). Each community will 
select a number of actions from the adaptation package menu that respond to the needs identified in 
their Community Adaptation Plan; these actions will be collated for implementation and will make up 
each community’s adaptation package. The Community Adaptation Plan may contain activities that go 
beyond the remit of the VCCRP. In these cases, the project will support communities to seek other 
sources of climate finance for implementation via an ‘investment plan’ component of the Community 
Adaptation Plan. The project-supported adaptation packages and the investment plan will both form 
part of the endorsed Community Adaptation Plan in each targeted community.   
77. Adaptation activities have been developed considering structural disadvantages experienced by 
women, children and people living with a disability. This will ensure that sustainable climate resilient 
development pathways also promote social justice and equality in decision-making. The project will 
work through established local governance structures and will partner with local-level civil society 
organizations where available to maximize the appropriateness, ownership and sustainability of 
adaptation actions.  
78. The Adaptation Package is made up of a menu of actions that fall under four broad community sectors: 
• 
Increasing the resilience of local natural resources upon which the local communities depend to 
climate change impacts using nature-based solutions (Output 2.1); 
• 
Climate-resilient small-scale agriculture for food security and livelihoods (Output 2.2); 
• 
Climate-resilient artisanal fisheries for food security and livelihoods (Output 2.3); 
• 
Climate-resilient food processing and preservation to support food security and diversification of 
livelihoods options (Output 2.4). 
79. The overarching package is outlined below in Figure 7, including the linkages between actions. Specific 
activities for each component of the package are provided in the section below.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
 
Components, outputs and activities 
Component 1: Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support local 
resilience to climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate information and early 
warnings 
80. The resilience of rural communities hinges in large part on: their awareness of climate change impacts; 
preparedness to proactively act when extreme weather events (e.g. cyclones or drought) occur, based 
on reliable early warning systems; and to make long term development decisions based on 
participatory local adaptation plans that incorporate up-to-date climate information. This component 
builds community and institutional capacity at the local level, integrated into a provincial structure, to 
plan for and respond to the current and anticipated impacts of climate change.  
Output 1.1: Community-based climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction mechanisms are 
strengthened 
81. Climate change impacts will result in an increase of disaster events which will have significant and 
ongoing impacts on communities. Strengthening local-level DRR mechanisms (the CDCCCs) is a 
critical component of reducing risk.  
Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
CDCCCs established and strengthened in at least 254 communities (assumed at 90% of targeted 
communities)  
Figure 7. The VCCRP Adaptation Package menu showing interlinkages between actions.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
• 
Gender balance achieved in 254 CDCCCs 
• 
Members of at least 254 CDCCCs have increased understanding of climate change, enhanced 
community leadership skills and ability to deliver climate change awareness training to community 
members 
• 
New communications channels (through SMS or social media) established for CDCCCs to request 
information/support from NDMO/Provincial Disaster Officers  
Activity descriptions 
1.1.1 Establish Community Disaster and Climate Change Committees (CDCCCs) (if necessary) and build 
their capacity, including strengthening social inclusion and gender-balance  
82. Activity 1.1.1 will establish new, or strengthen existing, CDCCCs and build their capacity, including 
strengthening social inclusion and gender-balance. Support will be provided to the national government 
(including the NDMO and  Department of Local Authorities (DLA)) in developing and field-testing of a 
CDCCC assessment instrument. CDCCC assessment indicators and methodology will be developed 
through an inclusive and participatory manner with key stakeholders and will include desktop and 
ground-truthed analysis of local contexts of where CDCCCs have been established, which are currently 
operational, and their inclusion of vulnerable groups. Field testing of the CDCCC assessment tool will 
take place to evaluate and improve the instrument prior to full implementation with all target sites. 
Consultations during field-testing will capture the perspectives of community members, including 
children/youth and people with disability, on how to strengthen their CDCCC (such as improving 
gender-balance). Based on CDCCC assessment instrument findings, tailored support will be provided 
to subnational government (including Area Councils and DLA) for the establishment and/or ongoing 
development of CDCCCs, including, where needed, CDCCC kits (containing two smart phones, one 
tablet, stationary supplies, a printer, a mini projector and five high-vis vests) and community workspace.  
1.1.2: Increase CDCCC member capacity to identify climate change and disaster risks at the local level, 
including providing leadership training (targeted at women) and establishing communication channels 
for CDCCCs to request information/support from the National Disaster Management Office (NDMO)  
83. Activity 1.1.2 will increase the capacity of CDCCC members in effectively identifying climate and 
disaster risk within their respective geographic boundaries. Based on CDCCC assessment findings, 
CDCCC members will be engaged in leadership and technical training (including climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction) sessions aligned to their respective needs and strengths. 
Traditionally vulnerable groups, including women and children/youth, will be engaged to participate in 
leadership-oriented training to enable greater participation in local adaptation planning processes. 
Follow-up refresher trainings will be conducted annually, with additional monitoring and support visits 
as needs arise. CDCCCs will be supported in establishing new, or strengthening existing, 
communication lines (including telephone, SMS/MMS/RCS, and social media) with the NDMO to 
enable requests for information and support in leading community education sessions on climate and 
disaster risk. 
Output 1.2: Communities have increased understanding of climate change impacts and are supported to 
develop inclusive local adaptation plans 
84. In order to take effective adaptation action, communities require an increased understanding of the 
implications of climate change for their impacts for their lives and livelihoods and the ability to 
effectively plan for current and future adaptation needs.  
85. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
90,157 people have increased understanding of climate change and its implications via 
participation in community education sessions  
• 
145 local government staff (Area Council) with the capacity to deliver awareness raising materials 
on climate change and disaster risks to food systems, livelihoods and disaster risk 
• 
144 community awareness media broadcasts/posts on climate change risks and impacts delivered 
to public via media/social media

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
• 
Baseline reports on biophysical and ecological conditions developed with at least 254 communities 
(assumed at 90% of targeted communities) 
• 
Baseline reports on household-level socioeconomic status and resource dependence developed 
with at least 254 communities (assumed at 90% of targeted communities) 
• 
Community Adaptation Plans developed with CDCCCs and households in at least 254 communities 
(assumed at 90% of targeted communities), developed by communities through a participatory 
process and approved by MoCC under national climate change policy processes 
• 
Prioritization of VCCRP adaptation package activities for delivery in at least 254 communities 
(assumed at 90% of targeted communities) 
Activity descriptions 
1.2.1: Community awareness raising on climate change risks to food systems, livelihoods and disaster 
risk via targeted information, education and communications (IEC) materials and information sessions 
managed by Area Council Climate Change Officers and CDCCCs 
86. Activity 1.2.1 will contribute towards building awareness in target communities on climate change and 
disaster risks to food systems and livelihoods by supporting Area Councils and CDCCCs with tailored 
IEC materials and training resources to facilitate community information sessions. A desktop review of 
existing climate change education materials (including those developed by other projects including GIZ 
CCPIR, RESCCUE, PEBACC, see Annex 2) aimed at community-level audiences will be reviewed to 
identify gaps and opportunities for improvement in partnership with sector stakeholders. Support will be 
provided to MoET and MoCC to incorporate project level information on climate change risks to food 
systems, role of habitats in supporting fisheries, livelihoods, disaster risk and adaptations options into 
existing material being developed for teaching and capacity building purposes. Digitized train-the-
trainer sessions with Area Councils and CDCCCs will be facilitated to ensure effective utilization of 
newly developed digital and paper-based IEC materials and key messages. Following dissemination of 
IEC materials, training opportunities will be scaled-up for interested community members, civil society 
organizations, and other local stakeholders. In conjunction with Activity 3.2.2, in-person knowledge 
exchange events will be held with local (including Area Council and CDCCC members), subnational, 
and national stakeholders to facilitate an additional entry point to champion consideration of local 
issues in subnational / national climate change adaptation planning processes. 
1.2.2: Identify key local issues that drive climate vulnerability and use this to develop local adaptation 
plans and measure program impact, including baseline biophysical and ecological surveys of key natural 
resources (habitats and species) that support food security and livelihoods as well as household 
socioeconomic surveys to document resource dependence and important natural resources to inform 
local adaptation actions 
87. Activity 1.2.2 will support identification of key challenges and barriers that drive climate vulnerability as 
well as existing local resources and adaptive capacities to inform development of local adaptation 
plans. The DLA will be provided with technical support toward capacity building of Area Council 
members in facilitating community profiling and assessing / documenting local climate vulnerabilities in 
alignment with the National Vulnerability Assessment Framework (NVAF) and other national sector 
guidance. Following digitized train-the-trainers sessions with DLA officers and Area Council members, 
participatory community profiling and local vulnerability assessments will be undertaken by local Area 
Council members. Rapid baseline surveys of key biophysical and ecological natural resources that 
support local food systems and livelihoods will be carried out, including assessment of threats to 
watersheds, erosion hotspots, mangrove and reef health, fish catch surveys, invasive species, and 
agricultural pests and diseases. In addition to collecting biophysical and ecological baseline data for 
assess project impact, household socioeconomic surveys will be conducted with national stakeholders 
(such as VNSO) to assess local natural resource dependence to inform adaptation interventions. 
1.2.3: Development of inclusive Community Adaptation Plans and identification of key resilience 
building actions (selected from adaptation package menu) through participatory processes facilitated 
by sub-national government and CDCCCs

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
88. Activity 1.2.3 will facilitate development of Community Adaptation Plans and identification of key climate 
resilience building actions from the VCCRP adaptation package menu of interventions. Building on 
findings from Activity 1.2.2 and in partnership with the DLA, a participatory and inclusive stakeholder 
engagement processes will be undertaken to develop Community Adaptation Plans, helping prioritize 
immediate to mid-term adaptation actions to address current and projected climate change risks, as 
well as identifying key areas for adaptation investment. Community Adaptation Plans will provide the 
foundation from which communities identify their local preference and priorities for VCCRP adaptation 
interventions, ensuring actions taken align to local needs, are socially acceptable, avoid adverse 
environmental and social impacts, and address the underlying local drivers of climate change 
vulnerability. The Plans will target both immediate adaptation priorities (some of which can be met via 
the VCCRP adaptation packages) and longer-term priorities, as well as identifying specific adaptation 
investment opportunities (including value chain and market opportunities) via an ‘investment plan’ 
component of the Community Adaptation Plan. Validation by community members (including Area 
Councils and CDCCCs) will enable finalization of Community Adaptation Plans and prioritization of 
VCCRP adaptation interventions to be undertaken. Community Adaptation Plans will then be updated 
on a three year cycle.  
Output 1.3: Communities have increased access to climate information services and early warning systems 
and the skills to utilise them as adaptation tools 
89. Output 1.3 will build on GCF FP035 (Van-KIRAP) to disseminate useable, accessible climate 
information to the community level, helping ensure that the climate information generated under Van-
KIRAP reaches the most vulnerable communities.  
90. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
Baseline assessment of existing access to EWS and CIS in 282 communities (assumed at 100% of 
targeted communities) 
• 
Increased access to CIS and EWS via telecommunications connectivity for at least 261 CDCCCs 
via installation of solar PV systems and internet connectivity with systems for on-selling data for 
financial sustainability 
• 
144 CIS communications delivered to communities via social media, text messages and radio 
• 
Technical competency in utilization of CIS and EWS increased in at least 254 communities 
Activity descriptions 
1.3.1: Develop and distribute CIS IEC products to support community adaptation awareness raising 
and adaptation planning processes building on products developed under FP035 (Van-KIRAP) and 
adapting them to the wider local context 
91. Activity 1.3.1 will support development and distribution of CIS IEC products to inform community-level 
climate change adaptation planning processes. In conjunction with Activity 1.2.2, a baseline 
assessment of existing access to EWS and CIS in target communities will be undertaken, including 
traditional indicators and knowledge as well as accessibility for people with disabilities and vulnerable 
groups. This assessment will be informed by a review of best practice on EWS. Based on 
demonstrated baseline assessment findings, support will be provided to enhance CDCCC infrastructure 
through the procurement and installation of solar PV systems (including batteries, lights, and wiring) 
and internet connectivity. Technical support will be provided to CDCCCs to establish a system of on-
selling data capacity to cover operational / maintenance costs and address long-term sustainability. 
Elderly members of target communities will be encouraged during community meetings to help identify 
and capture traditional knowledge (including knowledge and memories of cropping calendars and their 
changes over time due to climate impacts and cyclones) for early warnings of disasters or extreme 
weather events related to agriculture or fisheries, with an emphasis on highlighted local/community-
level expertise. CIS products and knowledge management materials will be developed (including print, 
digital, audio, and mixed media) for use in target communities in partnership with national authorities 
(including NDMO and VMGD). Opportunities to extend or scale-up CIS materials from other relevant 
projects (particularly Van-KIRAP / FP035) for community-level use will be preferred to ensure efficiency

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
and to avoid duplication of efforts. See Annex 2 Section 3.4.1 for more detail on VCCRP-Van-KIRAP 
collaboration.  
1.3.2: Build capacity of Area Council Climate Change Officers and CDCCCs to effectively utilize CIS 
in community planning processes, including scaling out FP035 community-level CIS training utilizing 
participatory processes 
92. Activity 1.3.2 will strengthen the capacity of Area Councils and CDCCCs in the use of CIS resources 
and information to inform community-level planning processes. Technical training materials will be 
prepared that address community needs and are tailored for community-level understanding 
(layperson) of climate and disaster risk. Tailored technical trainings will be facilitated with CDCCCs and 
community members (using digitized train-the-trainer model) on use of CIS products and resources, 
including integration of GESI considerations and youth-inclusive approaches. Collaboration on delivery 
of CIS technical training with Van-KIRAP (FP035) and national authorities (VMGD and NDMO) will 
avoid duplication of efforts. Building on Activity 1.2.1, community trainings will be delivered by CDCCC 
members on using CIS related to agriculture, fisheries, and disaster risk reduction, thereby increasing 
local knowledge base on understanding climate change. 
 
Component 2: Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community adaptation 
needs to create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways 
93. Vulnerable communities can only achieve climate-resilient food systems and livelihoods if their primary 
production is made resilient to climate shocks. This component focuses on strengthening agriculture 
and fisheries systems to achieve food security and promoting economic activities through local value-
chain improvements in order to diversify livelihoods options. This component is the core of the project 
and is built around the adaptation package menu which is flexible and scalable to community contexts. 
Output 2.1: Local natural resources are more resilient to climate change impacts through implementation of 
nature-based solutions 
94. Climate change impacts on natural resources that support food systems and livelihoods vary by 
location and over time and will, therefore, affect communities differently. Actions under this sector will 
support communities to build the resilience of their local ecosystem to ensure it can continue to support 
food security and livelihoods as climate change impacts escalate.  
95. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
At least 254 land use plans developed to guide community decision-making around the allocation 
of community resources 
• 
29 nurseries will be established to provide communities with native tree saplings to support re-
forestation  
• 
500,000 tree seedlings and 500,000 culms of vetiver grass (Chrysopogon zizanioides) will be 
distributed to communities for reforestation, erosion control and shoreline protection 
• 
At least 254 erosion management demonstration sites will be developed to highlight climate-
resilient land management, and 29 erosion hotspots (one per Area Council) will be rehabilitated as 
fully realized examples 
• 
A total of 11,600 hectares of agricultural and fisheries sites under better management, including: 
• 500 hectares of upland forest areas across 29 Area Councils will be protected via extended tabu 
areas 
• 200 hectares of forest area will be restored with native trees  
• 100 hectares of shoreline vegetation will be restored via replanting mangrove forests and invasive 
species management 
• 200 hectares of critical watershed areas protected through installation of micro-check dams and 
erosion control (including establishing living barriers) 
• 500 hectares of marine habitats will be protected by local conservation (tabu) areas

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
Activity descriptions 
2.1.1: Support adaptations that strengthen or rehabilitate coastal protection barriers, reduce risk of 
flood/landslides and improve water-security through nature-based solutions, including establishing living 
barriers to storm winds, erosion or landslide zones to fortify slopes and reduce erosion, and reforestation 
of damaged forests and water catchments 
96. Activity 2.1.1 will deliver community-based education on coastal and upland resource management 
(including role of mangroves in local fisheries and natural coastal barriers), working with CDCCCs and 
community leaders to ensure inclusive, participatory events that incorporate traditional knowledge and 
‘kastom.’ The education components will be parlayed into planning workshops with sector stakeholders 
(including Department of Environment Protection and Conservation (DEPC) and Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD)) for development of coastal and upland resource 
management plans (as a component of the Community Adaptation Plan). These community-led plans 
will be informed by activities under Component 1 that also address community education and 
identification of underlying issues that drive climate variability. Building on baseline biophysical and 
ecological surveys carried out under Component 1, this activity will establish living barriers (including 
planting mangroves and vetiver grass), support reforestation of damaged forests and water catchments 
(including growing saplings), manage invasive vine species impacting watersheds (identify and 
remove), and establish new / strengthen existing community conservation areas (including helping 
community leaders establish/expand ‘tabu’ areas). 
2.1.2: Introduce/scale up improved agriculture methods to minimise erosion, including establishing field 
demonstrations sites for soil erosion minimisation methods and facilitate groundwater recharge and 
distributing preventive species to communities.  
97. Activity 2.1.2 will support agriculture technical officers at DARD to develop, produce, and deliver 
training and education materials on climate-resilient agricultural practices, including reviewing and 
strengthening existing technical resources. Further support will be provided to DARD staff to undertake 
community participatory approaches to develop and implement site-specific strategies to combat soil 
erosion (including conservation methods, minimum tillage and contour planting/terracing). Based on 
community validation of erosion strategies developed, this activity will establish field demonstrations to 
showcase to local households and community members various approaches to mitigating soil erosion 
and facilitating groundwater recharge. Field demonstrations will be complimented by the distribution of 
trees and plants to prevent erosion (native tree saplings and vetiver grass) and tools to support 
implementation (planting at identified hot spots). 
2.1.3: Support communities to protect and rehabilitate habitats that support fisheries, particularly 
degraded coral reefs, seagrass meadows and mangroves, including establishing or enhancing traditional 
tabu areas for conservation of coastal resources and freshwater resources 
98. Activity 2.1.3 will support provincial fisheries officers to develop, produce, and deliver training and 
education materials on mangrove and reef health, sustainable fisheries practice and coastal zone 
management (including the role of habitats for coastal/marine resources). Further support will be 
provided to provincial fisheries officers to engage communities (direct beneficiaries) on identification 
and establishment of priority actions to address protection and rehabilitation of local coastal habitats 
(including reduced mangrove clearing, limited reef gleaning). Emphasis will be placed on collaborating 
with community leaders (including chiefly authorities and CDCCCs) on establishing new / enhancing 
existing ‘tabu’ areas for environmental conservation (including freshwater resources, reef fisheries). 
Degraded coastal resources (including mangroves, seagrass meadows and coral reefs) will be 
identified and rehabilitated as part of overall efforts to support communities to protect and rehabilitate 
habitats that support fisheries. Similar to Activity 2.1, invasive species (including crown of thorns 
starfish) in coastal habitats will also be addressed (identified and removed). 
Output 2.2: Climate-resilient agriculture for food security and livelihood development 
99. Climate change is affecting the success of traditional planting methods and ways of growing crops due 
to changes in local weather and climate, pests and disease. As climate change impacts escalate, food

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
insecurity will increase. Building the resilience of local agriculture practice is critical to preventing further 
degradation of food security and building surpluses for processing and marketing.  
100. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
Training of 17,072 small-holder farmer households in climate-resilient agriculture techniques for 
application in household plots (assumed at 90% of households in the project sites) 
• 
At least 254 demonstration sites of community-level climate-resilient agriculture  
• 
11,300 farmer households supported in the adoption of these more resilient agriculture methods 
and increasing their food security and livelihood options (assumed at 60% of households that 
received training) 
• 
29 crop and vegetable nurseries will be established to provide communities with seeds and 
saplings of climate resilient crop varieties  
• 
Seeds and seedlings will be distributed to 15,175 farmer households (assumed at 80% of 
households that received training) 
• 
Simple agricultural tools will be distributed to 15,175 farmer households to help increase their 
productivity (assumed at 80% of households that received training) 
• 
Climate-resilient kitchen gardens will be established in schools across 29 Area Councils 
Activity descriptions 
2.2.1: Support adaptations to traditional farming methods to increase climate-resilience and increase 
food security, including establishing field demonstrations of climate-resilient agriculture techniques 
101. Activity 2.2.1 will support DARD technical officers to perform a comprehensive stock take of exiting and 
traditional agriculture practices and seasonal crop calendars in target communities. The results of the 
stock take will support the DARD in development of training materials on climate-resilient agriculture 
and water conservation techniques (including intercropping, seed selection, grafting techniques, and 
planting management). Training materials produced and distributed will encompass existing DARD 
resources as well as new resources (such as video demonstrations on natural composting) focused on 
climate-resilient agriculture practices. DARD technical officers will be supported in undertaking training 
and education workshops at the community level. Public areas for field demonstrations will be 
established in partnership with community leaders to enable DARD technical officers to showcase 
climate-resilient agriculture methods using a participatory learning approach. 
2.2.2: Introduce/scale up adoption of climate-resilient native food and cash crop varieties, including 
establishing new or support existing nurseries in Area Councils for raising climate-resilient seed stocks, 
and distributing seedlings and tools to communities. 
102. Activity 2.2.2 supports the adoption (through increased supply and accessibility) of climate-resilient 
native food and cash crops through partnerships with nurseries and sector stakeholders (including 
DARD, VARTC, FSA) in target communities. Support for Area Council nurseries will include 
collaborating with stakeholders to supply and raise new climate resilient seeds and seedlings, and 
establishing multiplication plots of resilient food and cash crops. Prior to distribution, DARD technical 
officers will be supported to survey needs for accompanying agricultural tools and equipment for each 
target Area Council. Mass distribution of resilient native food and cash crops planting materials will be 
complimented by distribution of simple agricultural tools (including earth huger, rotavator) to increase 
productivity. Training will be provided to accompany distribution of new planting materials and tools. 
2.2.3: Establish/scale-up community-, school- and home-based kitchen gardens for enhanced nutrition 
utilising climate-resilient crops, including establish demonstration training gardens in schools to raise 
vegetable and tree seedlings for increased climate resilient nutrition and facilitating seed exchanges and 
seed saving to increase local independence and resilience. 
103. Activity 2.2.3 focuses on supporting adoption (through increased supply and accessibility) of kitchen 
gardens to promote enhanced nutrition utilizing climate-resilient crops. Delivery of family-based nutrition 
education on traditional diet and local food gardens with diversified climate-resilient crops will be carried 
out collaboratively with DARD and other sector stakeholders. Training and awareness materials will 
cover family-based (household, school, community) nutrition awareness and kitchen gardens to

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
promote nutrition and use of traditional food sources. Also covered will be agroforestry to promote 
healthy soils and water conservation (including using trees for shade, soil stabilization, improving soil 
moisture, etc.), as well as plant health and capacity building of community members to better identify 
and manage pests and diseases. Climate-resilient seeds, seedlings and plants will be procured and 
distributed in partnership with DARD. Public areas for field demonstrations will be established in 
partnership with community leaders to enable schools to raise vegetable and tree seedlings for 
enhanced nutrition. 
Output 2.3: Climate-resilient fisheries for food security and livelihood development 
104. Coastal and reef fisheries in Vanuatu are already impacted by current climate-related threats such as 
marine heatwave events, cyclones and terrestrial runoff. As climate change impacts escalate 
communities will see a significant reduction in the productivity of coastal resources, reducing fish 
populations and the catches needed to nourish households. Supporting communities to better 
manage the coastal zone and diversify their fish catch will help reduce pressure on coastal and reef 
ecosystems and supporting increased food security.  
105. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
Training of 11,734 artisanal fishers in effective coastal resource management to help protect 
coastal and reef ecosystems from further damage (assumed 80% of households in the coastal 
project sites reached) 
• 
Catch data recording system established in at least 202 communities to support more sustainable 
decision-making (assumed 90% targeted coastal communities) 
• 
At least 404 community champions identified and trained in local monitoring and management of 
coastal resources (assumed one female and one male champion in each of 90% of targeted 
coastal communities)  
• 
202 coastal communities establish community-led coastal resource management systems 
(assumed 90% targeted coastal communities) 
• 
Off-reef fishing equipment distributed to 112 communities (assumes 50% targeted coastal 
communities) 
Activity descriptions 
2.3.1: Build community capacity on coastal resource management and monitoring that supports 
sustainable fisheries, including via youth-focused skills development  
106. Activity 2.3.1 will build the capacity of target communities on coastal resource management through 
delivery of bespoke training and education programs. In parallel with Activity 2.1, communities will be 
engaged to assess coastal resource conditions (including habitats), direct and indirect threats 
(including mangrove clearing, overfishing), and current management and governance practices 
(including conservation or tabu areas). Community leaders will identify ‘community champions’, 
including youth champions, who will serve as focal points for activity implementation and 
communication to team members. Coastal resource assessments will inform the development of 
culturally appropriate and scalable coastal resource management training programs in partnership 
with key sector stakeholders (including Vanuatu Fisheries Department (VFD) and community 
champions). Support will be provided to VFD fisheries specialists for development and delivery of 
coastal resource management training program, including pilot implementation prior to upscaling to 
further project sites. 
2.3.2: Support communities to adopt primary community-based fisheries management to reduce climate 
change impacts, including supporting community-level implementation of climate-resilient fisheries 
management and development of locally appropriate governance mechanisms, as well as increasing 
diversification and sustainability of fisheries resources (alleviating pressures on inshore fisheries) by 
providing off-shore fishing equipment to communities 
107. Activity 2.3.2 will support adoption of primary community-based fisheries management given small-
scale fisheries with limited management and enforcement capacity. Training materials focused on 
building community-level capacity in leadership, monitoring, and effective governance will be

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
developed in consultation with ‘community champions,’ followed by delivery of training sessions in 
partnership with Area Councils and provincial government. Community champions will work in 
partnership with VFD fisheries specialists and community members to collect local fisheries data using 
community-based monitoring methods. Support will be provided to community champions in use of 
monitoring data to assess effectiveness of new fisheries management techniques, conduct refresher 
trainings for peers as needed, and establish long-term mechanisms for sharing data between 
communities and government. Support for implementation of climate-resilient management 
techniques focused on primary community-based fisheries management to reduce climate change 
impacts will be determined through community consultations and sector stakeholders (including VFD). 
Off-shore fishing equipment (including bottom fishing gear, and training on canoe making) will be 
distributed to target communities as a means of alleviating pressure on inshore fisheries and to 
support diversification and sustainability of fisheries resources. 
Output 2.4: Women-led climate-resilient food processing and preservation established to support food 
security and diversification of livelihoods options 
108. Climate change, including disaster events, impact on traditional crop and fisheries production and 
food-security, with reverberating impacts on local livelihoods and the availability of capital to purchase 
store-bought food stuffs. Food processing and preservation methods are key to climate-resilient food 
and livelihood systems, addressing yearly fluctuations in agricultural production and disasters such as 
cyclones, while facilitating commodity diversification. Food preservation and storage techniques will 
also extend the shelf-life of both agricultural and fisheries products, reducing food loss and improving 
quality, allowing for transport to markets, particularly for remote communities that are isolated from 
market centres. Food preparation and preservation at the household level is generally considered 
‘women’s work’ in Vanuatu. Women are equally as engaged in agriculture activities as men and 
participate in near-shore fishing for household sustenance. Women are also engaged in selling 
produce at markets. This output will focus on building women’s economic empowerment through 
community-level food security and income diversification activities. A key outcome will be supporting 
the establishment of women-led producer groups. These groups will be 100% owned and managed by 
women from target communities and will utilize project provided food preservation and processing 
technologies to develop value-add products for markets.  
109. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
261 communities utilizing climate-resilient food preservation techniques (assumed at 90% of 
targeted communities)  
• 
Solar food dryers distributed to 261 communities for use in preserving surplus produce and fish for 
food security and delivery to markets (assumes 90% of targeted communities) 
• 
Solar-powered freezers distributed to 261 communities for storing excess fish catch and produce 
for food security (assumes 90% of targeted communities) 
• 
Households in at least 140 communities utilizing salting and pickling for food preservation and 
marketing (assumed at 50% of targeted communities) 
• 
New livelihoods commodities (dried fruits, dried nuts, smoked fish, shell crafting, copra, coffee) 
adopted by at least 140 communities to increase incomes and diversify livelihoods (assumed at 
50% of targeted communities) 
• 
Establishment of 90 women-led producer groups to support communities to bring agricultural and 
fisheries goods to market, 30 led by young women (assumed average of 3 per Area Council) 
• 
Facilitation of at least six private sector partnerships to support access to distant markets for 
commodities (assumed at 1 per province) 
Activity descriptions 
2.4.1: Introduce or scale up women-led local solutions for food processing and preservation, including 
identifying foods most suitable for preservation and provision of processing equipment (solar dryers and 
freezers) to communities  
110. Activity 2.4.1 will introduce new (or scale up existing) local solutions for food processing and 
preservation as a means of supporting food security, reducing food loss and diversifying women’s

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
livelihood options to strengthen climate resilience. Local commodities that can be harvested or grown 
in target communities and are suitable for preservation will be promoted for cultivation and 
preservation in communities. Food losses are expected to be reduced when excess produce from 
agriculture and fisheries can be preserved. Target communities will be provided with educational 
information on relevant food processing and preservation techniques. Adaptation technologies for 
food preservation and storage (including solar dryers and solar freezers) will be supplied to 
communities to facilitate food processing. Target communities will be provided with support towards 
long-term use, operation and maintenance of food processing and preservation systems (including 
replacement parts, refresher trainings, and upskilling as needed). Key stakeholders (including Area 
Councils, DLA) will be provided with support towards identifying and addressing barriers to support 
successful adoption of adaptation technologies. 
2.4.2: Support women to diversify into new agricultural/food commodities and value-add products that 
deliver greater income generating opportunities, including identifying local value-add commodities with 
market potential and supporting processing  
111. Activity 2.4.2 will deliver outreach and educational information on recommended value-added 
products. Outreach will take place at the Area Council level, with further dissemination of information 
and materials to individual target communities based on relevance. A sub-set of targeted communities 
will be provided supported to develop new agriculture/food commodities and value-added products 
(dried fruits, dried nuts, smoked fish, shell crafting, copra, coffee) for income generation as a means of 
supporting food security and diversification of livelihood options. Participatory and inclusive 
community consultations (workshops and meetings) will identify and prioritize opportunities, ensuring 
a community-led process. A market analysis will be undertaken to inform how to best support 
community development of value-added products as well as increase access to new (distant) markets 
for emerging commodities, including for tourism through local cottage industries. 
2.4.3: Support women-led enterprises to access private partnership options to access new (distant) 
markets for value-add products  
112. Activity 2.4.3 will deliver outreach and educational information on recommended value-added 
products. Outreach will take place at the Area Council level, with further dissemination of information 
and materials to individual target communities based on relevance. Assistance with production and 
distribution of value-added products and agriculture/fisheries commodities will be channeled through 
women-led producer groups established at the community and/or Area Council level. In collaboration 
with the Vanuatu Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VCCI) (building on the Mobilizing Vanuatu 
private sector towards climate change action readiness activity delivered by GGGI), private sector 
partnerships will be identified and established to further support community-level enterprise and 
enhance access to markets, and, where possible, support producer groups to transition into micro or 
small enterprises (including support to identify longer term sources of finance for business 
development). 
Component 3: Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive governance systems 
at the local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages 
113. One of the key processes in adaptive governance is the feedback mechanism and integration of 
lessons learned into policies and procedures. Consideration of Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
(GESI) procedures in local planning will ensure that all vulnerable local individuals, households and 
communities are included in creating climate-resilient livelihoods in the rural areas. This component is 
key to ensuring the sustainability of the adaptation packages approach, by embedding the system of 
community adaptation planning and prioritization of actions into national and provincial planning and 
budgeting cycles. The component will also build the capacity of provincial and national actors to 
access and effectively use future flows of climate finance.  
Output 3.1: Adaptive local governance systems strengthened through sub-national planning 
114. To help ensure the sustainability of government supported adaptation actions at the local level, sub-
national government needs to integrate future climate risk into planning and budgeting processes and

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
have the institutional capacity to support the ongoing operations of CDCCCs. As disaster risk 
increases with the escalation of climate change impacts, ensuring government resources are able to 
flow quickly and efficiently to where they are needed is a critical component of building resilient 
communities. The development of shock-responsive social protection mechanisms is a key 
component of this process.  
115. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
Development of 29 Area Council vulnerability maps 
• 
Actionable analysis of gaps in Area Council institutional capacity to support local-level adaptation 
• 
Increased Area Council capacity to undertake local-level climate risk analysis and integrate climate 
risks into planning and budgeting processes  
• 
NDMO supported to design a climate-resilient, shock-responsive social protection system, including 
the development of locally appropriate targeting criteria to register the most vulnerable children and 
households in communities 
• 
NDMO supported to develop the framework for a cash transfer system to operationalize the social 
protection system 
Activity descriptions 
3.1.1: Support Area Council and Province officials to incorporate climate risk analysis and financing 
strategies into Area Council development plans and budgets 
116. Activity 3.1.1 will enable subnational officials to incorporate climate risk analysis (such as vulnerability 
mapping) into Area Council development planning and budgeting, and will incorporate assessment 
findings from Activity 1.2.2. Financing strategies will be included in the plans, identifying all relevant 
sources, including from the private sector through enterprise investment options and the communities 
through community funds, etc. Gaps and barriers to integrating climate risk into local development 
processes will be identified and addressed through the development of tailored technical trainings to 
Area Council members, provincial government officials, and other relevant stakeholders. In-person 
instruction with field demonstration will be coupled with ongoing technical support and resources to 
both operationalize training materials as well as assist with new or updated climate risk assessments 
when necessary. Continuity with development of Community Adaptation Plans from Activity 1.2.3 will 
be ensured to avoid duplication, contradictions, or inconsistent budgeting. Additional technical support 
and resources will be provided to Area Councils and provincial government officials to enable 
assessment of gender gaps (including existing gender and social deficits, best practices to reduce 
gaps, and recommendations moving forward) through gender-responsive climate change budgeting 
and planning. 
3.1.2: Build the capacity of local authorities to support operations of the CDCCCs and ongoing inclusive 
local adaptation planning processes, including supporting systems to increase two-way communication 
and engagement between Area Councils and CDCCCs 
117. Activity 3.1.2 will strengthen the capacity of local authorities (including Area Councils and CDCCCs) to 
carry out inclusive and effective adaptation planning at the local level. In partnership with the DLA, a 
diagnostic instrument will be developed and implemented to assess the capacity of Area Council 
officials and identify knowledge gaps, interests, and opportunities. Incorporating results from the 
assessment, as well as findings from Activity 1.2.1 and 1.2.2., a suite of technical training materials 
will be developed to address key competencies through a digitized train-the-trainer approach. 
Opportunities to bolster formal linkages between Area Councils and CDCCCs will be incorporated into 
capacity assessments and training materials to support increased communication and engagement. 
Ongoing linkages will be ensured by facilitating more frequent access to communities (including via 
provision of transport, i.e. quad bikes). Ongoing support will be provided to local authorities to 
encourage and enable the inclusion of sustainable budgeting for CDCCCs as a component of Area 
Council Development Plans. 
3.1.3: Support NDMO to design and establish a shock-responsive social protection system designed for 
the needs of the most vulnerable households

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
118. Activity 3.1.3 will utilise co-finance from Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to provide 
technical assistance to the National Disaster Management Office for the design of a government 
owned, shock-responsive social protection initiative. NDMO will be supported through a technically 
specialized procured party to develop and pilot locally appropriate targeting criteria based on needs 
(including inputs from Activity 1.2.2) and triggers determined by national-level indicators of shock such 
as drought and rainfall or local-level knowledge of community-specific shocks. The targeting criteria 
will be used to register the most vulnerable children and households in communities. Targeting criteria 
combined with trigger indictors will form the underlying framework for the system which in turn will 
further strengthen sub-national CIS and EWS systems (including via output 1.3). The system consists 
of providing primarily unconditional cash transfers for time-delimited consumption support in times of 
acute needs and stress. Delivery will occur through physical payment, vouchers or mobile money, to 
be determined during the design phase.   Upon the occurrence of a shock (sudden or slow-onset), 
activation of immediate cash transfer to registered households, possibly even before disaster occurs 
based on seasonal weather forecasting will enable households to prepare for shocks (natural 
hazards) or climate induced stress and address immediate needs before household resilience is 
eroded. The activity will include the generation of evidence and learning to understand perceptions of 
cash transfers including acceptability and accessibility of cash transfer mechanisms and targeting 
criteria. Note the activity exclusively focused on designing and establishing the system and will not 
include cash payments as that is out of the scope of this project.  
Output 3.2: Enhanced local-provincial-national linkages through knowledge management and creation of 
feedback loops 
119. Ensuring that project-supported processes and outcomes are shared between communities, Area 
Councils, Provinces and the national level will help build a culture of adaptation learning in Vanuatu 
and promote replication and scale up of successful adaptation actions.  
120. Activities under this output will result in: 
• 
The production and distribution of 30 annual knowledge management products, including in local 
languages 
• 
Engagement in 18 national, regional and/or international forums to disseminate local CBA 
knowledge 
• 
Systemized capture, evaluation, and reporting of data on CCDRRR sector policy implementation by 
at least 23 Area Councils  
• 
Annual dialogue meetings/forums held, increasing communication vertically across government to 
increase inclusion of local needs in planning decisions 
• 
1 national and 29 sub-national planning documents (e.g. strategic plan, business plans, etc.) 
reflecting long-term community needs identified by local actors 
Activity descriptions 
3.2.1: Capture lessons learned, emerging themes and best practices at the community level to ensure 
sub-national and national planning processes are informed by local needs and that local actions support 
national objectives 
121. Activity 3.2.1 will promote national and sub-national planning processes that are informed by 
community level experiences (such as capturing lessons learned, emerging themes and best 
practices) and that community-level actions are in support of national public policy objectives. Periodic 
evaluations will be carried out to assess progress against key outcome/performance metrics, as well 
as document lessons learned on the successes and challenges of project implementation. Bespoke 
knowledge management products and resources will be produced to communicate the insight and 
knowledge gleaned from evaluations (including impact assessments) directly to national stakeholders 
(including NAB Secretariat, MoCC, and PMO) involved in climate change governance and planning. 
Participation of community champions in national and regional forums on climate change adaptation 
governance (such as Pacific Resilience Partnership events and national climate change adaptation 
planning workshops) will be supported as a means of increasing communication and linkages 
between community-level and national stakeholders. Dissemination of knowledge management

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
products will occur in all three national languages (including English, French, and Bislama) to ensure 
inclusivity of all stakeholders. Additionally, knowledge management resources will be produced in 
multiple mediums (including text, video, audio, and interactive media) to further ensure inclusivity of 
people with disabilities to benefit. Linkages to international adaptation knowledge bases (including the 
FRDP and the Nairobi Work Programme) will be assessed through a comprehensive stocktake of 
relevant community-based adaptation frameworks, appraised against relevant project outcomes, 
followed by communicated/demonstrating these linkages in knowledge management products. 
3.2.2: Support local authorities in monitoring and evaluation of national CCDRR policies at the local level 
and increasing dialogue between stakeholders at all levels, including establishing a system to support 
sub-national authorities with reporting on implementation of national sector policies 
122. Activity 3.2.2 will support monitoring and evaluation of the national sector policy on climate change 
and disaster risk reduction, further aiming to strengthen linkages and communication between local, 
provincial, and national stakeholders. 
Subnational government (including Area 
Council and provincial officials) will be 
supported towards establishing systems 
to support reporting on implementation 
of the national CCDRR sector policy 
within local stakeholders’ respective 
subnational boundaries. In partnership 
with civil society (including  Vanuatu 
Climate Action Network (VCAN)), 
participatory events will be facilitated 
between national and subnational 
stakeholders (including government, 
private sector, and non-governmental 
organizations) to discuss actions to 
increase emphasis on long-term, 
community-level priorities within national 
and subnational planning and budgeting 
processes. 
123. Activities in the adaptation package 
under Component 2 are designed to be 
modular and scalable. Specific activities 
can be increased, decreased or 
removed, depending on community 
circumstances. This makes the package 
approach tailored and highly transferable 
to the remaining communities in Vanuatu 
as well as to other contexts. The specific 
contents of the package may alter based 
on broad country context (i.e. packages 
for another Pacific SIDS may look broadly similar while packages for a landlocked LDC in Asia may 
look significantly different) but the approach would be the same. Activities under components one and 
three are designed to ensure the sustainability of the adaptation package actions and help 
government to support and scale-up the approach over time to all rural communities in Vanuatu. 
124. The project’s activities are designed to directly address the specific climate drivers and vulnerabilities 
identified as key constraints to sustainable development in remote and rural communities in Vanuatu. 
The impact and response chains for each climate driver and project output are shown in Figure 8.1, 
below.  
 
Figure 8. Components of the project and interrelationships between outputs

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
125. The legal agreement between the GCF and Save the Children Australia (SCA) as Accredited Entity 
(AE) will be a grant agreement through a FAA. SCA, as the AE, will enter into legally binding sub-
grant agreements with the Co-Executing Entities – the Government of Vanuatu, acting through its 
Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC), and Save the Children Vanuatu (SCV) – to deliver the agreed 
project activities. MoCC will enter into agreements with other Government ministries including Ministry 
of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fisheries and Biosecurity, Ministry of 
Lands and Natural Resources, and Ministry of Justice and Community Services.   Formal project 
agreements with other ministries will be managed through both the established ‘Government 
Investment Program’ (GIP) system as well and intergovernmental MoUs between MoCC and other 
government ministries and departments. The GIPs outlines and formalizes: (1) the project; (2) the 
sources and destination of funds; (3) detailed budget; (4) specifics of project objectives and activities; 
(5) beneficiaries; (6) monitoring mechanisms; and (7) risk and risk management. The GIP system is 
integrated into the Government Financial Management Information System (FMIS) and linked to the 
Single Treasury Account (STA) for oversight and reporting against project expenditure.  Project 
funded activities not delivered through Government Ministries or the EEs will be undertaken through 
procured parties, e.g. specialized technical constancies. The MoUs will outline the accountability of 
other government ministries to the MoCC in the delivery of the activities. They will include the 
cascading of GCF and Save the Children Australia (SCA as AE) compliance requirements and project 
activity implementation coordination and reporting. The GIPs will be annexes to the MoUs.  No funds 
will be directly disbursed to community members in cash. All relevant goods and services will be 
Figure 8.1. Impact and response chains for each climate driver and project output

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
procured by the co-EEs or government partners. Note: any investment income earned on interest from 
the EEs GCF Bank accounts will be reflowed into the GCF project.      
126. Project implementation will be facilitated by the key stakeholder departments contained within the 
various ministries, specifically including the Department of Climate Change (DoCC), Department of 
Local Authorities (DLA), Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD), Vanuatu 
Fisheries Department (VFD), Department of Water Resources (DoWR), Department of Women’s 
Affairs (DWA), Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department (VMGD), and the National 
Disaster Management Office (NDMO). With sub-national government officials and extension offices to 
deliver agreed components of the adaptation package. Save the Children Vanuatu will also deliver 
several activities, such as community-level adaptation actions partnering with provincial governments, 
private sector and civil society partners in all six provinces. The MoCC will retain overall responsibility 
for the implementation of the project.  
127. Agreements between the co-Executing Entities and beneficiary communities will be captured in the 
Community Adaptation Plans before investments are made in the communities. The plans are 
developed, finalized and agreed by the communities supported by the CDCCCs and project staff. 
Once agreed they are approved by the Executing Entities. Once approved, they are implemented as 
outlined in the plans. 
128. Save the Children Vanuatu (SCV) and the MoCC will work with other government ministries and 
procured parties to deliver agreed national-level activities. Where required civil society and private 
sector entities will be engaged by SCV as procedure parties to deliver project activities where they 
have a comparative advantage in consultation with the Vanuatu Chamber of Commerce and the 
Vanuatu Climate Action Network (VCAN), and in coordination with the NAB. 
129. Co-financing from the Government of Australia will be managed through a grant agreement to SCA. A 
sub-grant agreement will be put in place between SCA to SCV managed through the Save the 
Children Award Management System (AMS). Funds will flow from SCA to SCV in the same way as all 
SCA to SCV projects from the SCA account in Australia to the SCV account in Port Villa. Compliance 
oversight and reporting is managed and documented through the AMS.   
130. Co-financing from the Government of Vanuatu to the project is managed through the GIP system 
(outlined above in paragraph 125), integrated into the Government Financial Management Information 
System (FMIS), and linked to the Single Treasury Account (STA) for oversight and reporting against 
project expenditure.   
131. The co-Executing Entities will work together through a single Project Management Unit (PMU) and 
technical team established in Port Vila, within the Department of Climate Change (DoCC). The PMU 
will maintain clear lines of communication between the project and the NDA/GoV; manage project 
implementation; undertake project-wide M&E; provide technical support to implementing partners on 
climate change impacts, adaptation and integration processes, Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) (including monitoring the project’s environmental performance and supporting the integration of 
gender, disability and social inclusion); lead communication and outreach activities; and lead 
coordination and cooperation with other projects, donors and organizations (see Figures 9 and 9.1, 
below).

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
132. The PMU will be led by a Team Leader reporting to the SCV Country Director and Director-General 
(DG) for Ministry of Climate Change. The Team Leader will line manage the other PMU members 
including a Finance and Compliance Specialist, Procurement Specialist, MEAL Specialist, ESS/GESI 
Specialist, Communications Specialist, Component Coordinators and Technical Advisers. 
Figure 9. Diagram showing the governance arrangements for VCCRP 
Figure 9.1. Diagram showing the flow of funds for VCCRP

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
133. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be formed and will be responsible for overall strategic 
oversight of the project. The PSC will support strategic high-level coordination and oversight and 
promote the interests of the project among senior country and regional level stakeholders. The PSC 
will also provide a high-level risk management function by reviewing and providing feedback on 
performance reports produced by the PMU. It will make decisions on critical project issues raised by 
Technical Working Groups (TWG’s) including amendments, budget allocations and endorsing 
management improvement actions arising from audits and addressing serious project quality and 
implementation issues (including major complaints and feedback that pose a reputational risk to the 
project, such as sensitive safeguarding issues that cannot be addressed by TWG). Project 
performance reports and outcomes from PSC meetings will be shared with the NAB to promote strong 
coordination and transparency. 
134. The PSC will be co-chaired by DG for Ministry of Climate Change and Country Director for SCV and 
will be comprised of all agency Directors involved in project implementation (DoCC, DLA, DARD, 
VFD, VMGD, NDMO, DoWR, DWA), Secretary Generals of provincial governments, VCCRP PMU 
Team Lead, and Representatives of Vanuatu Climate Action Network and Vanuatu Business 
Resilience Council. It is proposed that the PSC will meet twice each year (with extraordinary meetings 
called as required).  
135. The NDA for Vanuatu is the Director General for the Ministry of Climate Change (DG MoCC). As the 
MoCC is also the EE the DG MoCC has both NDA and EE accountabilities. However, the work of the 
DG MoCC as NDA is governed by the National Advisory Board (NAB) which is the decision-making 
mechanism.  The NAB is chaired by the DG MoCC but is a whole of government body with 
representative from across Ministries. The role of the DG MoCC as EE for the project is governed by 
the PSC with oversight for the Minister of MoCC. Conflict of interest is avoided by both mechanisms 
being mandated as multi-stakeholder decision making bodies. 
136. The PSC shall report and provide updates to the NAB when it meets 3-4 times per year. The NAB is 
responsible for bringing leaders of government and non-government organizations across all sectors 
together to promote greater levels of coordination among the many individual climate change and 
disaster risk reduction projects. The NAB remains independent of the VCCRP and the project will 
support the functionality of the NAB through technical support to the NAB Secretariat and ensure the 
PSC is accountable to the NAB throughout the project duration. 
137. A National Technical Working Group (NTWG) will be established to provide operational and technical 
oversight during implementation of the project. The NTWG will meet quarterly to provide feedback to 
the PMU on project performance reports, review and approve project documents prepared by the 
PMU and to address critical issues, discuss and provide feedback on recommendations from 
provincial technical working group meetings and address major operational and project quality issues 
impacting delivery (including significant complaints and feedback from communities and project 
stakeholders). The NTWG will be comprised of technical implementing officials from key government 
and non-government agencies (not senior management / Director level positions). 
138. Provincial Technical Working Groups (PTWG) will also be formed in each province. This body will 
replicate the function of the NTWG at the provincial level and will provide bottom-up feedback on 
project quality and implementation issues to the NTWG. This group will also meet on a quarterly basis 
and will be co-chaired by the Provincial Secretary Generals and the Save the Children Provincial 
Program Manager. The PTWGs will be comprised of the members of the provincial Technical 
Advisory Commissions (TAC) and attended by relevant provincial authorities such as Area 
Administrators and Community Liaison Officers as required. 
139. The proposed implementation structure for project operations is provided in Figure 10, below. Note 
The EEs will maintain final decision-making in respect of the implementation of the Project activities.

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
 
Accredited Entity Capacity: experience and track record 
140. Save the Children is the world’s leading independent organization for children, with 30 national 
organizations working together to deliver programs in more than 120 countries. In 2019, Save the 
Children delivered programs worth over USD 2.2 billion across 117 countries and directly reached 
over 38.7 million children. Our vision is a world in which every child attains the right to survival, 
protection, development and participation. Our mission is to inspire breakthroughs in the way the 
world treats children, and to achieve immediate and lasting change in their lives. Globally, Save the 
Children is implementing a portfolio of 100+ resilience-related projects and programmes valued at 
more than USD 200 million, including those with explicit objectives to reduce climate and disaster 
risks, as well as to increase adaptive capacity and speed recovery from shocks and stresses, as well 
as those which seek the social and economic empowerment of women and youth and the 
amplification of the voices of the most marginalized. 
141. Save the Children Australia (SCA) was accredited to the GCF in November 2019 on behalf of the 
global Save the Children movement. SCA were chosen to lead on the GCF for Save the Children due 
to our longstanding leadership role in climate change and Disaster Risk Reduction. The Accreditation 
Master Agreement (AMA) was made effective in May 2020.  
142. SCA has extensive experience of designing, delivering, evaluating and documenting approaches to 
community-based adaptation, including in Vanuatu, where we have worked for more than 25 years. 
Our approach is to support governments to deliver against their adaptation policy objectives and 
needs bringing a consultative approach to engaging a broad range of stakeholders, including 
communities, in the design of climate change interventions.  
Executing Entities Capacity: experience and track record 
143. The project is closely aligned to, and supportive of, key national and sector policies and strategies in 
Vanuatu. The project will have two Executing Entities: the Vanuatu MoCC and Save the Children 
Vanuatu (SCV). Both entities have extensive experience in managing and delivering climate change 
programs across Vanuatu at a range of scales and from a variety of funding sources (including the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Climate Investment Funds (CIF), the Australian aid program, 
the World Bank and the GCF). SCV is managed by SCA and utilizes the AE’s systems and processes. 
Figure 10. Proposed implementation structure for project operations

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
41 Government of Vanuatu (2014) Climate public expenditure and institutional review report, Vanuatu. Available here.  
The Vanuatu MoCC is the co-executing entity for GCF FP035 (via the Department of Meteorology and 
Geohazards) and is the executing entity for a number of donor-funded projects, including via the GEF. 
A review of climate public expenditure and institutional governance in 2014 identified several gaps in 
the delivery of climate change investment in Vanuatu, particularly as the newly established Ministry of 
Climate Change had not administered any climate change projects41. Since then, the government has 
made a concerted effort to address any capacity shortfalls, particularly focusing on the 
recommendations of the capacity assessment that suggested medium- and long-term actions to 
improve the governance of climate change and DRR funding through institutional capacity building. 
These actions have been supported by the dedicated M&E Unit within the Prime Minister’s Office and 
significant progress and improvements have been made in the country’s capacity to deliver large-
scale climate change projects. 
144. To ensure that the project can commence on time and meet agreed timelines and milestones, SCA 
will work closely with the co-Executing Entities to ensure that processes and approvals are in place at 
all levels. Save the Children has a history of delivering quality projects across a range of sectors in 
Vanuatu. Key government partners have staff in place within each province who can be mobilized to 
support project start up. Existing networks and relationships at the province level will ensure a smooth 
start up and on-time implementation. Further, the project has been designed to prevent over 
burdening any one government delivery partner to avoid straining absorptive capacity and creating 
capacity constraints that delay project implementation. This is a key lesson from the implementation of 
a range of previous projects, including FP035. Working with a range of relevant departments will 
ensure no one department creates funding bottlenecks as has been the experience with some 
previous projects. The project will also provide direct technical assistance to Government departments 
and other delivery partners and will be supported through Save the Children’s systems and national 
footprint. The breadth of the project will also help ensure community capacity is not overwhelmed. 
Working across all six provinces will enable us to spread the investment across space and time. 
145. A recent organizational review of SC-Vanuatu highlighted challenges in a few areas of capacity and 
procedures. These include issues with oversight of controls for child safeguarding; a lack of sufficient 
prioritization of humanitarian preparedness; gaps in risk identification and monitoring processes; and 
inadequate management oversight over key controls due to some outdated policies and procedures. 
Due to the relationship between Save the Children Australia and SC-Vanuatu, Save the Children 
Australia will work with Save the Children Vanuatu to establish a remedial action plan and tracking 
mechanism as well as provide on-going support in these areas at the organizational level (not just for 
GCF project staff) before and during GCF project implementation to support capacity development 
and reduce risks. Tracking the delivery of the remedial action plan will be included as a standing item 
on the Senior Management Team (SMT) quarterly meeting until completed. The expected completion 
date of the necessary action for the above-mentioned shortcomings is March 2022. 
146. Save the Children Australia completed an initial partnership assessment for The Government of 
Vanuatu represented by the Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC) in October 2021. The data collected 
for the assessment included a review of related policies, a 2020 Public Finance Management 
Assessment by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade for the Department of 
Education and Government of Vanuatu overall, and discussions with MoCC staff. The assessment 
found that MoCC has the experience and expertise to carry out the scope of work outlined in the 
project successfully. The results of the assessment highlighted that Save the Children should work 
together with the Government of Vanuatu and MoCC partners to better understand the strength of 
financial systems, including planning and budgeting, reporting, controls, and staffing. Similarly, while 
the team reviewed the Ministry of Finance and Economic Management (MFEM) and MoCC 
procurement guidelines, which were deemed to be adequate as outlined in their procumbent manuals, 
the team was unable to confirm how these policies and procedures are followed on a day-to-day 
basis. While the review identified no red flag risks, Save the Children will continue to collaborate with 
MoCC and plans to update the partner assessment on an ongoing basis including undertaking an 
additional compliance review of the consistency of the application of the guidelines prior to the 
commencement of this project.

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
42 The Government of Vanuatu has noted, including in its NDC, that significant external financing will be required if the country is to effectively manage the unavoidable 
impacts of climate change. 
43 Buchner et al. 2019. Global landscape of climate finance 2019, Climate Policy Initiative. Available here. 
44 Soanes et al. (2017) Delivering real change: Getting international climate finance to the local level, IIED Working Paper. Available here. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
147. To date, the majority of climate change adaptation projects in Vanuatu have either worked at the 
national level on capacity building and policy development or piloted community-based approaches in 
relatively small numbers of communities. The one large project that took a comprehensive approach 
to community-based adaptation (CBA) across the country is the GEF-supported Vanuatu Coastal 
Adaptation Project (VCAP, Phase 1), although CBA interventions were limited to a handful of islands. 
This trend holds true for the broader Pacific region and across the developing world, where the vast 
majority of CBA initiatives have been small scale, short term and of limited reach. Notable examples 
of on-going climate change adaptation (CCA) projects in Vanuatu (including those in late-design 
phase and closing/phasing out) are provided in Annex 2.  
148. As outlined in Section D.5, adaptation, including CBA, is the key component of Vanuatu’s national 
and sub-national response to climate change. As also noted, accessing finance to support CBA 
actions at the scale required to create transformational change has been difficult for governments and 
civil society. Communities in Vanuatu are some of the least responsible for the emissions that are 
causing climate change, but they are among the first to suffer the impacts and will feel these impacts 
more acutely than people in wealthier, less hazard-exposed countries42. The Government struggles to 
balance the broad range of adaptation priorities (from protecting critical economic infrastructure to 
building local climate resilience). This project will work to increase the accessibility of global climate 
finance to local communities. There is a clear argument for high co-finance and private sector 
engagement in mitigation action. The argument for poor countries to finance their own adaptation 
actions in response to a problem stemming from the unregulated use of the global commons, or to 
take out concessional loans to do so, is less clear. It is even less strong when the ultimate 
beneficiaries are communities on low-lying islands facing an ever-harsher climate not of their own 
making. Investing in CBA delivers significant benefits for communities across many development 
sectors, but governments struggle to find the resources to meet current development needs within 
communities, let alone proactively address anticipated future climate change impacts. The funding 
amount requested from the GCF for this project is commensurate with the scale of the problem and 
the Vanuatu Government’s desire to take a coordinated nation-wide approach to addressing 
community adaptation needs. 
149. Despite global climate finance continuing to increase over time the amount allocated to adaptation has 
remained relatively static in recent years, at around USD 20-30 billion (10-15% of public climate 
finance, but less than 5% of total climate finance).43 While it is difficult to accurately account for the 
total flow of climate finance to the community level, a recent assessment estimated that less than 10% 
of climate finance flowing from dedicated multilateral, bilateral and regional climate funds between 
2003 and 2016 was “approved for locally focused climate change projects.”44 The assessment 
estimated this figure was around USD 1.5 billion, of which around USD 1.3 billion was allocated to 
CBA activities – equating to an average of USD 93 million allocated to CBA annually since 2003. This 
represents a tiny proportion (around 0.02%) of total global climate flows. This rises to just under 0.4% 
when taken as a percentage of public climate finance flows for adaptation – still an insignificant 
number compared to the known needs at the community level.  
150. Within these total flows, some funds and donors have attempted to prioritize CBA, but only at small 
scale or in competition with other priorities. For example, the GEF has a dedicated community-based 
mechanism – the Small Grants Programme (SGP), which channels funding direct to communities and 
civil society groups for a range of issues, including adaptation. The SGP is an excellent and well-
regarded mechanism; however, individual grants are capped at USD 50,000, necessarily resulting in 
very small-scale pilot activities. In Vanuatu, for example, the SGP has supported 60 projects since 
2007 with total funding of USD 2.3 million – averaging at USD 38,000 per project. Projects at this 
scale can have a significant impact on local lives, but they are not likely to result in transformational 
change.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
151. With the scale of need at the local level growing and the majority of donors choosing to remain 
focused on national level programmes, there is a significant gap in climate finance that the GCF is 
well positioned to fill. Investing in CBA is not likely to be a high priority for many governments with 
scarce resources and competing interests, particularly in the face of patchy documented evidence of 
the impacts of community-based approaches working at scale and driving transformative change.  
152. Without substantial investment from a mechanism like the GCF, CBA is likely to remain a small scale, 
pilot approach that struggles to make an impact beyond individual communities. With GCF 
investment, the government of Vanuatu will be able scale up community-based approaches to drive 
transformational changes in the way adaptation is conceived, from the bottom up, and provide the 
donor community with the evidence they need to proactively invest in participatory approaches to 
building community resilience. The Government of Vanuatu is committed to CBA approaches; 
however, domestic resources are insufficient to take CBA to scale, and bilateral donors are spread 
across a wide range of sectors and are unlikely to focus sufficient resources to catalyze scale in CBA. 
153. There is a strong justification for the GCF funding request. The additional burdens on communities’ 
resilience from the increasingly evident impacts of climate change are already significant and will only 
grow over time. Sudden onset events, like TC Pam and TC Harold, have resulted in economic 
devastation across the country (with the impact of TC Pam alone estimated to be USD 450 million or 
64% of Vanuatu’s GDP), with remote and rural communities particularly affected. The need for these 
communities to have substantially increased climate resilience is clear as the global emissions profile 
is only slowly bending downward and is currently not on track to achieve the Paris Agreement’s goal 
of keeping global temperatures well below 2°C. The project will work nation-wide, reaching 44% of the 
rural population (which is in itself 75% of the country’s total population). A further 110,000 rural people 
will be indirectly reached – increasing the project’s total reach to 95% of the rural population. Meeting 
the adaptation and resilience needs of these communities is critical, relatively expensive, and funding 
is not available via other mechanisms. 
154. It is clear that the Government of Vanuatu does not currently have sufficient funding from any source 
(including domestic resources, donor funds and global climate finance) to meet immediate adaptation 
needs at the local level, particularly as the island nation has a highly decentralized and dispersed 
population. It is equally clear that donor funds are not an adequate source of CBA finance, as they are 
shorter term and smaller scale. Grant funding is the most appropriate level of concessionally for CBA 
activities as they are not of interest to the private sector finance and contain no direct repayment 
capacity. CBA activities that are not funded directly by government or cannot be self-funded by 
communities are not viable without external assistance. In the context of Vanuatu, the government 
does not have the capacity to meet adaptation needs and rural communities do not have the 
resources to self-support required adaptation actions. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
155. The VCCRP adaptation packages, under Component 2, are designed to be modular and scalable. 
Specific activities can be increased, decreased or removed, depending on community circumstances. 
This makes the package approach highly tailored to direct beneficiary needs and transferable to the 
remaining communities in Vanuatu (indirect beneficiaries). Activities under Components 1 and 3 are 
designed to ensure the sustainability of the adaptation package actions and help government to 
support a scale out of the approach over time. 
156. Consultation with DLA during the feasibility study identified opportunities during implementation to 
have CDCCCs captured in the Decentralization Act and formally recognized in the service delivery 
structure as a way of getting them sustainable resourcing and supported. This is a key outcome the 
project will support by strengthening and demonstrating the value of the CDCCCs.  
157. The governance capacity building activities in Component 3, provide further potential for government 
and/or future climate finance to use the same menu and support further menu items in the same 
communities (along with scaling out to further communities). 
158. Six key sustainability strategies will be employed to ensure project impact will be sustained over time: 
• 
Building the evidence base to advocate for the national government to allocate future 
climate finance and other resources to support locally driven adaptation actions. CBA

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
45 See https://www.iied.org/principles-for-locally-led-adaptation  
projects have proved highly successful. However, many have been small scale and have struggled 
to gain traction beyond targeted communities. This project aims to build a substantial evidence 
base of the impact of CBA when taken to scale across the entire country. This will increase the 
likelihood of future climate finance flows in Vanuatu including an allocation to support CBA 
activities. This will be achieved via activities in Component 3 (i.e. 3.2.1), the project’s MEAL 
(including an impact evaluation) and broader AE activities. The project will deliver 40 knowledge 
products to a range of stakeholders. The project will also work to support the Department of Local 
Authorities (DLA) to have at least 50% of the new staff hired for the project at the sub-national 
taken on as permanent staff in the DLA at the provincial and or Area Council level. 
• 
Allocation of national budget resources to local adaptation actions. The project will work with 
provincial governments to integrate the risks of climate change as well as current and future 
adaptation actions into local planning and budgetary processes such that experiences in selected 
communities and Area Councils can be upscaled to other areas of the province, sharing lessons 
learned with NAB and other national stakeholders to foster scaling up of the actions on a national 
scale. Having adaptation actions included in formal budget submissions will increase visibility of the 
needs and capacities of communities and increase the likelihood of domestic resources being 
allocated to sustaining the impact of the project over time. A key aim of this project is to ensure 
communities are better positioned to access domestic resources for adaptation action. As 
Vanuatu’s economy gets back on track and resumes projected growth trajectories post COVID-19, 
adaptation priorities at the community level may find domestic funding sources such that the 
experience of the project can be applied elsewhere in the country. Despite this, international 
climate finance will remain a key source of adaptation support for the foreseeable future. A further 
key aim of this project is to ensure communities and sub-national governments are better 
positioned to access future flows of climate finance for adaptation action regardless of the source. 
The project will deliver training to 145 government staff on integrating climate change risks and 
adaptation actions into local and provincial budgeting processes and support targeted officials to 
undertake adaptive budgeting processes during project implementation to influence future 
processes. The project’s aim to have at least 50% of local level project staff maintained as 
permanent DLA staff by the project’s conclusion, will also help increase local level capacity to 
access and utilize future flows of climate finance.  
• 
Promoting local ownership. All activities implemented at the community level will be based on 
community stakeholder engagement combined with climate impact information. Communities will 
determine how to implement and sustain the adaptation actions (from the adaptation package). 
This ownership over project activity implementation at the community level will increase the 
likelihood that activity outputs and outcomes will be sustained beyond the life of the project. 
Stronger and more resilient food systems will reduce the impact of tropical cyclones and reduce the 
economic cost of rebuilding. Previous experience in developing and implementing CBA activities in 
Vanuatu and beyond has shown that the more engaged and in control community stakeholders are 
in how activities are implemented the more likely the outcomes are to be sustained and replicated. 
This approach is also in line with the Principles for Locally-led Adaptation45, developed by a 
partnership of peers formed under the Global Commission on Adaptation. Save the Children has 
endorsed the principles and will endeavour to fulfil them in our climate finance projects. 
• 
Ensure financial sustainability of the project. The project will aim to maximize GCF financing to 
address inevitable on-going operation and maintenance (O&M) related expenses associated with 
introduced adaptation technologies (including solar PV freezers and solar air driers) to reduce the 
likelihood of negative externalities such as equipment falling into disrepair or breaking down. 
Detailed strategies are included in the project activities that include training for target communities 
on installation, operation, maintenance and repair of all equipment, and budget to provide spare 
parts or training in using local materials for repairs and maintenance. This guidance on post-
sale/installation O&M considerations will also be supplied to the DoCC on the selection and 
procurement of adaptation technology services for use in communities. Targeted trainings will also 
be provided to address long-term maintenance and operation challenges. A further key component

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
of financial sustainability is the capacity of beneficiaries to maintain/expand project-supported 
adaptation actions over time beyond the life of the project. In the Vanuatu context, for remote and 
rural communities, the reality is that government support will be needed long term to support local 
level adaptation action. The project will work with government at all levels to increase capacity to 
access and effectively utilize future flows of climate finance, while also supporting communities to 
develop clearly articulated and prioritized adaptation plans, which include key investment options 
and opportunities. Supporting local producer groups to access markets for processed and 
preserved food products will also help increase incomes, increasing funds available for local 
adaptation actions. The project will foster at least six partnerships between producer groups and 
private sector entities as examples that can be scaled out by industry actors with ongoing VCCI 
support.  
• 
Build capacity of government and civil society systems to enable improved service delivery 
of future climate adaptation initiatives. The project will support the strengthening of existing 
government and civil society systems and staff, strengthening the nationally endorsed 
decentralized approach rather than re-organizing arrangements or introducing new structures. For 
example, fiduciary arrangements for the project will utilize a de-centralized financial management 
approach relying on pre-existing line structures located in the Corporate Service Units of each 
Ministry. Similarly, the project will utilize Area Council structures and processes for implementation 
at the community level. The utilization and strengthening of these existing government systems 
(which may vary in effectiveness currently amongst Ministries and Area Councils) will provide 
improved capacity for national service delivery in the future. The project will help build strong 
coordination mechanisms within the 29 targeted Area Councils and increase the effectiveness of 
local-provincial-national connections and feedback loops. Increased connectivity of CDCCCs (via 
satellite internet connectivity supported by the project) is key to this increased coordination and 
cooperation, as real time data and information can flow in both directions. The connectivity will be 
sustainably financed by a) a government commitment to enhanced CDCCC connectivity and b) the 
ability of CDCCCs to on-sell unused data allocations to community members for a range of 
purposes – including the potential for online study programs linked to other adaptation actions and 
market engagement. The project’s aim to have at least 50% of local level project staff maintained 
as permanent DLA staff by the project’s conclusion, will also help increase local level capacity to 
deliver adaptation services over the longer term.  
• 
Foster sustainable value chains in the local market. Food surpluses from agriculture and 
fisheries will be preserved and marketed through national private sector entities. Food surpluses 
are expected to be generated due to improvements in agricultural and fisheries practices, including 
through access to improved CIS, as well as significantly reduced losses from excess production 
and improved handling of produce. Food preservation is essential due to the long distances and 
limited transportation options between the project sites and the main commercial and residential 
hubs of Vanuatu. Establishing the value chains ensures a small but steady supply of income to the 
community with which the operation and maintenance of the installed processing technologies can 
be supported over the long term. Once communities have realized the potential of marketing food 
surpluses, this may lead to autonomous growth without the need for further external financial 
support, especially through fostering of twinning arrangements between local producers and 
private enterprises in the food sector. For the private sector entities, engagement in the project and 
the creation of new commodity supply lines is expected to aid in the green economic recovery 
following the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, in collaboration with the VCCI, private sector 
partnerships will be identified and established to further support community-level enterprise and 
enhance access to markets, and, where possible, support producer groups to transition into micro 
or small enterprises (including support to identify longer term sources of finance for business 
development). 
159. The project’s implementation arrangements with co-execution by government and Save the Children, 
will promote sustainability through: 1) increasing line ministry and provincial governments’ capacity to 
support adaptation at the community level; 2) substantially strengthening local implementation 
structures to ensure they are ready and able to identify local adaptation needs; and 3) the enduring 
links Save the Children has with communities in Vanuatu. Furthermore, the project will aim to have at

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
least 50% of the new staff hired for the project at the sub national level transferred to and taken on as 
permanent staff in the Department of Local Authorities (DLA) at the provincial and or area council 
levels. This will further embed the skills and project experience into government systems and 
structures supporting long-term sustainability by enhancing the government ability to manage future 
adaptation programming irrespective of the source of funding. 
160. Any assets purchased for project implementation will be procured by government or handed over to 
key implementing agencies in the Vanuatu national government or Area Councils towards the end of 
implementation as will be mandated in a comprehensive Exit Strategy to be developed during the 
initial stages of implementation. 
161. The planned VCCRP adaptation package and activities will continue to be scaled-out by implementing 
partners in the future after the project is completed as activities are designed to be modular and 
scalable. Specific activities can be increased, decreased or removed, depending on community 
circumstances. Thus, the package approach is tailored to meet direct beneficiary needs and is 
transferable to all rural communities in Vanuatu (indirect beneficiaries). Activities under Components 
2 and 3 are designed to ensure the sustainability of the adaptation package actions and help 
government to support a scaling-up of the approach over time.

=== PAGE 51 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
26,182,878 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % 
equity return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
26,182,878  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
6,467,562 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Australian 
Department of 
Foreign Affairs 
and Trade 
Grant 
4,625,040 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Government of 
Vanuatu 
In kind 
1,541,230 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Save the 
Children 
Australia 
Grant 
301,292 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
32,650,440 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Parallel financing: 
United Nations Development Programme / Global Environment Facility  
(USD 12.5 million) 
 
162. UNDP is in the final stages of design and approval for the second phase of 
the GEF-funded Vanuatu Coastal Adaptation Project. Phase 1 was 
completed in 2019. Phase 2 (VCAP-2), which aims to improve the resilience 
of vulnerable areas and communities to the impacts of climate change 
through the conservation of biodiversity and natural ecosystems, will 
commence implementation in 2022. SCA and UNDP have collaborated on 
site selection to ensure no overlap of targeted communities. The two projects 
will cooperate closely during implementation to ensure complementarity of 
activities at the local level, sharing of lessons and outcomes, and ensuring 
that national and provincial level work under each project is well coordinated 
and mutually reinforcing.

=== PAGE 52 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in Section B.3 
above and disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a 
single component or output. Provide the summarized cost estimates in the table below and the 
detailed budget plan as Annex 4. 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financia
l 
Instrume
nt 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 1 
Output 
1.1 
2,060,687 
1,751,424 
Grants 
309,263 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
1.2 
1,401,149 
1,196,775 
Grants 
204,374 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
1.3 
3,217,477 
3,074,374 
Grants 
143,103 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Component 2 
Output 
2.1 
4,388,046 
4,176,602 
Grants 
211,444 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
2.2 
3,875,004 
3,639,309 
Grants 
235,695 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
2.3 
1,450,329 
1,321,402 
Grants 
128,927 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
2.4 
4,848,679 
4,754,172 
Grants 
94,507 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Component 3 
Output 
3.1 
6,968,283 
2,227,622 
Grants 
4,625,04
0 
 
115,621 
Grants 
 
In Kind 
Government 
of Australia 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Output 
3.2 
1,538,9922 
1,440,696 
Grants 
98,296 
In Kind 
Government 
of Vanuatu 
Component 4 
Output 
4.1 
1,429,494 
1,429,494 
Grants 
 
 
 
Project Management 
Component 
1,472,300 
1,171,008 
Grants 
301,292 
Grants 
Save the 
Children 
Australia 
Indicative total cost 
(USD) 
32,650,440 
26,182,878 
6,467,562 
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 
17, if available. 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
163. The project will build significant capacity among targeted beneficiaries across several key 
climate change related challenges. Outputs under Component 1 will build knowledge and 
awareness of climate change impacts and locally-appropriate adaptation options as well as 
building local capacity to develop community adaptation plans. Outputs under Component 2 
include activities designed to build local capacity on climate-resilient agriculture and fisheries

=== PAGE 53 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
techniques, as well as help communities diversify their livelihoods by building capacity around 
food preservation and development of value-add products. Low tech adaptation technologies 
(solar dryers and freezers) will be transferred to communities to facilitate the application of 
new capacity to local resilience building initiatives. Further capacity will be built at subnational 
and national levels to help ensure the integration of climate change risks and adaptation 
actions into Area Council and provincial planning processes, and to support the scale out of 
project activities to further Area Councils by government agencies.  
164. The total budget allocated to capacity building activities across all project components is 
$2,113,674.  
165. The total budget for adaptation technology transfer under Component 2 is $1,632,075  
Note on withholding tax. There is no withholding tax applicable to GCF funds transferred between 
the GCF and the AE in Australia and the EE’s in Vanuatu.

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
166. The project will make a contribution to the GCF’s overarching adaptation impact – contributing to 
increased climate-resilient sustainable development – by directly increasing the climate resilience of 
90,157 people in Vanuatu (33% of the total population / 44% of the rural population), focused on the 
most vulnerable and socially marginalized groups. Direct beneficiaries at community level will benefit 
from activities under Component 2, via implementation of the adaptation packages through the 
adoption of climate resilient agriculture, fisheries and diversified/enhanced livelihoods resilient to the 
conditions of flooding, storm surges, salinization, drought and heatwaves (marine and terrestrial); as 
well as from activities under Components 1 and 3. Direct beneficiaries at provincial and national 
levels will also benefit from activities under Components 1 and 3. Farmers and fishers will benefit from 
reduced vulnerability through the use of improved climate information services and early warning 
systems, adoption of resilient food production techniques, as well as income diversification. The 
project prioritizes measures to address the resilience needs of small farmers – who have limited 
access to markets, financial instruments, agricultural and climate technological advice and who suffer 
from poor basic infrastructure – and of vulnerable groups such as women, youth and people with 
disability. Beneficiary numbers were calculated via a systematic approach to beneficiary identification 
at Area Council level based on published statistics and data. Communities in 29 Area Councils across 
all six provinces will receive inputs selected from the adaptation package menu, based on their 
evolving needs and local context. More detailed information on beneficiary selection and targeting is in 
Annexes 2 and 23. 
167. The project will contribute to several of the GCF’s Fund-level adaptation and enabling environment 
outcomes including: 
• 
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and communities as it targets some of the most climate vulnerable 
remote and rural communities in Vanuatu with support to build adaptive capacity; 
• 
ARA2 Health, well-being, food and water security as it will help significantly strengthen local-level 
climate resilience via increased food security, diversified livelihoods strategies and reduced 
disaster risk; 
• 
ARA4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services as it will help protect and rehabilitate critical ecosystem 
services for local food security and livelihoods; 
• 
Core indicator 5 (Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and 
regulatory frameworks for low emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven 
manner) by supporting development and implementation of sub-national level adaptation planning 
and implementation coordination mechanisms; 
• 
Core indicator 6 (Degree to which GCF investments contribute to technology deployment, 
dissemination, development or transfer and innovation) by supporting introduction of climate 
resilient food production and processing tools, systems and technologies; and  
• 
Core indicator 8 (Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation 
and learning processes, and use of good practices, methodologies and standards) 
 
168. The project will also increase the GCF’s reach at the local level – highlighting the Fund’s ability to 
directly impact the lives of vulnerable people with practical adaptation actions that measurably build 
climate resilience. The project will work nation-wide, reaching 44% of the rural population (which is in 
itself 75% of the country’s total population). A further 110,000 rural people will be indirectly reached – 
increasing the project’s total reach to 95% of the rural population. The entire population of Vanuatu 
(272,000 people) will ultimately benefit, as the project will operate nation-wide and will help improve 
structures and coherence for adaptation actions at all levels.

=== PAGE 55 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
169. The project will result in substantial reductions in the risk of loss of lives and assets due to reduced 
exposure to extreme weather events; as well as a significant increase in the number of people 
adopting climate-resilient livelihoods options. It will also increase the number of households with year-
round food security.  
170. The project is aligned with the Updated Strategic Plan for the Green Climate Fund: 2020-2023, as 
contained in document GCF/B.27/21, particularly with regard to the vision (Promote the paradigm shift 
towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways in the context of sustainable 
development). The project directly contributes to the adaptation priorities of the Government, engages 
directly in design and implementation with local communities, including marginalized groups, and 
fosters engagement by the private sector through local value-chain development of primary food 
processing in the local communities. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
171. The project will lead to a paradigm shift away from an agricultural system that is highly sensitive to 
climate change to climate-resilient food productive systems which ensure food and water security for 
farmers and fishers. Achieving reduced vulnerability and increased resilience requires a shift in 
agricultural and fisheries practices in Vanuatu. GCF funding will support this project to make remote 
communities resilient to the impacts of climate change, through a transformation in the way adaptation 
actions are conceived and implemented. Providing local communities with up-to-date climate 
information and projections; empowering them to make informed decisions about the nature, timing 
and type of adaptation actions they want to take; and resourcing them to follow through and feed 
results upward through governance structures to create a fundamental shift in the way adaptation is 
pursued. To date, a largely top-down approach to CBA has resulted in adaptation actions at the local 
level that are not community ‘owned’ and, therefore, not consistently maintained or sustained after 
project funding concludes.  
172. The project will support many of the transformational success factors identified by the Government of 
Vanuatu in their GCF country programme46, including: a demand-driven/bottom up approach that 
meets local community needs; a robust exit strategy; leveraging private sector expertise; fit-for 
purpose solutions (without maladaptation); transparent selection of project beneficiaries; transparent 
selection of delivery partners; integrated sectoral approach; capacity building; community-based small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs); communication and outreach; meaningful engagement with CSOs 
and NGOs; and integrating GCF and other climate finance into annual development programme, 
planning and policy. 
173. The project aims to result in a step change in the scale at which CBA is conceived and implemented 
in Vanuatu and beyond. For CBA, the key paradigm shift is mobilizing resources at scale and with 
sufficient implementation time to ensure community structures are built and have the capacity to 
continue to operate effectively, with government support, beyond the life of the project. The project 
also aims for a transformation in the accessibility of climate finance at the community level. Too often 
climate finance hits bottlenecks at the national or provincial level. This project aims to ensure that 
communities are ready to access and effectively utilize future flows of climate finance from a range of 
sources. Lessons from this project will be applied in future CBA projects developed by Save the 
Children and communicated widely to the broader CBA community. 
174. The project will help overcome information, technical, financial, social and institutional barriers that 
prevent a transition from conventional practices by delivering a package of proven and validated 
measures that will: improve the resilience of local production systems; increase the efficiency of 
agriculture and fisheries food and water management at the local level; and improve inter-institutional 
coordination and local governance capacity. The project is also transformative in its focus on 
promoting women’s equitable representation in project activities and enabling greater economic 
empowerment and participation in decision making by women, youth and people with disability. The 
project will contribute to each of the GCF’s assessment factors from the Investment Framework: 
• 
Potential for scale up and replication – Taking CBA approaches to scale in one country will 
provide lessons and a platform for replication across different contexts. This model will seek to 
 
46 Government of Vanuatu (2018) Vanuatu’s Climate Transformation with Green Climate Fund: Country Programme

=== PAGE 56 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
prove that CBA approaches can work at scale and will set the foundations for a scale up across 
and between regions. The model could also be scaled to reach all remaining communities in 
Vanuatu via a combination of domestic resources and future climate finance.  
• 
Institutional knowledge and learning – Part of each project component will be dedicated to 
knowledge sharing and learning engagement between national and sub-national government within 
Vanuatu. In particular, Component 3 activities will support linkages across different levels of 
government within existing governance structures in Vanuatu and ultimately the knowledge 
generated will contribute to the broader CBA evidence base. 
• 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment – In order to provide for the longer-
term sustainability of any adaptation technologies provided to communities, the project will ensure 
adaptation package actions and implementation align with and support existing government 
systems and processes. Importantly, the project will ensure that government systems and 
processes are reflective of local needs and have the capacity to support them by strengthening the 
current vision of decentralization. This is a key paradigm shift in a country that has largely been 
governed under a centralized approach despite the dispersed and isolated population. Activities 
under Output 2.4 will help targeted communities diversify their livelihood options via supporting 
access to markets for agriculture/food commodities, creating new avenues for remote and rural 
communities to engage with private sector entities and increase the sustainability of project 
activities.  
• 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies – Enhanced dialogue processes will help 
‘reality check’ national policies and ensure they are targeted at effectively meeting the needs of 
communities as climate change impacts escalate. Working with communities and local government 
to integrate climate change risks and resilience building actions into development planning and 
budgeting processes will help catalyze a sustainable transition to locally resourced climate-
responsive planning and development.  
• 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with a country’s 
climate change adaptation strategies and plans – This project has a high potential for both 
scalability and replicability, aligned with, and designed to support achievement of the objectives of 
national policies. The adaptation package is designed to be scaled out over time to all rural 
communities, via local authorities. Provincial government officers, trained in climate focused 
stakeholder engagement and climate change integrated planning and budgeting, could extend the 
project to non-targeted communities. Within the region, the initial outcomes of this project will 
inform the development of the other projects addressing similar issues at the community level. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
175. Undertaking adaptation programming at the community level requires a holistic view of community 
needs and capacities. At the local level, the impacts of climate change are inextricably interconnected 
with broader development challenges. The evidence is clear that climate change impacts exacerbate 
existing development challenges and that, in the absence of significant adaptation action, sustainable 
development will be unachievable. CBA works directly at the local level to build community adaptive 
capacity by reducing vulnerability and increasing resilience to the current and projected impacts of 
climate change. One element of this work is to close existing adaptation deficits to ensure 
communities have a stable base from which to increase resilience to projected impacts and build 
adaptive capacity to ensure they can safeguard sustainable development outcomes.  
176. The adaptation package includes actions with a range of economic, social, environmental and gender 
co-benefits, including: 
• 
Increasing the household incomes of rural communities through livelihoods diversification and 
increasing access to markets (co-benefit 1); 
• 
Increasing broad community health outcomes by ensuring communities have more secure access 
to locally-available nutritious foods (co-benefit 2); 
• 
Increasing access to education by ensuring fewer school days lost in the aftermath of extreme 
weather events through adaptation planning and enhanced DRR action (co-benefit 3);

=== PAGE 57 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
• 
Increasing the sustainability of ecosystem services by reducing reliance on vulnerable resources 
(e.g. reef fish) as a primary food source in rural coastal communities (co-benefit 4); 
• 
Increasing gender equality across all areas of community life – with a specific focus on ensuring 
women’s voices are heard in climate-related decision-making forums and that the gendered nature 
of climate change impacts is a key component of all climate and development planning at 
community and province levels (co-benefit 5); 
• 
Increasing social inclusion across all areas of community life – with a specific focus on ensuring 
voices of traditionally underrepresented groups (e.g. youth, people with a disability) are heard in 
climate-related decision-making forums (co-benefit 6). 
 
177. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system of the project will ensure that the co-benefits will be 
monitored throughout implementation of the project and integrated with monitoring systems of the 
relevant Ministries and other public authorities, particularly the National Sustainability Development 
Plan (NSDP), and ultimately support the achievement of the NSDP. The M&E system, and the 
indicators to be monitored are fully described in Annex 11. 
178. The project will make direct contributions to Vanuatu’s efforts to meet UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs): 
• 
2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture), 
particularly targets 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4; 
• 
5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls), particularly targets 5.1, 5.5 and 5.b; 
• 
6 (Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all), particularly 
targets 6.3, 6.5 and 6.6; 
• 
11 (Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable), particularly target 
11.5; 
• 
13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts), particularly targets 13.1, 13.3 
and 13.b; 
• 
14 (Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable 
development), particularly targets 14.2, 14.5 and 14.b; and  
• 
15 (Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage 
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss), 
particularly targets 15.1, 15.2, 15.5, 15.8 and 15.9. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
179. Vanuatu leads the world disaster risk index as the country with the highest disaster risk score of 
49.74, indicating it is the most highly exposed to natural hazards. Accessing finance to address 
adaptation deficits and build community resilience to the current and anticipated impacts of climate 
change has posed a significant challenge in Vanuatu. As outlined in Section B.5 above47.  
Absence of alternative sources of financing and need for strengthening institutions and capacity 
180. While Vanuatu recently graduated from the LDC category to a lower middle-income country, it 
remains highly aid dependent48. Domestic revenue remains insufficient to adequately fund essential 
services to a widely dispersed, largely rural population. Donor programs are generally focused on 
immediate development priorities (like economic growth, poverty reduction, health and education), 
with a relatively minor focus on climate change – and only a small number of programmes effectively 
integrating climate change risks and resilience building into core objectives. The capacity of line 
ministries to deliver services, particularly to remote islands, remains limited. While the Vanuatu 
Government has access to strong technical climate change capacity, the capacity to deliver 
 
47 Atteridge and Canales (2017) Climate finance in the Pacific: An overview of flows to the region’s Small Island Developing States. Stockholm Environment Institute, 
Working Paper 2017-04. Available here. 
48 Vanuatu graduated from LDC status in 2020. While steadily increasing economic and social indicators are a positive sign for Vanuatu’s climate resilience, gains remain 
unevenly distributed and the most vulnerable people and communities will require adaptation assistance for the foreseeable future, particularly given the country’s 
significant exposure to extreme weather events and other hazards. Increasing domestic revenue streams will help increase the sustainability of project outcomes. The 
economic impact of COVID-19 and TC Harold (5 April 2020) are likely to have pushed back Vanuatu to GDP levels representative of LDCs.

=== PAGE 58 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
adaptation assistance to the local level – in ways that meet community needs and expectations – 
remains restricted. Communities in Vanuatu urgently need scaled up support to address immediate 
adaptation priorities, as well as to support the integration of climate change into local planning 
processes.  
181. The economic impacts of COVID-19 have been dire in Vanuatu. While the country has recorded only 
a handful of cases and no fatalities, the economic impacts from the collapse of the tourism sector and 
reduced tax receipts pushed the domestic budget into deficit in 2020/21 and is likely to result in 
increasing debt stress. These factors combined are likely to push Vanuatu back to LDC status49.  
182. The initial problem identification was derived from the deep experience of Save the Children and the 
MoCC in working at all levels across the country to understand capacities, needs and gaps – 
particularly the development, implementation and evaluation of previous small-scale CBA projects. 
During the detailed design phase, extensive consultations were undertaken at the national, provincial 
and community levels to identify the key drivers of climate change vulnerability to test and verify the 
existing understanding of the issues facing communities. These consultations revealed significant 
climate-related impacts to food systems (agriculture and fisheries) and the ecosystems that support 
them. There were also key issues associated with limited or declining community infrastructure and 
cultural systems (loss of traditional knowledge), and poor communication and transport networks 
within and between islands. This was supported by national and sub-national consultations, that 
confirmed these local issues and needs in relation to climate change impacts. The project, including 
the flexible adaptation packages, has been designed to address these critical adaptation challenges.  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
183. The project is specifically designed to support achievement of national climate-relevant objectives of 
key sector policies and strategies in Vanuatu. The funding proposal has been developed in 
cooperation with senior staff from key departments as well as the Vanuatu MoCC – the project’s co-
Executing Entity.  
184. Adaptation is the key focus of Vanuatu’s approach to addressing climate change. In its first Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC), Vanuatu highlighted adaptation as the country’s overriding concern. 
In response to the climate threats facing Vanuatu, the National Adaptation Programme for Action 
(NAPA) initiated consultations and collaboration at several levels of government, identifying urgent 
actions to increase climate resilience. The NAPA identified five adaptation priority areas for Vanuatu, 
namely: i) agriculture and food security; ii) sustainable tourism development; iii) community-based 
marine resource management; iv) sustainable forest management; and v) integrated water resource 
management. This project will help address NAPA priorities (i), (iii) and (iv).  
185. The National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for Land-Based Resources (NCCAS) (2012-2022) 
was designed to build on the NAPA, the Priorities and Action Agenda (PPA) and the Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Disaster Management National Action Plan. The Vanuatu Climate Change and 
Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030 (CCDRR Policy) builds on the work of the NAPA, NCCAS, 
and other adaptation and DRR efforts, in which these priority areas were updated to become: i) 
governance; ii) finance; iii) knowledge and information; iv) climate change adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction; v) low carbon development; and vi) response and recovery.  
186. In 2018, the Government of Vanuatu prepared the GCF Country Programme for Vanuatu, 
complementing the NAPA and CCDRR Policy and assisting the Government with prioritization of 
adaptation investments. This project is highlighted as a priority in Vanuatu’s GCF Country 
Programme, including in the 2021 update.  
187. Vanuatu’s NAPA, CCDRR Policy and GCF Country Programme are fully aligned with the country’s 
National Sustainable Development Plan (NSDP). The NSDP, the highest public policy framework in 
Vanuatu, explicitly includes climate change adaptation as a key sustainable development priority. The 
policy’s Environment Pillar 1: Food and Nutrition Security includes policy objective ENV 1.5: Enhance 
traditional agricultural practices, focusing on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation. 
More prominently, Environment Pillar 3: Climate and Disaster Resilience includes five policy 
objectives all related to adaptation, namely: ENV 3.1) Institutionalize climate change and disaster risk 
 
49 Australian Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade (2020) Partnership for COVID Recovery Strategy. Available here.

=== PAGE 59 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
governance, and build institutional capacity and awareness; ENV 3.2) improve monitoring and early 
warning systems; ENV 3.3) Strengthen post-disaster systems in planning, preparedness, response 
and recovery; ENV 3.4) Promote and ensure strengthened resilience and adaptive capacity to climate 
related, natural and man-made hazards; ENV 3.5) Access available financing for climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk management. 
188. Anticipated actions by the Government of Vanuatu on national priorities for climate change adaptation 
in 2021-22 include efforts identified under its updated NDC (2020-2030)50 to provide for quantifiable 
adaptation targets. The updated NDC includes specific targets and indicators aimed at enhancing the 
resilience of the agriculture sector and water sector, developed with the objectives of maintaining food 
security, income security and water security. The overarching goal for the agricultural sector is 
identified as: “Agriculture is able to support household income and food needs in a changing climate”. 
Two targets have been established to meet this goal, focused on SMEs and private sector operators 
to generate sufficient income to cover essential household needs and services in normal and stressed 
(climate, disaster and environmentally) times (Ag1) and measures for enhancing the resilience of 
subsistence agriculture in a changing climate in the six provinces have been implemented (Ag2). The 
VCCRP aligns well with this NDC goal and targets. Additionally, the Government of Vanuatu is aiming 
to secure external climate financing to design, trial and operationalize a National Adaptation Plan 
(NAP) to build on the NAPA and expects to operationalize the National Vulnerability Assessment 
Framework (VAF), to which the VCCRP’s national-level vulnerability assessment process (undertaken 
during the design) will make a strong contribution.  
189. Vanuatu has had five GCF Readiness Proposals approved from 2015 to date, with which the VCCRP 
is well aligned. Further details on how VCCRP builds on and extends Readiness activities are 
provided in Annex 2.  
190. The NDA has been engaged in the design process and will Co-Chair the Project Steering Committee 
(PSC), maintaining a role in oversight of for the project and direct lines of communication with the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) throughout implementation. 
191. Country ownership has been ensured through extensive and comprehensive consultation during the 
design process with MoCC and line ministries via workshops and meetings, as well as wider 
engagement with civil society. Relevant stakeholders were identified through a mapping exercise and 
consultations built on many years of stakeholder engagement with key partners, government and 
communities to develop the Concept Note (2016-2019). Consultation was participatory and voluntary 
and worked closely with primary stakeholders who will have an implementing role during 
implementation. The continued consultation during the design phase with government at all levels, 
civil society and other relevant stakeholders further progressed the project development and 
ownership and included discussions on the project concept and details of the design process, 
feasibility study results, focus of the adaptation package, validation of the target beneficiaries and 
approval of the full funding proposal at the April 2021 NAB meeting (full details on engagement and 
consultation are provided in Annex 7).  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
192. As outlined in Section D.5, above, CBA is a key component of Vanuatu’s response to climate change. 
As also noted above (in Section B.5), accessing finance to support CBA actions at the scale required 
to create transformational change has been difficult for governments and civil society. Communities in 
Vanuatu are some of the least responsible for the emissions that are causing climate change, but they 
are among the first to suffer the impacts and will feel these impacts more acutely than people in 
wealthier, less hazard-exposed countries. The Government of Vanuatu is clear that significant 
external financing will be required if the country is to effectively manage the unavoidable impacts of 
climate change. The Government also struggles to balance the broad range of adaptation priorities 
(from protecting critical economic infrastructure to building local climate resilience). This project will 
work to increase the accessibility of global climate finance to local communities. There is a clear 
argument for high co-finance and private sector engagement in mitigation action. The argument for 
poor countries to finance their own adaptation actions in response to a problem stemming from the 
 
50 Government of Vanuatu (2020) Vanuatu’s First Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) (Updated Submission 2020)

=== PAGE 60 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
unregulated use of the global commons, or to take out concessional loans to do so, is less clear. It is 
even less strong when the ultimate beneficiaries are communities on low-lying islands facing an ever-
harsher climate not of their own making. Investing in CBA pays dividends,51 but governments struggle 
to find the resources to meet current development needs within communities, let alone proactively 
address anticipated future climate change impacts. The funding amount requested from the GCF for 
this project is commensurate with the scale of the problem and the Vanuatu Government’s desire to 
take a nation-wide approach to addressing community adaptation needs. 
193. It is clear that the Government of Vanuatu does not currently have sufficient funding to meet 
immediate adaptation needs at the local level. It is equally clear that most donor funds are not an 
adequate source of CBA finance, as they are shorter term and smaller scale. Grant funding is the 
most appropriate level of concessionality for CBA activities as they are not of interest to the private 
sector finance and contain no direct repayment capacity. CBA activities that are not funded directly by 
government or are not self-funded by communities are not viable without donor assistance. In the 
context of Vanuatu, the government does not have the capacity to meet adaptation needs and rural 
communities do not have the resources to self-support required adaptation actions. Further, as the 
adaptation packages approach is embedded in government systems and scaled out to the remaining 
communities across the country each intervention will become more cost effective as the communities 
remaining to be targeted are less difficult to reach and, relatively, less vulnerable to the identified 
climate change impacts. In effect, this project will undertake the most cost intensive component of this 
work – reaching some of the most vulnerable and hardest to access populations – allowing the 
government to scale out the approach further to help meet the needs of slightly easier to reach 
communities.  
194. Implementing projects in Pacific SIDS entails higher costs than in many other developing countries, as 
the ‘combination of extreme remoteness from major markets, very small size, dispersion over vast 
tracts of the Pacific Ocean, and environmental fragility results in very high cost of production of goods 
and services by both the private and public sector’,52 leading to an assessment that the public sector 
is likely to remain the main source of formal sector employment and driver of economic activity in most 
Pacific Island countries for the foreseeable future. This project explicitly aims to reach some of the 
most climate vulnerable communities in Vanuatu. These communities are often in the most remote 
and geographically challenging parts of the country, requiring significant logistical undertakings to 
bring people and goods to them. These challenges are a key element of why these communities are 
highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and have limited adaptive capacity. Reaching these 
communities is, necessarily, high cost, but, for a community-based adaptation project with the aim of 
meeting the immediate adaptation needs of the most vulnerable people, the cost is justifiable.  
195. While the Government does not have access to sufficient finance to meet current adaptation needs, 
the country has the Pacific region’s only functional Government Financial Management Information 
System. The FMIS is linked to a Single Treasury Account (STA), a single reporting system and a 
single chart of accounts. This means that all Government ministries currently access all of their funds 
via the one system for both spending, reporting and commitment purposes. It is this total level of 
transparency and control that has enabled Vanuatu to be the first and, in many cases, only recipient of 
direct budget support from a wide range of donors including DFAT, the European Union, the US MCA, 
NZMFAT, UNICEF and others. The Vanuatu Government runs a fully centralized financial 
management system that has sufficient decentralized coverage through Government agencies in the 
islands (including Department of Finance). This system is functional and can handle significant flows 
of funding. Project resources allocated to Government IEs (including Department of Local Authorities 
and Provincial governments; Department of Agriculture, Department of Fisheries; Department of 
Climate Change; and National Disaster Management Office) will all flow through this centralized 
system and will be tracked and reported via MFEM.  
196. The project will be designed to avoid over burdening any one government delivery partner to avoid 
straining absorptive capacity and creating capacity constraints that delay project implementation. This 
is a key lesson from the implementation of a range of previous projects implemented in Vanuatu and 
 
51 See for example, Vardakoulias and Nicholles (2014) Managing uncertainty: An economic evaluation of community-based adaptation in Dakoro, Niger. Available here. 
52 World Bank (2017) Pacific Possible. Available here.

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
the region. Working with a range of relevant departments will ensure no one department creates 
funding bottlenecks as has been the experience with some previous projects. The project will also 
provide direct technical assistance to Government departments and other delivery partners and 
supported through Save the Children’s systems and national footprint. The breadth of the project will 
also help ensure community capacity is not overwhelmed. Working across all six provinces will enable 
us to spread the investment across space and time. 
197. An economic and financial analysis (Annex 3) undertaken as part of the project’s design phase 
examined four specific adaptation actions that are representative of the actions in the adaptation 
package menu: 
• 
EWS communications equipment (EIRR of 111%) 
• 
Nature based solutions – coastal management (EIRR of 12%) 
• 
Climate resilient agriculture – taro and yam as examples (EIRR of 19% for taro and 27% for yam) 
• 
Food processing and storage (EIRR of 81%) 
 
198. The analysis shows that all four of the adaptation measures have solid economic internal rates of 
return and can be justified on economic grounds. The analysis shows that the selected measures will 
have a significantly positive economic impact for the targeted communities over the life of the project 
and beyond.  
199. The report also undertook assessment of the incremental adaptation benefits of the four selected 
measures in the context of the overall project budget. This analysis showed the project has an 
economic internal rate of return of 3%, which, while positive, is below the discount rate. This is directly 
due to the size of the non-investment flows required to enable and support the adaptation 
investments, to ensure their long-term sustainability and to catalyze a paradigm shift in resilience in 
Vanuatu. However, the analysis found that the project still presents a strong investment for the GCF. 
An economic analysis cannot assess the non-economic, non-investment components of the project 
and, therefore, while the full project shows a just slightly positive economic return on investment, each 
specific investment shows a high rate of return on investment, and the non-investment costs will 
ensure the project leaves a substantial legacy of capacity for sustainability and more effective 
allocation and utilisation of future flows of climate finance. This does not imply a shortcoming of the 
project or its direct economic benefits, which, on a per-investment basis, are strongly positive. Rather 
it highlights some incompatibility of this method of assessment for projects delivering adaptation 
action in highly resource constrained and low-capacity contexts.  
200. The analysis highlights three key reasons why the project budget includes significant non-
economically assessable costs (non-investment costs). These are elaborated below as they are of 
fundamental importance to the project’s success and ability to create transformational change in 
remote and rural communities that are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 
201. The need to address significant capacity gaps and constraints at all levels (government at national, 
provincial and Area Council levels as well as at the community level) that undermine the effective 
development and implementation of adaptation actions – particularly in highly climate vulnerable rural 
and remote communities – and prevent the generation of a paradigm shift in resilience. The project’s 
first component is focused on building institutional capacity at the local level to ensure that the 
project’s adaptation investments (delivered via the adaptation package menu under Component 2) 
are feasible and are implemented in a strong enabling environment. Without these additional 
investments, the adaptation investments would be unlikely to be successful.  
202. The need to ensure that the project leaves behind significantly increased institutional capacity to 
increase the sustainability and replicability of the project’s adaptation investments and catalyze 
transformation. National and provincial capacity to support ongoing adaptation action in the targeted 
communities is vital, and investments under Component 3 of the project focus on this element, as well 
as helping ensure that the government has the capacity to scale up and replicate these adaptation 
investments in communities not targeted by the project. 
203. The high cost of delivering projects in Pacific SIDS. It is important to note that implementing projects 
in Pacific SIDS entails higher costs than in many other developing countries, as the ‘combination of

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
extreme remoteness from major markets, very small size, dispersion over vast tracts of the Pacific 
Ocean, and environmental fragility results in very high cost of production of goods and services by 
both the private and public sector.’53 This project explicitly aims to reach the most climate vulnerable 
communities in Vanuatu to generate a paradigm shift in their resilience. These communities are often 
in the most remote and geographically challenging parts of the country, requiring significant logistical 
undertakings to bring people and goods to them. This also explains why the technical assistance and 
travel cost of the project is high compared to the investment costs. 
204. The economic analysis found that all four of the adaptation measures analyzed have an economic 
internal rate of return significantly higher than the discount rate and can be justified on economic 
grounds, and that the selected measures will have a significantly positive economic impact for the 
targeted communities over the life of the project and beyond.  
205. Further, the analysis noted that the support provided by the non-investment costs is appropriate to the 
context of Vanuatu as a Pacific SIDS and Least Developed Country, with significant institutional 
capacity gaps and constraints at all levels to develop and implement adaptation actions in the most 
vulnerable remote and rural communities. And, importantly, that these non-investment costs are a 
critical component of ensuring the project generates transformational change and creates a paradigm 
shift in resilience for the most vulnerable communities in Vanuatu.  
206. The economic analysis concluded that the project represents an excellent value for money investment 
for the GCF. The full analysis is at Annex 3 (a and b). 
 
 
 
53 World Bank (2017) Pacific Possible. Available here.

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of 
change).        
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Adaptation 
programming at the 
community level in 
Vanuatu has, to date, 
been ad hoc and often 
driven by donor 
priorities (thematic and 
geographic). The vast 
majority of projects and 
funding have been 
targeted at the national 
level. Previous CBA 
projects have largely 
Low 
Once implemented, the VCCRP will be 
the largest investment in CBA in Vanuatu 
(and the wider Pacific region), in terms of 
both beneficiary reach and funding. The 
target scenario will see 90,157 people in 
282 communities in 29 Area Councils 
across all six provinces with increased 
adaptive capacity and more climate 
resilient food security and livelihoods – 
directly reaching nearly half of the 
country’s rural population. This project 
will have a significant impact on how all 
future CBA projects in Vanuatu are 
Component 2 of the project will be the 
key driver of scale, with the adaptation 
packages directly reaching 90,157 
people with contextually targeted 
adaptation assistance related to food 
security and livelihoods.  
Activities under Component 1 will support 
the scale out of the project approach 
across the targeted communities via 
awareness raising and adaptation 
planning activities.

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
been pilots in a 
relatively small number 
of communities. There 
has been little in the 
way of systematic 
learning and knowledge 
generation. To date, 
accessing finance to 
support CBA actions at 
the scale required to 
create transformational 
change has been 
difficult for governments 
and civil society.  
developed and implemented. Further, the 
project will indirectly reach the remaining 
half of the country’s rural population via 
delivery of CIS and DRR outreach and 
awareness raising activities. This will 
help prepare these communities to 
positively engage with future projects 
utilising the VCCRP model.   
Activities in the adaptation package 
under Component 2 are designed to be 
modular and scalable. Specific activities 
can be increased, decreased or 
removed, depending on community 
circumstances. This makes the process 
inherently scalable to the full range of 
geographic and socio-economic contexts 
in Vanuatu.  
As Save the Children has a permanent 
presence in Vanuatu, SCA will be able to 
work with MoCC after implementation to 
capture ex-post information on the 
degree to which there has been a 
significant increase in quantifiable results 
within and beyond the scope of the 
intervention, as per the GCF definition of 
scale. 
Component 3 activities will help embed 
these approaches into government 
systems at all levels to enhance 
sustainability.  
Activities under Components 1 and 3 will 
also support the scaling out of activities 
under Component 2 to additional, non-
targeted, communities over time; further 
increasing the reach and scale of the 
project.  
Replicability 
There is currently no 
unified approach to CBA 
planning and 
implementation in 
Vanuatu. There are also 
significant institutional 
Low 
To foster and facilitate replicability of the 
project’s outcomes, the target scenario 
would see the Ministry of Climate 
Change (MoCC) adopting the project’s 
approach to local-level adaptation 
planning and implementation, including 
Component 3 of the project will be the 
key driver for institutional replicability of 
the project’s approach by embedding the 
system of community adaptation planning 
and prioritization of actions into national 
and provincial planning and budgeting

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity constraints at 
local, sub-national and 
national levels which 
hamper effective 
adaptation planning 
processes and 
implementation of 
adaptation actions at 
scale across the 
country. 
maintaining the project-established Area 
Council Climate Change Officer positions 
and expanding these roles to all 
remaining Area Councils over time. 
MoCC has indicated a willingness to do 
this. The MoCC and government 
agencies implementing activities will 
receive support to build adaptation 
planning and implementation capacity at 
the local level. As this capacity will be 
embedded in government agencies, the 
target scenario will see these agencies 
maintaining their enhanced capacity post 
project implementation. This is a viable 
scenario as embedded capacity and 
activity implementation will be managed 
via the existing Government Investment 
Program.  
As Save the Children has a permanent 
presence in Vanuatu, SCA will be able to 
work with MoCC after implementation to 
capture ex-post information on the 
degree to which the project’s activities 
are scaled out to other communities and 
applied to other key sectors.   
cycles. The component will also build the 
capacity of provincial and national actors 
to access and effectively use future flows 
of climate finance. Key outputs are: 
- 
Output 3.1: Adaptive local 
governance systems strengthened 
through sub-national planning 
- 
Output 3.2: Enhanced local-
provincial-national linkages through 
knowledge management and 
creation of feedback loops 
Implementation of the adaptation 
packages (Component 2) and adaptation 
planning processes (Component 1) in 
targeted communities will also provide a 
model for other, non-targeted 
communities to adopt (autonomously or 
via alternative sources of finance). The 
low-tech, locally-led approach to 
adaptation related to food security and 
livelihoods adopted by the project is 
highly replicable. As the model is proven 
effective, we anticipate it will be adopted 
by other projects in Vanuatu and beyond.   
Sustainability 
The Vanuatu 
Government is 
committed to facilitating 
adaptation action at all 
levels. Adaptation is the 
key focus of Vanuatu’s 
approach to addressing 
climate change. In its 
Medium 
The target scenario will see the VCCRP 
supporting the Government to achieve 
NDC targets on livelihoods and food 
security. The VCCRP’s national 
vulnerability assessment will also support 
the Government to finalize their NAP and 
operationalize the National Vulnerability 
Assessment Framework (VAF).  
Six key sustainability strategies will be 
employed to ensure project impact will be 
sustained over time: 
- 
Building the evidence base to 
advocate for the national government 
to allocate future climate finance and 
other resources to support locally 
driven adaptation actions

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
first NDC, Vanuatu 
highlighted adaptation 
as the country’s 
overriding concern. The 
country’s updated NDC 
includes specific targets 
and indicators aimed at 
enhancing the resilience 
of the agriculture and 
water sectors, 
developed with the 
objectives of 
maintaining food 
security, income 
security and water 
security.  
There is, however, the 
national government 
has no effective 
adaptation planning and 
implementation 
coordination mechanism 
in place linking 
community and national 
processes. This reduces 
the likelihood of 
systematic generation 
and dissemination of 
knowledge from 
successful (and less 
successful) actions and 
reduces sustainability.  
There are also currently 
low incentives for 
The adaptation packages, under 
Component 2, are designed to be 
modular and scalable. Specific activities 
can be increased, decreased or 
removed, depending on community 
circumstances. This makes the package 
approach highly tailored to direct 
beneficiary needs and transferable to the 
remaining communities in Vanuatu 
(indirect beneficiaries). Activities under 
Components 1 and 3 are designed to 
ensure the sustainability of the 
adaptation package actions and help 
government to support a scale out of the 
approach over time. As the specific make 
up of each community’s adaptation 
package will be locally owned and based 
on their own local adaptation planning 
process, there is a high likelihood of 
activity outcomes being sustainable over 
time.  
Activities under Output 2.4 (Women-led 
climate-resilient food processing and 
preservation established to support food 
security and diversification of livelihoods 
options) will help support rural 
communities to access markets and 
adopt more resilient livelihood strategies, 
which will help further increase the 
sustainability of project-supported 
adaptive capacity.  
Activities under Components 1 and 3 will 
help institutionalise knowledge and 
awareness of climate change risks and 
- 
Allocation of national budget 
resources to local adaptation actions 
- 
Promoting local ownership 
- 
Ensure financial sustainability of the 
project 
- 
Build capacity of government and civil 
society systems to enable improved 
service delivery of future climate 
adaptation initiatives 
- 
Foster sustainable value chains in the 
local market 
(Further details on these strategies is 
provided in Section B.6, above).

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 
private sector entities to 
engage with remote 
rural communities to 
support increased 
market access and help 
diversify livelihoods.  
adaptation, facilitate enhanced access to 
climate information, and embed 
adaptation planning and implementation 
capacity in government institutions at all 
levels.  
The project has a high likelihood of 
achieving sustained impact well beyond 
the implementation period.   
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final54 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
NDMO reports 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
Direct  
0 males,            
0 females 
Indirect 
0 males,            
0 females 
Direct  
36,000 total 
people (17,640 
females, 
18,360 males) 
Indirect 
44,000 total 
people (21,560 
females, 
22,440 males) 
Direct  
90,157 total 
people (44,177 
females, 
45,980 males) 
Indirect 
110,000 total 
people (53,900 
females, 
56,100 males) 
Project is able to effectively 
reach and operate in all 
targeted communities 
during the implementation 
period 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries will be 
counted via aggregated 
project reporting, which will 
include activity and sub-
activity level attendance, as 
well as project M&E (ie 
surveys of uptake, and 
 
54 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 68 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
 
media/social media hit 
counts) 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries are the same 
for all three results areas  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
NDMO reports 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
0 males,            
0 females 
36,000 total 
people (17,640 
females, 
18,360 males) 
90,157 total 
people (44,177 
females, 
45,980 males) 
 
Adequate uptake of 
improved practices secures 
buy-in from communities 
and long- term commitment 
to promoted climate 
resilient actions 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
NDMO reports 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
Direct  
0 males,            
0 females 
Indirect 
0 males,            
0 females 
Direct  
36,000 total 
people (17,640 
females, 
18,360 males) 
Indirect 
44,000 total 
people (21,560 
females, 
22,440 males) 
Direct  
90,157 total 
people (44,177 
females, 
45,980 males) 
Indirect 
110,000 total 
people (53,900 
females, 
56,100 males) 
Project is able to effectively 
reach and operate in all 
targeted communities 
during the implementation 
period 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries will be 
counted via aggregated 
project reporting, which will 
include activity and sub-
activity level attendance, as 
well as project M&E (ie 
surveys of uptake, and 
media/social media hit 
counts)

=== PAGE 69 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries are the same 
for all three results areas 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
NDMO reports 
Post-disaster surveys 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
61,600 people 
(30,184 females, 
31,416 males) 
across 13,689 
targeted 
households are 
food secure   
(30% of the rural 
population are 
moderately or 
severely food 
insecure) 
Baseline data is 
from a 2019 
assessment and 
does not include 
impacts of 
COVID-19. The 
baseline will be 
updated during 
project inception 
Average number 
people per 
household 
across project 
sites is 4.5 
66,001 people 
(32,341 
females, 
33,660 males) 
across 14,667 
targeted 
households 
are food 
secure 
(Measured as 
an increase in 
the proportion 
of households 
reporting as 
food secure 
using FAO 
Food 
Insecurity 
Experience 
Scale) 
Average 
number people 
per household 
across project 
sites is 4.5 
74,799 people 
(36,652 
females, 
38,147 males) 
across 16,622 
targeted 
households 
are food 
secure 
Food insecurity 
in targeted 
communities is 
reduced by 
50% 
(Measured as 
an increase in 
the proportion 
of households 
reporting as 
food secure 
using FAO 
Food 
Insecurity 
Experience 
Scale) 
Average 
number people 
per household 
Latest estimate of 
prevalence of food 
insecurity is from 2019 and 
does not include the 
impacts of Cyclone Harold 
or COVID-19. With these 
events, food security in 
remote and rural areas has 
been impacted and likely 
decreased 
Absence of extreme climate 
events and economic 
shocks, affecting yields and 
household economies. that 
occur before the project 
interventions have been 
fully implemented

=== PAGE 70 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
across project 
sites is 4.5 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
innovations that 
stregthen climate 
change resilience 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
<1,495 people 
(733 females, 
762 males) 
<5 communities 
in target Area 
Councils are 
utilizing food 
preservation / 
processing 
technologies 
 
Average number 
of people per 
community 
across project 
sites is 299 
 
<1,495 people 
(733 females, 
762 males) 
(Distribution of 
food 
preservation / 
processing 
technologies to 
occur in years 
4 and 5) 
Average 
number of 
people per 
community 
across project 
sites is 299 
 
78,039 people 
(38,239 
females, 
39,800 males) 
across 261 
communities in 
target Area 
Councils are 
utilizing food 
preservation / 
processing 
technologies 
Average 
number of 
people per 
community 
across project 
sites is 299 
 
Project is able to effectively 
reach and operate in all 
targeted communities 
during the implementation 
period 
 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Govt statistics (national 
census, HIES) 
NDMO reports 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Direct  
0 males,            
0 females 
Indirect 
0 males,            
0 females 
Direct  
36,000 total 
people (17,640 
females, 
18,360 males) 
Indirect 
44,000 total 
people (21,560 
Direct  
90,157 total 
people (44,177 
females, 
45,980 males) 
Indirect 
110,000 total 
people (53,900 
Project is able to effectively 
reach and operate in all 
targeted communities 
during the implementation 
period 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries will be 
counted via aggregated 
project reporting, which will

=== PAGE 71 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
females, 
22,440 males) 
females, 
56,100 males) 
include activity and sub-
activity level attendance, as 
well as project M&E (ie 
surveys of uptake, and 
media/social media hit 
counts) 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries are the same 
for all three results areas 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient 
management practice 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
0 hectares 
No ecosystems 
in targeted 
areas are 
currently 
protected or 
strengthened to   
respond to 
climate 
variability and 
change 
5,800 hectares 
11,600 
hectares  
 
No perverse incentives 
(policies, prices, 
monoculture industries that 
affect natural capital) are 
introduced in the project 
area 
The project’s area is not 
seriously disrupted by a 
major extreme climate 
event, affecting restored 
areas, before resilience 
measures have been fully 
adopted 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems 
Progress / completion 
reports 
Extension officers 
monitoring reports 
0 hectares 
No ecosystems 
in targeted 
areas are 
currently 
protected or 
strengthened to   
respond to 
5,800 hectares 
11,600 
hectares  
 
No perverse incentives 
(policies, prices, 
monoculture industries that 
affect natural capital) are 
introduced in the project 
area 
The project’s area is not 
seriously disrupted by a

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
climate 
variability and 
change 
major extreme climate 
event, affecting restored 
areas, before resilience 
measures have been fully 
adopted 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
 No effective adaptation 
planning and 
implementation 
coordination mechanism 
in place linking 
community and national 
processes 
low 
By the end of the 
project, the 29 targeted 
Area Councils will have 
Level 2 strengthened 
adaptation planning and 
implementation 
coordination 
mechanisms, connected 
to national systems, in 
place and operational 
The project will support 
all targeted Area 
Councils to adopt 
relevant local-
subnational-national 
coordination 
mechanisms, which will 
be measured by an 
effectiveness uptake 
scorecard. This 
scorecard will have four 
levels to measure the 
performance of 
effectiveness:  
Level 0 – no meaningful 
coordination mechanism 
in place and/or applied; 
Level 1 – coordination 
mechanism in place with 
clearly defined roles and 
responsibilities;  
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
Level 2 – coordination 
mechanism actively 
applied with joint 
planning and 
implementation of 
activities,  
Level 3 – coordination 
mechanism regularly 
reviewed and refined 
through inclusive 
stakeholder consultation 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Minimal access to 
project-relevant 
adaptation technologies 
in targeted communities 
low 
By the end of the project 
targeted communities 
will have increased their 
food security by 
adopting climate resilient 
agriculture and fisheries 
techniques, including via 
the introduction of tools, 
systems and 
technologies. Targeted 
communities will also 
have commenced food 
processing and 
preservation for direct 
food security and market 
engagement, principally 
via the introduction of 
adaptation technologies 
(solar dryers and 
freezers).  
 
These investments will 
catalyse a paradigm 
shift in communities’ 
approaches to climate 
Activities under 
Component Two will 
directly support 
communities to adopt 
and utilize locally 
appropriate and 
sustainable adaptation 
technologies via the 
adaptation packages.  
Multiple sub-national 
areas within a country

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
resilient food and 
livelihoods security and 
help develop a viable 
pipeline of demand for 
NGEF products and 
services. 
 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
No systematic climate 
change communication 
across all targeted 
communities 
low 
By the end of the 
project, 200,157 people 
(98,076 females, 
102,080 males, all direct 
and indirect project 
beneficiaries) will have 
increased awareness of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses.  
 
282 targeted 
communities will have 
adaptation plans under 
implementation which 
are driving project-
supported adaptation 
actions that reduce 
exposure to climate 
hazards and increase 
food security and 
livelihoods resilience. 
 
90,157 people (44,177 
females, 45,980 males, 
all direct beneficiaries) 
will be reached by 
reliable EWS (via 
CDCCC connectivity) 
Investments under 
Component One will 
help generate and 
disseminate climate 
information. CDCCCs 
will have enhanced 
connectivity to facilitate 
this access and will be 
trained to help 
communities apply it to 
adaptation planning and 
action. Activities will also 
ensure more reliable 
and sustainable access 
to EWS (via CDCCCs). 
Area Council Climate 
Change Officers will 
support increased 
understanding of climate 
change at the local level 
and will coordinate with 
key stakeholders to 
support development of 
community adaptation 
plans and 
implementation of 
adaptation package 
actions (under 
Component Two) 
Multiple sub-national 
areas within a country

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
and have enhanced 
access to climate 
information.  
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1 
Output 1.1:  Community-
based climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction mechanisms are 
strengthened 
% target communities with 
functioning CDCCCs 
 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 10% target 
communities 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All targeted communities 
engage in CDCCC formation 
and formalization  
% target CDCCCs with 
gender balance  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
90% target  
CDCCCs 
CDCCCs leadership open to 
addressing gender issues 
% target CDCCCs with 
child/youth engagement 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
90% target  
CDCCCs 
CDCCCs leadership open to 
including youth representation 
(as mandated) and facilitating 
child engagement 
Output 1.2:  Communities 
have increased understanding 
of climate change impacts and 
are supported to develop 
inclusive local adaptation 
plans 
% target women, men, 
children and youth with 
increased understanding of 
the implications of climate 
change  
 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 15% nation-
wide (<25% female) 
60% targeted 
beneficiaries (49% 
female) (direct and 
indirect) (120,000 
people) 
95% total 
beneficiaries (49% 
female) (direct and 
indirect) (190,000 
people) 
Project effectively reaches all 
direct and indirect beneficiaries 
with IEC materials 
% target communities with 
adaptation plans in place 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
0 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All target communities 
participate in developing and 
formalizing plans

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
Gov’t records 
Output 1.3:  Communities 
have increased access to 
climate information services 
and early warning systems 
and the skills to utilise them 
as adaptation tools 
% target CDCCCs with 
internet connectivity for 
CIS/EWS delivery 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 7% nation-
wide 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
100% target 
CDCCCs 
All CDCCCs are able to be 
connected and actively transfer 
information for CIS/EWS 
# target community 
members with increased 
understanding of 
application of CIS to 
agriculture/fisheries 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
720-1,380 people 
nation-wide (<25% 
female) 
17,500 people 
(30% female as 
fishers skew male) 
29,210 people 
(30% female as 
fishers skew male) 
60% of adults/youth reached 
with CIS training c apply it to 
livelihoods 
Outcome 2 
Output 2.1: Local natural 
resources are more resilient 
to climate change impacts 
through implementation of 
nature-based solutions 
# hectares of agricultural 
and fisheries sites under 
improved management 
using nature-based 
solutions  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 hectares in target 
Area Councils 
5,800 hectares 
(approx. 200ha per 
target Area 
Council) 
11,600 hectares 
(approx. 400ha per 
target Area 
Council) 
Targeted communities prioritize 
nature-based solutions ahead of 
possible quick but 
unsustainable gains from 
destructive farming and 
resource management habits 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
better managed sites, before 
the project interventions have 
been fully implemented 
 
Output 2.2: Climate-resilient 
agriculture for food security 
and livelihood development 
# target farmers with 
increased understanding of 
climate-resilient agriculture 
practices  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Training report 
Gov’t records 
720-1,380 people 
nation-wide (<25% 
female) 
18,600 farmers 
(50% female) 
31,200 farmers 
(50% female) 
Farmers actively engage in 
climate-resilient agricultural 
training initiatives because they 
perceive benefits in mitigating 
climate risk and assume 
positive results in agricultural 
product pricing, yields and 
access to inputs 
# target farmers 
implementing climate 
resilient agriculture 
practices  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
720-1,380 people 
nation-wide (<25% 
female) 
14,000 farmers 
  
23,400 farmers 
  
Short term results are 
sufficiently promising to 
incentivize farmers to follow-
through on training and apply 
principles on farm  
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 Vanuatu National Statistics Office (2021) Food Security in Vanuatu: 2019-2020 NSDP Baseline Survey, p.62. Available here. 
major climate event affecting 
agricultural production, before 
the project’s full implementation 
of interventions 
% target households in 
moderate or severe food 
insecurity  
(This indicator will also be 
used to assess progress 
against Output 2.3) 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t reports  
 
30% of households 
involved in 
agriculture, fishing, 
aquaculture and/or 
livestock are reported 
to be food insecure55 
 
(30% of 19556 HHs = 
5867 HHs food 
insecure) 
 
25% of targeted 
households in 
moderate or 
severe food 
insecurity. 
 
(25% of 19,556 
HHs = 4,889 HHs 
food insecure) 
15% of targeted 
households in 
moderate or 
severe food 
insecurity. 
 
(15% of 19556 
HHs = 2933 HHs 
food insecure) 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
agricultural or fisheries 
production, before the project’s 
full implementation of 
interventions 
Target populations/household 
numbers and food supply 
logistics remain stable through 
project implementation 
Output 2.3: Climate-resilient 
fisheries for food security and 
livelihood development 
# target fishers with 
increased understanding of 
climate-resilient fisheries 
practices 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Training report 
Gov’t records 
720-1,380 people 
nation-wide (<10% 
female) 
5,400 fishers (30% 
female as fishers 
skew male) 
9,000 fishers (30% 
female as fishers 
skew male) 
Fishers in targeted communities 
adopt an open-minded rather 
than sceptical outlook to actively 
engage in climate-resilient 
fisheries training opportunities 
# target fishers diversifying 
fisheries resources 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 2,000 people 
nation-wide (<5% 
female) 
4,000 fishers 
6,800 fishers 
Fishers in targeted communities 
reached follow-through on 
training received by applying 
principles to diversify livelihoods  
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
fisheries production, before the 
project’s full implementation of 
interventions 
Output 2.4: Women-led 
climate-resilient food 
processing and preservation 
established to support food 
security and diversification of 
livelihoods options 
# communities using food 
preservation technologies 
 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
 
<5 in target Area 
Councils 
 
0  
communities 
(distribution to 
occur in years 4 
and 5) 
 
261 
communities 
 
Targeted communities follow-
through on food preservation 
training received, by adopting 
and utilizing adaptation 
technologies

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
# target women-led 
producer groups 
collaborating to access new 
markets 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Producers in 35 
communities 
nationally (20% 
female) 
Producer groups in 
50 communities 
(100% female) 
Producer groups in 
90 communities 
(100% female) 
Communities utilizing 
preservation techniques see the 
value of forming producer 
groups and mobilize accordingly 
No disinformation campaigns 
that work against the new 
formation of producer groups 
Markets remain intact and are 
not disrupted by economic 
downturns or shocks 
% target households 
participating in producer 
groups that report 
increased incomes 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t reports 
 
0%  
30% producer 
group households 
report increased 
incomes 
50% producer 
group households 
report increased 
incomes 
Producer groups are 
established and functional and 
can effectively access markets 
Household income increases 
relate to the current median 
household income in rural areas 
is VTU 52,269 per month (USD 
471) 
# partnerships facilitated 
between producer groups 
and private sector entities 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Partnership agreements/ MoUs 
Gov’t records 
0 
4 partnerships 
6 partnerships 
National private sector entities 
realize the value of climate 
resilient food production and 
supply chain benefits secured 
through coordinated local food 
production and see value in 
engaging with remote/rural 
producer groups 
 
Outcome 3 
Output 3.1: Adaptive local 
governance systems 
strengthened through sub-
national planning 
# Area Council staff with 
increased capacity to 
integrate climate change 
into planning and budgeting 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Training report 
Gov’t records 
0 
No systematic Area 
Council capacity 
building initiatives  
80 
people 
145 
People 
Obstacles, such as transport 
logistics, time availability or 
different expectations from other 
staff, are mitigated, so that at 
least 5 staff per targeted Area 
Council engage in training 
Shock-responsive social 
protection system 
developed and tested (via 
DFAT co-finance) 
ANCP project reports 
Gov’t records 
0 
No social protection 
system  
Social protection 
system designed 
Vulnerability 
criteria tested 
DFAT co-financed project is 
sufficiently linked to VCCRP 
Social protection system 
designed in accordance with

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
best practice and subnational 
context-specific needs  
Output 3.2: Enhanced local-
provincial-national linkages 
through knowledge 
management and creation of 
feedback loops 
# knowledge products 
disseminated nationally, 
regionally and globally  
Project reports 
Knowledge products 
0 
25 knowledge 
products 
40 knowledge 
products 
Agreement reached by key 
stakeholders on what 
knowledge products are 
required and how these need to 
be communicated to ensure 
uptake and application 
Knowledge products are 
available and accessible to all 
key stakeholders 
# local-provincial-national 
stakeholder forums 
convened 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Attendee list and meeting 
minutes 
Gov’t records 
0 
No formalized 
process for adaptation 
knowledge 
management  
2 forums 
6 forums  
Key stakeholders at national, 
subnational and local levels 
understand climate risk and the 
need for climate resilient 
practices to be amplified  
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Note: a sub-set of core project indicators will be used to assess progress on achievement of co-benefits. Where required, additional questions will be added to surveys/questionnaires and other 
monitoring tools to increase data on co-benefits.  
Co-benefit 1 
Increasing the household 
incomes of rural communities 
through livelihoods 
diversification and increasing 
access to markets. 
% target households 
participating in producer 
groups that report 
increased incomes 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t reports 
 
0%  
30% producer 
group households 
report increased 
incomes 
50% producer 
group households 
report increased 
incomes 
Producer groups are 
established and functional and 
can effectively access markets 
Household income increases 
relate to the current median 
household income in rural areas 
is VTU 52,269 per month (USD 
471) 
Co-benefit 2 
Increasing access to 
education by ensuring fewer 
school days lost in the 
aftermath of extreme weather 
events through adaptation 
planning and enhanced DRR 
action. 
% target communities with 
functioning CDCCCs 
 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 10% target 
communities 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All targeted communities 
engage in CDCCC formation 
and formalization  
% target CDCCCs with 
internet connectivity for 
CIS/EWS delivery 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 7% nation-
wide 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
100% target 
CDCCCs 
All CDCCCs are able to be 
connected and actively transfer 
information for CIS/EWS 
% target communities with 
adaptation plans in place 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All target communities 
participate in developing and 
formalizing plans

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-benefit 3 
Increasing broad community 
health outcomes by ensuring 
communities have more 
secure access to locally-
available nutritious foods. 
% target households in 
moderate or severe food 
insecurity  
(This indicator will also be 
used to assess progress 
against Output 2.3) 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t reports  
 
30% of households 
involved in 
agriculture, fishing, 
aquaculture and/or 
livestock are reported 
to be food insecure 
 
(30% of 19556 HHs = 
5867 HHs food 
insecure) 
 
25% of targeted 
households in 
moderate or 
severe food 
insecurity. 
 
(25% of 19,556 
HHs = 4,889 HHs 
food insecure) 
15% of targeted 
households in 
moderate or 
severe food 
insecurity. 
 
(15% of 19556 
HHs = 2933 HHs 
food insecure) 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
agricultural or fisheries 
production, before the project’s 
full implementation of 
interventions 
Target populations/household 
numbers and food supply 
logistics remain stable through 
project implementation 
# target farmers 
implementing climate 
resilient agriculture 
practices  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
720-1,380 people 
nation-wide (<25% 
female) 
14,000 farmers 
  
23,400 farmers 
  
Short term results are 
sufficiently promising to 
incentivize farmers to follow-
through on training and apply 
principles on farm  
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
agricultural production, before 
the project’s full implementation 
of interventions 
# target fishers diversifying 
fisheries resources 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 2,000 people 
nation-wide (<5% 
female) 
4,000 fishers 
6,800 fishers 
Fishers in targeted communities 
reached follow-through on 
training received by applying 
principles to diversify livelihoods  
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
fisheries production, before the 
project’s full implementation of 
interventions

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-benefit 4 
Increasing the sustainability of 
ecosystem services by 
reducing reliance on 
vulnerable resources (e.g. 
reef fish) as a primary food 
source in rural coastal 
communities. 
# target fishers diversifying 
fisheries resources 
 
 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
Approx. 2,000 people 
nation-wide (<5% 
female) 
4,000 fishers 
6,800 fishers 
Fishers in targeted communities 
reached follow-through on 
training received by applying 
principles to diversify livelihoods  
Market prices for key inputs or 
outputs in the value chain 
remain stable 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
fisheries production, before the 
project’s full implementation of 
interventions 
# hectares of agricultural 
and fisheries sites under 
improved management 
using nature-based 
solutions 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 hectares in target 
Area Councils 
5,800 hectares 
(approx. 200ha per 
target Area 
Council) 
11,600 hectares 
(approx. 400ha per 
target Area 
Council) 
Targeted communities prioritize 
nature-based solutions ahead of 
possible quick but 
unsustainable gains from 
destructive farming and 
resource management habits 
The project’s targeted area is 
not seriously disrupted by a 
major climate event affecting 
better managed sites, before 
the project interventions have 
been fully implemented 
 
Co-benefit 5 
Increasing gender equality 
across all areas of community 
life – with a specific focus on 
ensuring women’s voices are 
heard in climate-related 
decision-making forums and 
that the gendered nature of 
climate change impacts is a 
key component of all climate 
and development planning at 
community and province 
levels. 
 
* See GESI Action Plan for a 
comprehensive list of gender-
% target CDCCCs with 
gender balance  
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
90% target  
CDCCCs 
CDCCCs leadership open to 
addressing gender issues 
% target communities with 
adaptation plans in place 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All target communities 
participate in developing and 
formalizing plans 
# local-provincial-national 
stakeholder forums 
convened 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Attendee list and meeting 
minutes 
Gov’t records 
0 
No formalized 
process for adaptation 
knowledge 
management  
2 forums 
6 forums  
Key stakeholders at national, 
subnational and local levels 
understand climate risk and the 
need for climate resilient 
practices to be amplified

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
related indicators the project 
will track 
Co-benefit 6 
Increasing social inclusion 
across all areas of community 
life – with a specific focus on 
ensuring voices of traditionally 
underrepresented groups (e.g. 
youth, people with a disability) 
are heard in climate-related 
decision-making forums 
 
* See GESI Action Plan for a 
comprehensive list of social 
inclusion-related indicators the 
project will track 
% target CDCCCs with 
child/youth engagement 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
30% target 
CDCCCs 
90% target  
CDCCCs 
CDCCCs leadership open to 
including youth representation 
(as mandated) and facilitating 
child engagement 
% target communities with 
adaptation plans in place 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Gov’t records 
0 
50% target 
communities 
100% target 
communities 
All target communities 
participate in developing and 
formalizing plans 
# local-provincial-national 
stakeholder forums 
convened 
Project reports 
Survey/questionnaire 
Attendee list and meeting 
minutes 
Gov’t records 
0 
No formalized 
process for adaptation 
knowledge 
management  
2 forums 
6 forums  
Key stakeholders at national, 
subnational and local levels 
understand climate risk and the 
need for climate resilient 
practices to be amplified  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Component 1:  Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support local resilience to climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate information and 
early warnings 
Output 1.1:  Community-based climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction mechanisms are strengthened 
Activity 1.1.1  
Establish CDCCCs (where necessary) and build 
their capacity, including strengthening social 
inclusion and gender-balance 
Establish new, or strengthen existing, CDCCCs 
and build their capacity, including strengthening 
social inclusion and gender-balance.  
1.1.1.1 DoCC develops and field-tests CDCCC 
status assessment tool in partnership with DLA 
and NDMO 
1.1.1.2 Assess CDCCC status using field-tested 
tool (where CDCCC are established, evaluate 
gender-balance, engage children/youth and 
people with disabilities, and consult with 
community to identify opportunities to 
strengthen CDCCC) 
1.1.1.3 Support the development of CDCCCs as 
necessary based on the findings of 1.1.1.2, 
including, where needed, CDCCC kits and 
community workspace 
Assessments of CDCCC in all target 
communities  
100% of target communities have new or 
strengthened CDCCCs  
Activities to strengthen CDCCCs including 
social inclusion and gender balance in at least 
90% target communities  
Gender balance in CDCCCs in at least 90% 
target communities 
People with disability represented on CDCCC in 
at least 60% target communities 
Youth representatives on CDCCC in at least 
80% target communities

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
50% participants in education and training 
sessions are women 
Activity 1.1.2  
Increase CDCCC member capacity to identify 
climate change and disaster risks at the local 
level 
Increase the capacity of CDCCC members in 
effectively identifying climate and disaster risk.  
1.1.2.1 Conduct leadership and technical 
(DRR/CCA) training with CDCCCs, based on 
needs identified in 1.1.1.2  
1.1.2.2 Conduct targeted training for women in 
leadership and children/youth engagement in 
CDCCCs and adaptation planning processes 
1.1.2.3 Conduct follow-up refresher training 1 
year after initial training with CDCCCs as well 
as regular monitoring/support visits 
1.1.2.4 Establish communication channels 
through SMS or social media for CDCCCs to 
request information/support from 
NDMO/Provincial Disaster Officers in leading 
community education sessions 
CDCCC digitized train-the-trainer sessions 
conducted in at least 90% of target communities 
At least 90% of target communities receive 
community-education sessions 
At least 80% of target CDCCCs receive 
refresher training (years 2 onwards) 
Scaled-up access to information for rural 
communities through newly established 
communication channels in 29 Area Councils 
Output 1.2:  Communities have increased understanding of climate change impacts and are supported to develop inclusive local adaptation plans 
Activity 1.2.1  
Community awareness raising on climate 
change risks to food systems, livelihoods and 
disaster risk via targeted IEC materials and 
information sessions managed by Area Council 
Climate Change Officers and CDCCCs 
Build awareness in target communities on 
climate change and disaster risks to food 
systems and livelihoods  
1.2.1.1 Review existing climate change 
education and awareness raising materials 
available at the local level to identify gaps and 
opportunities for improvement 
1.2.1.2 Building on existing efforts by MoET and 
MoCC to develop standardised participatory 
climate change education and awareness 
raising materials and key messages on climate 
change risks to food systems, role of habitats in 
supporting fisheries, livelihoods and disaster 
risk  
1.2.1.3 Conduct best practice adult learning 
approaches to digitized train-the-trainer 
sessions with Area Council Climate Change 
Officers and CDCCCs using materials designed 
in 1.2.1.2 (delivered in tandem with 1.1.2.1 and 
1.3.2.2) 
1.2.1.4 Disseminate digital and paper-based 
awareness materials and extend training 
through local officers, CSOs and 
communication networks, as well as through 
participation in public events that provide 
outreach opportunities 
1.2.1.5 Facilitate face-to-face knowledge 
exchange events with local community 
representatives, area council representatives 
and sub-national government officials and 
Updated/new community awareness materials 
on climate change and disaster risks to food 
systems, livelihoods and disaster risk 
5 local officers trained in each Area Council 
(145 total) on delivering awareness on climate 
change risks to food systems, livelihoods and 
disasters  
Extension of awareness materials and 
messages through local offices, CSOs, 
networks and related project activities to be 
undertaken in at least 95% of target 
communities and 29 Area Councils to scale-up 
further 
At least 95% of target communities receive 
community awareness sessions 
144 community awareness media 
broadcasts/posts on climate change risks and 
impacts delivered to public via media sources

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives to help ensure local issues are 
considered in sub-national/national adaptation 
planning processes (linked to 3.2.2.3) 
Activity 1.2.2  
Identify key local issues that drive climate 
vulnerability and use this to develop local 
adaptation plans and measure program impact 
Support identification of key challenges and 
barriers that drive climate vulnerability to inform 
development of local adaptation plans.  
1.2.2.1 Build capacity of Area Council climate 
change officers in community profiling and 
documenting local vulnerabilities (consistent 
with National Vulnerability Assessment 
Framework, GESI principles and child/youth 
inclusive approaches) 
1.2.2.2 Conduct participatory community 
profiling and documenting of local vulnerabilities 
to record the key local issues that drive climate 
vulnerability to inform the development of 
Community Adaptation Plans 
1.2.2.3 Conduct rapid baseline biophysical and 
ecological surveys of key natural resources 
(habitats and species) that support food security 
and livelihoods and help measure program 
impact (including technical assessments of 
threats to watersheds, erosion hotspots, 
mangrove and reef health checks, fish catch 
surveys, invasive species, agricultural pests and 
diseases) 
1.2.2.4 Conduct household socioeconomic 
surveys to document resource dependence and 
important natural resources to inform local 
adaptation actions 
At least 90% of target Area Councils participate 
in technical training on facilitating community 
profiling and documenting local vulnerabilities  
Baseline report for biophysical and ecological 
condition for at least 90% of target communities 
and 29 Area Councils to scale-up 
Baseline report for household-level 
socioeconomic status and resource 
dependence for at least 90% of target 
communities and 29 Area Councils to scale-up 
Activity 1.2.3 
Development of inclusive Community 
Adaptation Plans and identification of key 
resilience building actions (selected from 
adaptation package menu) 
Facilitate development of Community 
Adaptation Plans and identification of key 
climate resilience building actions from the 
VCCRP ‘adaptation package’ of interventions. 
1.2.3.1 Sub-national government/CDCCCs 
facilitate participatory stakeholder engagement 
processes to develop Community Adaptation 
Plans, based on the data collected via activity 
1.2.2, which identify immediate and mid-term 
adaptation actions to address current and 
projected climate change risks 
1.2.3.2 Sub-national government/CDCCCs and 
diverse community representatives to select the 
highest priority and locally appropriate 
adaptations from the VCCRP ‘adaptation 
package’ (Component 2) that are socially 
acceptable, avoid adverse environmental and 
social impacts, and address the main drivers of 
climate vulnerability 
1.2.3.3 Finalise Community Adaptation Plan, 
including key priority activities for 
implementation by VCCRP and future activities. 
100% of target communities develop 
Community Adaptation Plans and prioritize 
interventions from VCCRP adaptation package 
100% of Area Councils participate in 
Community Adaptation Plan processes 
At least 60% of target communities update 
Community Adaptation Plans during project 
lifetime

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
Validate with community members and Area 
Council officials and update on a 3 year cycle  
Output 1.3:  Communities have increased access to climate information services and early warning systems and the skills to utilise them as adaptation tools 
Activity 1.3.1 
Develop and distribute CIS IEC products to 
support community adaptation awareness 
raising and adaptation planning processes 
Development and distribution of CIS IEC 
products to inform community-level climate 
change adaptation planning processes, 
including enhanced connectivity for CDCCCs. 
CIS products and knowledge management 
materials will be developed (including print, 
digital, audio, and mixed-media) for use in 
target communities in partnership with national 
authorities (including NDMO and VMGD), 
building on materials developed through Van-
KIRAP (FP035). 
1.3.1.1 Conduct best practice review and 
baseline study of existing access to EWS in 
high-risk communities (undertaken in 
conjunction with 1.2.2) 
1.3.1.2 Enhance community EWS infrastructure 
where gaps exist (installation of small rooftop 
satellite dishes) and establish system for 
CDCCCs to on-sell data capacity to cover costs 
1.3.1.3 Support CDCCCs to conduct 
participatory community meetings with an 
emphasis on the participation of elderly 
community members to identify, share and 
capture traditional knowledge for early warning 
of disaster or weather extremes related to 
agriculture or fisheries 
1.3.1.4 Deliver CIS products and materials to 
communities from the Van-KIRAP and 
NDMO/VMGD projects identifying opportunities 
to further extend tailored materials for 
community-level use in target communities. In 
support of 1.2.1.2  
1.3.1.5 Disseminate climate information to 
target communities through a range of media, 
including printed materials, social media, text 
messages and radio (e.g. radio drama). Linked 
to 1.2.1.4 
At least 90% of CDCCCs undertake baseline 
assessment of existing access to EWS and CIS 
At least 90% of CDCCCs have solar PV 
systems and internet connectivity with system 
for on-selling data for financial sustainability 
At least 90% of target communities and 29 Area 
Councils (to scale-up) reached with delivery of 
CIS materials and resources 
660 CIS communications through social media, 
text messages, radio and other media 
Activity 1.3.2 
Build capacity of Area Council Climate Change 
Officers and CDCCCs to effectively utilize CIS 
in community planning processes 
Activity 1.3.2 will strengthen the capacity of 
Area Councils and CDCCCs in the use of CIS 
resources and information to inform community-
level planning processes. Collaboration on 
delivery of CIS technical training with Van-
KIRAP (FP035) and national authorities (VMGD 
and NDMO) will avoid duplication of efforts.  
1.3.2.1 Optimise training materials that 
specifically address community needs and are 
tailored to community-level understanding of 
climate change, including integration of GESI 
considerations and child/youth inclusive 
approaches (extending CIS delivery from 
FP035)  
1.3.2.2 Train local Area Council Climate 
Change Officers/CDCCCs to deliver community 
training on accessing and using climate and 
early warning information, in conjunction with 
1.2.1.3 
1.3.2.3 Conduct community trainings on 
accessing and using climate information relating 
to fisheries, agriculture and disaster 
preparedness through CDCCCs building on 
Training materials and resources developed 
(including testing through VDPA) 
CIS/EWS training conducted in 100% of target 
communities and 29 Area Councils to scale-up 
Review of CIS-EWS use and future needs in at 
least 60% target communities in 29 Area 
Councils (from year 2)

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
increased community understanding of climate 
change from 1.2.1 
Component 2: Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community adaptation needs to create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways 
Output 2.1: Local natural resources are more resilient to climate change impacts through implementation of nature-based solutions 
Activity 2.1.1 
Support adaptations that strengthen or 
rehabilitate coastal protection barriers, reduce 
risk of flood/landslides and improve water-
security through nature-based solutions 
Deliver community-based education on coastal 
and upland resource management; develop 
coastal and upland resource management 
plans; establish living barriers; support 
reforestation of damaged forests and water 
catchments; manage invasive vine species 
impacting watersheds; and establish new / 
strengthen existing community conservation 
areas. 
2.1.1.1 Deliver community education and 
awareness raising on coastal and upland 
resource management 
2.1.1.2 Conduct planning workshops with sector 
stakeholders for development of community-led 
coastal and upland resource management plans 
(including cooperation between communities for 
cross-boundary resources) – drawing in 
information from 1.2.2 and 2.1.1.1. Resulting 
plans will form a component of the Community 
Adaptation Plans under 1.2.3 
2.1.1.3 Establish living barriers (vetiver and/or 
native trees) to storm winds, erosion or 
landslide zones to fortify slopes and reduce 
erosion 
2.1.1.4 Support reforestation of damaged 
forests and water catchments using native 
species (including native coastal vegetation) 
and micro check dams for erosion control and 
groundwater recharge 
2.1.1.5 Management of invasive vine species 
that impact on watersheds  
2.1.1.6 Establish or enhance traditional tabu 
areas for conservation of forest resources, 
including biodiversity 
Education sessions delivered in at least 90% of 
targeted communities  
Community-led coastal and upland resource 
management plans developed in at least 90% of 
target communities 
29 tree nurseries established 
11,600 hectares of agricultural and fisheries 
sites under better management using nature-
based solutions  
 
Activity 2.1.2 
Introduce/scale up improved agriculture 
methods to minimise erosion and reduce impact 
of pests and diseases 
Support agriculture technical officers at DARD 
to develop, produce, and deliver training and 
education materials on climate-resilient 
agricultural practices; develop and implement 
site-specific strategies to combat soil erosion; 
establish field demonstrations; distribution of 
trees and plants to prevent erosion and tools to 
support implementation. 
2.1.2.1 Develop and provide training and 
education materials on climate-resilient 
agricultural methods to minimise erosion and 
facilitate groundwater recharge  
2.1.2.2 Support communities to develop site-
specific strategies to combat soil erosion and 
loss and facilitate groundwater recharge  
2.1.2.3 Establish field demonstrations sites for 
soil erosion minimisation methods and facilitate 
groundwater recharge  
2.1.2.4 Distribute preventive species for erosion 
control, including establishing Area Council 
agro-forestry nurseries, and tools to support 
implementation (coordinated with 2.2.2.3) 
15,645 farmers attend training on climate-
resilient agricultural methods and erosion 
management (at least 50% of attendees are 
women and ensuring inclusivity for people with 
a disability) 
Erosion management demonstration sites 
developed in at least 90% targeted communities 
29 rehabilitated erosion hot spots to reduce soil 
erosion and sedimentation to coastal areas and 
scaled-up through Area Council extension

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.1.3 
Support communities to protect and rehabilitate 
habitats that support fisheries, particularly 
degraded coral reefs, seagrass meadows and 
mangroves 
Support provincial fisheries officers to develop, 
produce, and deliver training and education 
materials on mangrove and reef health, 
sustainable fisheries practices and coastal zone 
management; implement protections for local 
coastal habitats (including reduced mangrove 
clearing, limited reef gleaning); establish new / 
enhancing existing ‘tabu’ areas for 
environmental conservation (including 
freshwater resources, reef fisheries);  
rehabilitate key degraded coastal resources 
(including mangroves, seagrass meadows and 
coral reefs). 
2.1.3.1 Develop and provide training and 
education materials on mangrove and reef 
health, sustainable fisheries practices and 
coastal zone management 
2.1.3.2 Engage communities to establish priority 
areas and targets for action 
2.1.3.3 Establish or enhance traditional tabu 
areas for conservation of coastal resources and 
freshwater resources (if applicable), building on 
2.3.1.1 
2.1.3.4 Where relevant, rehabilitate degraded 
mangroves, seagrass meadows and coral reefs 
2.1.3.5 Management of climate-driven invasive 
species (i.e. crown of thorns starfish) 
282 education sessions on mangrove and reef 
health, sustainable fisheries practices and 
coastal zone management 
11,600 hectares of agricultural and fisheries 
sites under better management using nature-
based solutions  
Output 2.2: Climate-resilient agriculture for food security and livelihood development 
Activity 2.2.1 
Support adaptations to traditional farming 
methods to increase climate-resilience and 
increase food security 
Support DARD technical officers to develop and 
implement training materials on climate-resilient 
agriculture and water conservation techniques 
(including intercropping, seed selection, grafting 
techniques, and planting management); 
establish field demonstration sites to showcase 
climate-resilient agriculture methods using a 
participatory learning approach. 
2.2.1.1 Confirm and document what existing 
and traditional practices exist in each target 
community and their seasonal calendar (in 
combination with 2.1.1.1) 
2.2.1.2 Develop training materials on climate-
resilient agriculture and water conservation 
techniques that will best suit changing 
conditions based on information gathered in 
1.2.2 and combined with 2.1.3.1 – including 
intercropping, seed selection, grafting 
techniques and planting, management 
2.2.1.3 Conduct training on climate-resilient 
agriculture techniques at community level 
2.2.1.4 Establish field demonstrations of 
climate-resilient agriculture techniques 
(including traditional methods where 
appropriate) 
1,410 print copies of climate resilient agriculture 
training manual and education materials 
developed and circulated 
Farmers in at least 90% of target communities 
receive and attend training on climate-resilient 
agriculture 
Field demonstration sites established in at least 
90% targeted communities 
Farmers in at least 60% of target communities 
apply climate-resilient agricultural methods 
(including bio-controls), scaled-up through Area 
Council extension 
At least 80% of engagement includes separate 
women’s, disability and youth focus groups 
Activity 2.2.2  
Introduce/scale up adoption of climate-resilient 
native food and cash crop varieties 
Support the adoption (through increased supply 
and accessibility) of climate-resilient native food 
and cash crops, along with simple agricultural 
tools (including earth huger, rotavator) to 
increase productivity. Training will be provided 
to accompany distribution of new planting 
materials and tools. 
2.2.2.1 Establish new or support existing 
nurseries at Area Council level for raising 
climate-resilient seed stocks, including native 
food and cash crops varieties, and germinating 
seedlings for food and cash crops 
2.2.2.2 Distribute resilient native food and cash 
crops planting materials to communities, 
including identified climate-resilient varieties of: 
fruit and nut trees, coconut, vegetables, cacao, 
coffee and kava 
29 nurseries established / supported  
At least 80% of targeted farmers receive 
seedlings of climate-resilient native and cash 
crop varieties  
At least 80% of targeted farmers receive 
agriculture tools 
At least 80% of engagement includes a 
separate women’s, disability and youth groups

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2.2.3 Distribute simple agricultural tools to 
communities to increase production of resilient 
food and cash crops 
Activity 2.2.3 
Establish/scale-up community-, school- and 
home-based kitchen gardens for enhanced 
nutrition utilizing climate-resilient crops 
Support adoption (through increased 
understanding, supply and accessibility) of 
kitchen gardens to promote enhanced nutrition 
and climate-resilient crops. 
2.2.3.1 Deliver family-based nutrition education 
based on local food and kitchen gardens with 
diversified, climate-resilient crops and training to 
promote nutrition and greater use of traditional 
foods 
2.2.3.2 Distribute seeds, seedlings and plants to 
schools, communities and households to 
facilitate seed exchanges and seed saving to 
increase local independence and resilience 
2.2.3.3 Establish demonstration training 
gardens in schools and/or communities to raise 
vegetable and tree seedlings for increased 
climate resilient nutrition  
Community members in all 29 Area Councils 
receive training on kitchen gardens, 
agroforestry, climate-resilient farming and 
nutrition 
29 vegetable nurseries established 
29 kitchen gardens established in schools 
and/or communities across targeted Area 
Councils 
Output 2.3: Climate-resilient fisheries for food security and livelihood development 
Activity 2.3.1 
Build community capacity on coastal resource 
management and monitoring that supports 
sustainable fisheries 
Build the capacity of target communities on 
coastal resource management; identify 
‘community champions’; undertake Coastal 
resource assessments; development and 
delivery of coastal resource management 
training program. 
2.3.1.1 Engage communities to determine 
coastal habitat and resource conditions and 
threats (in combination with 2.1.1.1) 
2.3.1.2 Develop a culturally appropriate and 
scalable coastal resource management training 
program that includes key capacity areas: the 
effects of fishing, habitat management tools, 
monitoring, and sustainable self-governance, 
including a youth-focused component 
2.3.1.3 Deliver education and capacity 
development program developed in 2.3.1.2 
Coastal habitat area, resource condition and 
threats determined for 202 target communities 
At least 80% of target coastal communities 
engaged to establish participation in coastal 
resource management activities 
Subsistence fish catch data collected in at least 
90% of target coastal communities 
Fisheries food security and livelihood program 
developed and delivered in target coastal 
communities 
404 community Champions (202 male and 202 
female) in 202 target communities across 29 
Area Councils trained in local monitoring and 
management 
At least 80% of engagement includes separate 
women’s, disability and youth focus groups 
Activity 2.3.2  
Support communities to adopt primary 
community-based fisheries management to 
reduce climate change impacts 
Support adoption of primary community-based 
fisheries management; collect local fisheries 
data using community-based monitoring 
methods; establish long-term mechanisms for 
sharing data between communities and 
government; support implementation of climate-
resilient management techniques; distribution of 
off-shore fishing equipment  
2.3.2.1 Develop community-level capacity in 
leadership, monitoring and effective 
governance, including management of tabu 
areas  
2.3.2.2 Support community champions to collect 
local and relevant fishing data using established 
community-based monitoring methods to inform 
decision-making 
At least 90% of target coastal communities 
empowered to implement effective coastal 
resource management   
At least 80% of target coastal communities 
establish community-led management of 
coastal resources 
At least 80% of target coastal communities 
establish community-led monitoring

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3.2.3 Support community-level 
implementation of climate-resilient fisheries 
management and development of locally 
appropriate governance mechanisms  
2.3.2.4 Support diversification and sustainability 
of fisheries resources (alleviating pressures on 
inshore fisheries) by providing off-shore fishing 
equipment in targeted communities 
At least 80% of target coastal communities 
implement sustainable governance mechanisms 
Off-shore fishing equipment distributed to 112 
fishing communities (50% of targeted coastal 
communities) 
Output 2.4:  Women-led climate-resilient food processing and preservation established to support food security and diversification of livelihoods options 
Activity 2.4.1 
Introduce or scale up women-led local solutions 
for food processing and preservation 
Introduce new (or scale up existing) local 
solutions for food processing and preservation; 
provide information on relevant food processing 
and preservation techniques; provide adaptation 
technologies for food preservation and storage 
(solar dryers and solar freezers); support long-
term use, operation and maintenance of food 
processing and preservation systems. 
2.4.1.1 Local stakeholder engagement to select 
commodities that exist or can be introduced to 
communities that are most suitable for 
preservation and storage (based on existing 
traditional and cultural practices incorporating 
the latest best practice across the Pacific). 
2.4.1.2 Purchase and install food preservation 
and storage systems in target communities 
2.4.1.3 Support long-term use, operation and 
maintenance of food processing and 
preservation systems, including accessing 
spare parts and skilled labour as needed 
90% of target communities assess food 
processing and preservation options  
90% of targeted communities using local food 
preservation technologies  
100% of technology owned and managed by 
women-led producer groups 
30 youth entrepreneurs (100% women) 
supported to operate and/or maintain 
perseveration technologies 
Activity 2.4.2 
Support women to diversify into new 
agricultural/food commodities and value-add 
products that deliver greater income generating 
opportunities 
Support targeted communities to develop new 
women-led agriculture/food commodities and 
value-added products for income generation, 
including participatory and inclusive community 
engagement.  
2.4.2.1 Participatory community engagement to 
select opportunities for diversification into and 
value-add food and non-food products for 
income generation  
2.4.2.2 Support women to develop value-add 
products that generate income and access to 
new (distant) markets for emerging commodities 
utilizing food preservation systems under 2.4.1 
Product processing and preservation options 
assessed for 141 target communities 
60% of assessed target communities conduct 
feasibility assessment of suitable commodities 
for preservation and storage  
5 new livelihood commodities requiring 
processing and preservation developed by 
women in 90 target communities  
At least 90 women-led income diversification 
initiatives implemented, with at least 30 led by 
young women 
Activity 2.4.3 
Support women-led enterprises to access 
private partnership options to access new 
(distant) markets for value-add products 
Provide assistance for production and 
distribution of value-added products and 
agriculture/fisheries commodities, channeled 
through producer groups established at the 
community or Area Councils level. In 
collaboration with the VCCI, identify and 
facilitate private sector partnerships to further 
support community-level enterprise and 
enhance access to markets. 
 
2.4.3.1 Support women to develop producer 
groups (at community or Area Council level) for 
production and distribution of value-added 
products and agriculture/fisheries commodities 
2.4.3.2 Support the establishment of 
partnerships with private sector entities to 
facilitate community enterprise and enhanced 
access to markets in collaboration with VCCI   
90 women-led producer groups established for 
production and distribution of value-added 
products and agriculture/fisheries commodities 
6 partnerships established between producer 
groups and private sector entities to facilitate 
community enterprise and enhanced access to 
markets (in collaboration with VCCI)

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 3: Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive governance systems at the local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages 
Output 3.1: Adaptive local governance systems strengthened through sub-national planning 
Activity 3.1.1 
Support Area Council and Province officials to 
incorporate climate risk analysis and financing 
strategies into Area Council development plans 
and budgets 
 
Enable subnational officials to incorporate 
climate risk analysis into Area Council 
development planning and budgeting; develop 
tailored technical trainings for Area Council 
members, provincial government officials, and 
other relevant stakeholders; facilitate links 
between Area Council and Community 
Adaptation plans; technical support to enable 
assessment of gender gaps through gender-
responsive climate change budgeting and 
planning. 
3.1.1.1 Consolidate and synthesise community 
analyses (from 1.2.2) to develop Area Council 
level vulnerability mapping to inform planning 
and adaptation action 
3.1.1.2 Identify and address gaps in the 
integration of climate risks and adaptation 
actions into Area Council planning and 
budgeting processes  
3.1.1.3 Provide training and capacity building to 
Area Council representatives and technical 
advisory groups on the integration of climate 
change risks and adaptation actions into 
planning and budgeting processes (including 
gender-based risks of climate change)  
3.1.1.4 Provide technical assistance/ resources 
to subnational officials to undertake new/ 
updated assessments of climate and disaster 
risk to inform Area Council development plans 
and budgets 
3.1.1.5 Facilitate linkages between Area Council 
development plans and Community Adaptation 
Plans to avoid duplication or contradictions, and 
ensure consistent planning and budgeting 
3.1.1.6 Provide technical assistance/resources 
to local and sub-national government (Area 
Councils, provincial government) to assess 
gender gaps through gender-responsive and 
inclusive climate change budgeting and 
planning 
29 Area Council vulnerability maps developed 
Analysis of Area Council gaps undertaken 
Capacity building trainings on integration of 
climate risk analysis into planning and 
budgeting processes delivered in 29 Area 
Council 
29 Area Council budget processes established 
to fund Area Council adaptation activities that 
consider climate and disaster risk 
At least 60% of Area Councils operationalize 
gender-responsive budgeting practices 
Activity 3.1.2 
Build the capacity of local authorities to support 
operations of the CDCCCs and ongoing 
inclusive local adaptation planning processes 
Strengthen the capacity of local authorities 
(including Area Councils and CDCCCs) to carry 
out inclusive and effective adaptation planning 
at the local level; develop and implement 
technical training materials to address key 
competencies; ongoing support will be provided 
to local authorities for the inclusion of 
sustainable budgeting for CDCCCs as a 
component of Area Council Development Plans. 
3.1.2.1 Undertake Area Council capacity 
reviews to support local adaptation action in 
order to identify resource constraints and needs  
3.1.2.2 Building on 1.2.1 and 1.2.2, roll out 
further training to build capacity of Area 
Councils to support the ongoing operations of 
CDCCCs 
3.1.2.3 Assess the status of formal links 
between Area Councils and CDCCCs and 
support increased two-way communication and 
engagement  
At least 50% of Area Administrators/Liaison 
Officers/Area Secretaries in 29 Area Councils 
participate in capacity assessment  
At least 90% of Area Administrators/Liaison 
Officers/Area Secretaries in 29 Area Councils 
receive capacity building training  
At least 60% of CDCCCs in 29 Area Councils 
are allocated sustainable budgeting as part of 
Area Council Development Plan

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.2.4 Support the inclusion of sustainable 
budgeting for CDCCCs in Area Council 
Development Plans 
Activity 3.1.3  
Support NDMO to design and establish a 
shock-responsive social protection system 
designed for the needs of the most vulnerable 
households 
Utilise co-finance from Australia’s Department 
of Foreign Affairs and Trade to provide technical 
assistance to the National Disaster 
Management Office for the design of a 
government owned, shock-responsive social 
protection initiative. NDMO will be supported to 
develop and pilot locally appropriate targeting 
criteria (including inputs from Activity 1.2.2) to 
register the most vulnerable children and 
households in communities and to establish the 
framework for the system, linked to the 
strengthened sub-national CIS and EWS 
systems (including via output 1.3). 
3.1.3.1 Provide technical assistance to the 
NDMO to design a government owned, shock-
responsive social protection initiative aligned to 
strengthened sub-national CIS and EWS 
systems (linked to output 1.3). 
3.1.3.2 Develop locally appropriate targeting 
criteria to register the most vulnerable children 
and households in communities (linked to 
1.2.2). 
3.1.3.3 Establish a framework for a cash 
transfer system. 
social protection system designed 
criteria developed and tested  
cash transfer framework developed 
 
Output 3.2: Enhanced local-provincial-national linkages through knowledge management and creation of feedback loops 
Activity 3.2.1 
Capture lessons learned, emerging themes and 
best practices at the community level to ensure 
sub-national and national planning processes 
are informed by local needs and that local 
actions support national objectives 
Promote national and sub-national planning 
processes that are informed by community level 
experiences and that community-level actions 
are in support of national public policy 
objectives. Bespoke knowledge management 
products and resources will be produced and 
disseminated. Participation of community 
champions in national and regional forums. 
3.2.1.1 Produce knowledge management 
products that capture and emphasise local 
needs to national stakeholders directly involved 
in the production of high-level adaptation 
planning processes (Updated NDC, NAP 
development, UNFCCC reporting)   
3.2.1.2 Facilitate participation of community 
champions and local community liaison officers 
in national and regional forums (Pacific 
Resilience Partnership, PIFS side events, 
national climate change conferences/events, 
other CBA/GCF project meetings) supported by 
governments and development partners. 
Facilitate visibility and engagement of senior 
officials through project site visits  
3.2.1.3 Disseminate knowledge management 
products (participatory tools, videos, project 
reports, technical toolkits) that are translated in 
all three national languages to encourage 
meaningful consideration and usage at local 
level 
3.2.1.4 Increase the global adaptation 
knowledge base by linking project outcomes to 
national, regional and global processes 
30 annual knowledge management products 
produced 
18 annual national, regional and/or international 
forums participated in to disseminate local CBA 
knowledge 
80% of knowledge management products are 
translated into each national language 
Progress on gender equality, disability inclusion 
and youth participation included in annual 
knowledge management products 
Activity 3.2.2 
Support local authorities in monitoring and 
evaluation of national CCDRR policies at the 
Support monitoring and evaluation of the 
national sector policy on climate change and 
disaster risk reduction. Strengthen linkages and 
3.2.2.1 Establish a system to support sub-
national authorities (provincial staff, Area 
Council, Area Administrators/Liaisons) with 
80% of Area Councils capture, evaluate, and 
report CCDRRR sector policy implementation 
data to national authorities

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
local level and increasing dialogue between 
stakeholders at all levels 
communication between local, provincial, and 
national stakeholders. Support sub-national 
government to establish systems to enhance 
reporting on implementation of the national 
CCDRR sector policy. Facilitate participatory 
events to increase emphasis on long-term, 
community-level priorities within national and 
sub-national planning and budgeting processes. 
reporting on implementation of national sector 
policy in their respective local boundaries 
3.2.2.2 Facilitate meetings between national 
and sub-national government stakeholders, 
including non-governmental actors, to discuss 
actions to increase emphasis on long-term 
community-level priorities within national and 
subnational planning and budgeting processes; 
coordinated with VCAN activities 
7 annual dialogue meetings/forums held to 
increase communication vertically across 
government to increase inclusion of local needs 
in planning decisions 
1 national and 29 sub-national planning 
documents (e.g. strategic plan, business plans, 
etc.) reflecting long-term community needs 
identified by local actors 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
207. The project has a monitoring, evaluation, accountability and learning (MEAL) framework, designed to measure two main areas: 
• 
progress towards project objectives as articulated in the national climate change policy, updated NDC and the Resilience Framework, and  
• 
contributions to key GCF Investment Criteria and the Adaptation Performance Measurement Framework. 
208. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with Save the Children’s MEL systems and processes as well as 
align to the GoV National Planning Framework (NPF) and National Monitoring and Evaluation Policy (MEP) to ensure complementarity with 
existing government systems and reporting processes.  
209. The PMU’s MEAL manager/adviser will be responsible for designing a study to established baseline, mid-line and final data for: 
• 
Fund-level core indicators and outcomes 
• 
Project level results and indicators 
Monitoring 
210. Setting up the monitoring system of the project will involve different steps. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and 
implementation rests with the Project Manager. The Project Manager in consultation with key stakeholders will develop annual work plans to 
ensure the efficient implementation of the project.  A project inception workshop, involving the Save the Children Australia, the co-Executing 
Entities (MoCC and SCV) and other key stakeholders will be held within the first six months of the project. The overarching objective of the 
inception workshop is to: a) assist the Project team and stakeholders to understand and take ownership of the project strategy, objectives and 
outcomes and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles, support services and 
complementary responsibilities of the project team and the national government ministries including reporting and communication lines and 
conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess baselines as needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and 
evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan.  
211. The Project team will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored and reported on annually and will 
objectively report progress. Project components will be monitored separately as well as in relation to the achievement of higher-level projects 
results and overall GCF goals. The Project M&E will each cover two levels of performance: GCF-level performance (expected performance 
against investment criteria) and project-level performance.

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212. Details of MEAL implementation will be negotiated and included in the agreements between the AE, the Co-Executing Entities – the MoCC 
and Save the Children Vanuatu. Annual reviews will be led by the PMU with the participation of Area Councils and other government ministries 
involved in the project. With 29 Area Councils involved, the annual monitoring reviews may need to be organized at the provincial or sub-
provincial levels.  
Evaluation 
213. The project’s mid-term evaluation process will include an internal impact evaluation and an independent process evaluation.  An independent 
final impact evaluation will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of the project.  
214. The evaluations will rely on key evaluation questions (to be developed during inception planning) to respond to the performance and impact of 
the project's completed activities, and will include assessment against OECD-DAC and GCF evaluation criteria. These may include the 
following: relevance; effectiveness of the project and processes; the efficiency of processes; sustained impact and coherence in climate 
finance delivery; gender equity and inclusiveness; innovation and potential for paradigm shift; country ownership; coherence of climate 
finance; and potential for building scale and unexpected results (positive and negative). Overall, the evaluation will contribute to accountability 
and learning by reviewing emerging evidence on the performance and the impact and/or likelihood of the project and disseminating that 
evidence to project implementors, beneficiaries and stakeholders (including donors) to support evidence-based decision-making. The mid-
term evaluation will be instrumental in contributing – through operational and strategic recommendations – to improve implementation, setting 
out any necessary corrective measures for the remaining period of the project. The final evaluation will assess the relevance of the 
intervention, its overall performance, as well as sustainability and scalability of results, differential impacts and lessons learned. The evaluation 
should also assess the extent to which the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in 
adaptation to climate change in Vanuatu.   
215. The full MEAL plan is available in Annex 11.

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
* The top 5 risks for the project are provided below with further details on all potential risks (including low 
risks) in Annex 2 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Financial Management 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Public financial management systems of the government’s Executing Entity (MoCC) and government 
ministries implementing activities are unable to effectively absorb and distribute the increased volume of 
financing from this project on top of existing budget expenditure.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The fiduciary management procedures that will be utilized for the project under the Vanuatu Government 
decentralized model significantly reduces the overall risk and aligns with the intent of the Vanuatu PFEM 
Act (see Section G3 for further details). In addition, the AE has established and effective corporate policies 
regarding financial management that further mitigate this risk. 
While the Government does not have access to sufficient finance to meet current adaptation needs, 
Vanuatu has the Pacific region’s only functional Government Financial Management Information System. 
The FMIS is linked to a Single Treasury Account (STA), a single reporting system and a single chart of 
accounts. This means that all government ministries currently access all of their funds via the one system 
for both spending, reporting and commitment purposes. It is this total level of transparency and control that 
has enabled Vanuatu to be the first and, in many cases, only recipient of direct budget support from a wide 
range of donors including DFAT, the European Union, the US MCA, NZMFAT, UNICEF and others. The 
Vanuatu Government runs a fully centralized financial management system that has sufficient 
decentralized coverage through Government agencies in the islands (including Department of Finance). 
This system is functional and can handle significant flows of funding. Project resources allocated to 
government ministries (including Department of Local Authorities and Provincial governments; Department 
of Agriculture, Department of Fisheries; Department of Climate Change; and National Disaster 
Management Office) will all flow through this centralized system and will be tracked and reported via 
MFEM. 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Long-term capacity building 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Many international and regional donors are funding projects in Vanuatu that include site-specific activities 
and discrete government positions. Once this funding and the project ends, experience has shown that 
there isn’t the financial capacity for government to continue the role and the staff and institutional 
knowledge is lost, and project activities cease. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The VCCRP project will mitigate this by embedding sustainable approaches to changing the governance 
framework and empowering government ministries to increasingly lead implementation of project activities. 
This will help ensure the knowledge, experience, skills and staff positions supported by the project remain 
after the project ends. A key focus of the project is in building local capacity to access and effectively utilize 
future flows of climate finance, including at the most local level (by supporting the development of

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
prioritized and fundable local adaptation plans and building local capacity to harness CIS and increasing 
knowledge of appropriate adaptation actions implementable at the community level. 
Selected Risk Factor 3: Prolonged period to establish the project 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Medium 
Description 
A lack of technical capacity and slow government systems and processes can affect mobilization and 
implementation of projects, leading to significant delays in delivery of work plans and meeting funding 
agreement obligations, particularly in years 1 and 2. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The implementation schedule and budget allocations have specifically taken this risk into account, and the 
proposal includes a staggered approach to project mobilization and scheduling. Early project activities 
(particularly in years 1 and 2) will be significantly supported by `Save the Children Vanuatu who can 
mobilize quickly to support government activities while recruitment, training and other capacity building 
tasks are completed. This will ensure early implementation is not delayed while also not placing a sudden 
and over-whelming pressure on limited government resources. 
The early establishment of the Project Management Unity (PMU) will enable the timely initiation of the 
procurement of goods and services which will happen in parallel to the mobilization of sub-national 
government offices and staff leading to faster project initiation timeframes. 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Limited Government Capacity 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Current limitations in technical capacity and available resources within government, with multiple 
competing demands on personnel, can undermine robust governance structures for selecting new 
positions, project sites and administration of project work plans.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will be designed to avoid over burdening any one government delivery partner to minimize 
straining absorptive capacity and creating capacity constraints that delay project implementation. This is a 
key lesson from the implementation of a range of previous projects. Working with a range of relevant 
departments, including Department of Local Authorities and Provincial governments; Department of 
Agriculture, Department of Fisheries; Department of Climate Change; and National Disaster Management 
Office will ensure no one department creates implementation bottlenecks as has been the experience with 
some previous projects. The project will also provide direct technical assistance to Government 
departments and other delivery partners and supported through Save the Children’s systems and national 
footprint. The breadth of the project will also help ensure community capacity is not overwhelmed. Working 
across all six provinces will enable the project to spread the investment across space and time. A slow and 
considered development of in-country, local and ongoing technical capacity and ownership supported by 
national and international expertise will help ensure sustainable engagement across government and the 
building of government skills and technical capacity throughout the life of the project. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: FP035 (Van-KIRAP / Van CISRD) delays 
Category 
Probability 
Impact

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
If FP035 CIS, IEC and demonstration site outputs are significantly delayed VCCRP will not be able to 
utilize them as inputs to project activities.    
Mitigation Measure(s) 
FP035 has, to our understanding, completed a range of soft outputs relevant to VCCRP. Should timely 
inputs to activities be unavailable, we will work closely with DoCC and VMGD to identify other sources of 
information as inputs to VCCRP IEC and training materials (including those developed under the 
VMGD/SPREP/SPC COSPPac project – supported by Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology).

=== PAGE 97 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
216. The proposal is a Category C in terms of environmental and social risks. ESS screening of the 
proposed project was undertaken against the GCF Guidelines for the Environmental and Social 
Screening of Activities Proposed under the Simplified Approval Process (SAP) during the design 
phase. The SAP ESS screening is substantially the same as the Program Environmental and Social 
Sustainability Management System (PESSMS) that Save the Children uses internally for similar 
projects. The objective of these guidelines is to apply best practice standards while reducing process 
times for micro and small-scale activities that promote and support certain scalable and 
transformational activities, typically activities qualifying as Category C. The project qualifies to use the 
SAP guidelines because the proposed actions are small-scale at the individual activity level, including: 
local community-based watershed and habitat management and rehabilitation; climate resilient 
agriculture (including soil and water conservation) and community forest management activities.  
217. In undertaking this screening, the potential risks and impacts have been considered that include direct 
and indirect, induced, long-term and cumulative impacts and have taken into account the proposed 
activities area of influence. SEAH provisions have been included in the project risk screening and its 
Environmental and Social Assessment and Residual Risk Management Plan (RRMP) Annex 6, to 
prevent and respond effectively to SEAH in a survivor-centred and gender-responsive way in 
accordance with the Green Climate Funds (GCF) Revised Environmental and Social Policy (ESP) 
(B.BM-2021/18). 
218. As per the SAP guidelines, the screening has been carried out at the pre-mitigation stage to enable 
the most serious potential impacts of the activities to be considered. While there are several 
categories of sub-projects proposed under VCCRP, as per GCF requirements, the risk category of the 
highest risk activity is applied to the entire project.  
219. Part A of the SAP ESS Screening is against a set of exclusion criteria. The exclusion criteria describe 
activities that have specific risk factors that would (i) raise the overall environmental and social risks of 
the proposed activities and would (ii) require more detailed assessment. Outcomes of Part A 
screening are shown below and verify that the exclusion criteria are not triggered by the proposed 
activities and their associated tasks and therefore the SAP can be used for the VCCRP. 
SAP Exclusion Criteria 
Yes/No 
Will the activities involve associated facilities or generate 
cumulative impacts that would require further detailed due 
diligence and management planning? 
 
No 
There are no associated 
facilities56 on VCCRP 
Will the activities involve transboundary impacts including those 
that require further due diligence and notification to affected 
states? 
 
No 
There are no transboundary 
impacts57 associated with VCCRP 
Will the activities adversely affect working conditions and health 
and safety of workers or potentially employ vulnerable 
categories of workers including women and children?  
No 
There are no deemed risks to 
workers or to the employment of 
any vulnerable groups.  
Will the activities potentially generate hazardous waste and 
pollutants including pesticides and contaminate lands that 
would require further studies on management, minimization and 
control and compliance to the country and applicable 
international environmental quality standards?  
 
No 
 
56 Associated facilities are facilities that are not funded as part of the project, and that would not have been constructed or expanded if the project did not exist and without 
which the project would not be viable. 
57 Transboundary impacts are those outside the defined area and manifested in other neighbouring countries.

=== PAGE 98 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
Will the activities involve the construction, maintenance, and 
rehabilitation of critical infrastructure (like dams, water 
impoundments, coastal and riverbank infrastructure) that would 
require further technical assessment and safety studies? 
 
No 
Will the proposed activities potentially involve resettlement and 
dispossession, land acquisition, and economic displacement of 
persons and communities?  
No 
Any changes proposed to access 
of lands or resources through 
management measures will be 
voluntary and will be based on 
community decision-making  
Will the activities be located in protected areas and areas of 
ecological significance including critical habitats, key 
biodiversity areas, and internationally recognized sites? 
No 
Project activities are targeting 
degraded habitats and 
ecosystems for improvement 
Will the activities affect indigenous peoples that would require 
further due diligence, free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) 
and development of inclusion and development plans? 
No 
The target communities of 
VCCRP are ni-Vanuatu who make 
up 98% of the country’s 
population and are therefore not 
considered to be indigenous 
under UNDRIP 
Will the activities be located in areas that are considered to 
have archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, 
cultural, artistic or religious values or contains features 
considered as critical cultural heritage? 
 
No 
 
220. The SAP Part B requires that an ESS Screening Checklist (appendix of the Residual Risk 
Management Plan (RRMP)) be applied to the projects proposed activities. Screening was caried out 
using the screening template recommended as part of the Vanuatu GCF Accreditation Processes 
Report58. The screening tool indicates a low degree of concern and confirms a Category C rating for 
the VCCRP. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
221. Existing inequality and disadvantage in Vanuatu are amplified by climate change. Access to 
resources, decision making, information and safety are all mediated through norms associated with 
gender, disability and age. In rural communities, agriculture and fisheries are family enterprises with 
different roles undertaken by men and women of different ages and abilities. However, men own the 
majority of resources and women’s access is based on fathers, husbands and sons. Decision-making 
positions in “kastom” governance as well as national and provincial government are almost exclusively 
male. At family level there is greater evidence of shared decision-making. Community development, 
church and market committees are all places where space has been created for women’s decision-
making and is starting to shift social norms. People with disability and children remain excluded from 
these structures. 
222. National agriculture and fisheries policies now recognize the value of and importance of engaging 
whole communities and families – women, men, children and youth of all ages and people with 
disabilities. However long-established practices of working with male heads of household, focusing on 
their roles in agriculture and fisheries are slow to change. Women’s roles in ensuring food security 
and value adding through marketing, food and handicraft production have not been a focus of climate 
change adaptations. Yet women’s ability to grow food, fish, collect marine resources, and access 
 
58 Vanuatu’s GCF Accreditation Process: Environment and Social Safeguards Analysis and Recommendations, USAID Climate Ready Project, December 2019

=== PAGE 99 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
fresh water are all directly impacted by drought, heavy rainfall, high seas and depleting marine 
resources. Work burdens are increasing, and women face risks of gender-based violence travelling 
further to gardens and to collect water. Vanuatu already has high rates of gender-based violence 
which serves to underpin women’s exclusion from decision making, reinforces women’s unpaid care 
roles and limit women’s mobility. 
223. The project will provide opportunities for women, men, girls and boys of all ages to build their 
resilience to the impacts of climate change in ways that are meaningful to them. Comprehensive 
community and stakeholder engagement is the foundation on which locally-led adaptation is built. 
Under the project, all stakeholder engagement will have issues of gender and social inclusion and 
equity at their heart. CDCCCs will aim for gender equity in representation and decision making, and 
Community Adaptation Plans will be inclusively developed and address climate risk and resilience 
building from all community perspectives. The project will ensure that women and men have equal 
voice in the determination of community adaptation priorities and equally benefit from project 
activities. Activities implemented via the adaptation packages (Component 2) will work to address the 
specific adaptation needs of all community members, within the project’s scope, and (under Output 
2.4) focus exclusively on increasing women’s economic empowerment via supporting the 
establishment and operation of women-led enterprises which will help increase and diversify incomes. 
These needs and opportunities are further explored in the full GESI Assessment and Action Plan (at 
Annex 8).  
224. The GESI Action Plan notes that the project benefits women, people with disability and children and 
youth, as well as men. Project interventions will be targeted in ways that support women, people with 
disability and children and youth to access climate information, and resources and skills to adapt their 
livelihoods. To support lasting change the project will also address underlying social norms and 
behaviours associated with work roles and workload, leadership and violence. This means going 
beyond individual self-improvement activities for women, people with disability and youth to also 
transforming power dynamics at household, community, area and province levels that serve to 
reinforce inequality.  
225. A “twin track” approach to disability inclusion will be applied – working directly with people with 
disability, and also mainstreaming disability inclusion into the wider community and government 
systems. Vanuatu Society of Disabled People and Vanuatu Skills Partnership are key partners for 
building skills and training, while Vanuatu Disabled People’s Association (Santo) and Rainbow 
Theatre are important advocacy organizations.  
226. Youth will be engaged in project activities to ensure they benefit from adaptation actions and have a 
voice in adaptation planning and community-level decision making.  
227. The full gender and social inclusion assessment and project-level gender and social inclusion action 
plan is available in Annex 8. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
228. Fiduciary arrangements will follow a decentralized model, that involves the Accredited Entity (AE), 
Save the Children Australia, providing direct funding tranches separately to both co-Executing 
Entities, the Ministry of Climate Change and Save the Children Vanuatu, following endorsement of 
work plans and budgets by the Project Steering Committee and the NAB. Once funding is received by 
the Vanuatu National Government from the AE via the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, a decentralized 
financial management approach will be utilized, where each separate government agency will receive 
its own budget / appropriation following established work plans and will be responsible for reporting to 
the Project Management Unit at the Ministry of Climate Change for all expenditure. Existing 
administrative structures for reporting against funds received would be distributed across pre-existing 
line Ministry structures located in the Corporate Service Units of each Ministry (as opposed to being 
centralized in one unit only). This is the approach used by other programs such as the European 
Union Budget Support, as it significantly reduces the overall administration costs of the program and 
aligns with the intent of the Vanuatu PFEM Act. The EEs will follow the AE rules and policies. This 
requirement will be stipulated in the sub agreements.

=== PAGE 100 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
229. Funding received by Save the Children Vanuatu would be used for implementation of its work plan 
and programming, including the engagement of procured parties, as approved by the Project Steering 
Committee and NAB. 
Transparency Implications 
230. A decentralized model allows for coding of project activities at a higher level in the chart of accounts 
and as a result the FMIS general reporting system would be able to produce the financial reports 
required without additional analysis and manipulation. 
231. This model also provides a better representation of project spending as expenses are shown 
alongside other sector spending, which increases transparency and understanding of how these funds 
are being utilized compared to funds from other donors and the Government budget. The funds would 
also be more visible to the responsible line Ministries who can view and manage the budget used for 
the project activities they are expected to deliver. 
Administrative burden 
232. A decentralized approach can be more administratively cumbersome as it entails multiple spending 
units across the Government, however, these units already exist within the Corporate Service Units of 
each Ministry. Therefore, no new structures or work units need to be established in terms of funds 
administration and the workload would be distributed across pre-existing line Ministry structures. This 
is the approach already in use by other programs such as the European Union Budget Support as it 
significantly reduces the overall administration costs of the project. 
Control 
233. As mentioned above, a decentralized model allows more efficient coding of the project activities in 
terms of their alignment with the overall “funds control” of the Government system. By spreading the 
funds allocation across Ministries the project can use higher parts of the coding structure (program, 
activity, and cost centre) for which there are strong financial controls already in place that would 
prevent overspending or any one component of the program adversely affecting another. 
Alignment with government and donor policies 
234. A decentralized model is aligned with Government and donor policies and allows for an accurate 
representation of project resources by sector and such reports could be produced using the pre-
existing government reporting tools and templates without the need to extract and manipulate data 
externally. It is also aligned with recent Government declarations to provide a greater alignment of 
donor and Government resources in terms of how they are operationalized and reported on by sector. 
Performance management/auditing 
235. A decentralized model enables the project to link seamlessly into the Vanuatu Government’s system 
of performance management and reporting. Under program budgeting, each agency of Government is 
required to publish a “narrative” that accompanies the budget report. This narrative forms part of the 
presentation of the budget to the Parliament, and importantly contains service delivery or output and 
outcome targets. Each agency is then obliged to report on these targets. Hence, the project will use a 
decentralized financial model to link into the performance management reporting of Government, 
thereby removing duplicate reporting. 
236. Annual audit of the financials of the project will be completed by SCA’s independent external auditor, 
PriceWaterhouseCoopers.  Two Internal audit reviews to be conducted by SCA’s in house Head of 
Internal audit in years 2 and 5 which will focus on reviewing compliance with SCA’s policies and 
procedures and GCF requirements. The Australian accounting standards which are aligned to IFRS 
will be used for project reporting.  
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:

=== PAGE 101 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 102 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
59 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)59 
☒ 
Annex 23 
National Vulnerability Assessment and beneficiary selection

=== PAGE 103 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 104 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP184 
Proposal name: 
Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project (VCCRP) 
Accredited entity: 
Save the Children Australia 
Country: 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project offers an innovative approach to 
transforming local food systems and boosting 
resilience with long-term benefits  
None 
The project’s adaptation packages provide a 
unique opportunity to tailor solutions and 
long-term opportunities to local landscapes 
and ecosystems and their individual key 
challenges 
None  
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum VII, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
Vanuatu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to extreme weather events 
induced by climate change. It was ranked eighth in the 2020 Global Climate Risk Index and 
received the highest disaster risk score of 49.7 in the World Risk Report in 2020. The country 
has been suffering from increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, 
including heatwaves, flooding and tropical cyclones. Food systems and livelihoods in Vanuatu 
have been affected by these climate change impacts, as 80 per cent of the population depend on 
subsistence agriculture and are susceptible to rainfall variability and extreme rainfall. The food 
security of rural households who depend on coastal fisheries is also threatened by changes in 
the number, distribution and sizes of coral reef fish and invertebrate species brought about by 
climate change. 
4. 
The Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project aims to fill the adaptation 
deficit in 282 remote and rural communities across six provinces. It will do so by supporting 
access to and utilization of local-level climate information, integrating climate risks into 
community planning processes and implementing priority adaptation actions. The project will 
directly benefit 90,157 people in 28 Area Councils. These are the most vulnerable and socially 
marginalized people in Vanuatu, who will benefit through the implementation of the project’s

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 105 
 
 
adaptation packages, including the adoption of climate-resilient agriculture and fisheries and 
the development of diversified or enhanced livelihoods resilient to flooding, storm surges, 
salinization, drought and heatwaves. The project will also indirectly benefit an additional 
110,000 rural people.   
5. 
The total project financing is USD 32,650,440, with a request for GCF grants of USD 
26,182,878. Co-financing will be provided by the Government of Australia of USD 4,625,040 in 
grants, USD 1,541,230 in grants by the Government of Vanuatu and USD 301,292 in grants by 
Save the Children Australia (SCA). The project is submitted under environmental and social 
safeguards category C. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis  
Component 1: Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support local 
resilience to climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate information and 
early warning (total cost: USD 6.68 million; GCF cost: USD 6.02 million, or 90 per cent) 
6. 
Component 1 aims to strengthen the resilience of 254 local communities (90 per cent of 
the total number of target communities) to climate change impacts through establishing 
Community Disaster and Climate Change Committees (CDCCCs) that will guide adaptation and 
disaster preparation and response for the local communities. Under this component Community 
Adaptation Plans will be developed with CDCCCs and awareness raised among communities of 
climate change risks through targeted information, education and communication materials. It 
will extend climate information services and early warning systems to target communities via 
various available technologies, which will increase the technical competency of the communities 
in utilizing climate information services and early warning systems. 
7. 
Baseline assessment shows that CDCCCs are either non-existent or not fully functional in 
the target communities. However, as a result of the active engagement and strong 
determination of the Government of Vanuatu in its climate actions, their terms of reference, 
including their structure, roles and responsibilities, have already been defined within the 
National Disaster Management Office under the Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC). The 
proposed activity of strengthening CDCCCs is therefore deemed to be appropriate in filling the 
financial gap for operationalizing the committees, providing an opportunity to increase 
community-level ownership in managing disaster risks. Although the Government of Vanuatu’s 
in-kind co-financing will support this activity, it will be important to secure resources to 
continue the committees’ activities after project completion. 
8. 
The activities related to climate information services and early warning systems have 
been extensively discussed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity (AE) in view of the 
potential overlap of proposed activities with those of approved GCF project FP035, “Climate 
Information Services for Resilient Development Planning in Vanuatu” (Van-CIS-RDP). Detailed 
mapping exercises have been conducted at the activity level by the AE in aligning the activities 
between the two projects. In essence, output 1.3 in the proposed project will enable wider 
dissemination of the climate information generated by the Van-CIS-RDP project at the 
community level. This includes utilizing outputs from the Van-CIS-RDP project as an input to the 
proposed project’s community training and facilitating access to the Van-CIS-RDP project’s 
climate information services on an ongoing basis. 
9. 
The appropriateness and necessity of the proposed component has been justified in that 
the awareness-raising and climate information services provision under this component covers 
all types of beneficiaries, including government (Area Councils), civil society and communities. 
Activities under this component should be closely linked to the capacity-building under 
component 3, especially the knowledge generation and dissemination for the target 
communities.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 106 
 
 
Component 2: Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community 
adaptation needs to create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways (total cost: USD 
14.56 million; GCF cost: USD 13.89 million, or 95 per cent) 
10. 
Component 2 will strengthen agriculture and fisheries systems through nature-based 
solutions and local value chain improvement. The first output includes the reforestation and 
restoration of upland forest areas and shoreline vegetation, as well as the protection of critical 
watershed areas and marine habitats, leading to a total of 11,600 ha sites under better 
management. This will be done through distributing 500,000 tree seedlings and building at least 
254 erosion management demonstration sites. The second output will support 17,072 
smallholder farmer households in carrying out climate-resilient agriculture techniques in 
household plots through training and the provision of seeds and seedlings. 
11. 
This component is structured as an adaptation package, with a suite of adaptation 
activities in the agriculture and fisheries sectors. Target communities will be able to select the 
most appropriate and effective options within the package to meet their needs on the ground. 
Given the dispersed locations of the target communities in different Area Councils, the proposed 
approach is deemed adequate and the most feasible approach in delivering tailored adaptation 
solutions for the target livelihoods. While the exact adaptation interventions have not been 
determined for each community at the project appraisal stage, the proposal still manages to set 
overall output and outcome targets, as provided in the logical framework. The package has been 
designed based on wide stakeholder consultations and the targets may change depending on 
the needs of the communities. 
12. 
Under this component, GCF grants will be used to generate tangible outcomes to address 
food insecurity in the agriculture and fisheries sectors. The component focuses on the supply 
side of agricultural inputs, tools and techniques; to maximize upscaling potential, mechanisms 
that would incentivize target beneficiaries to adopt such inputs and techniques are required. As 
the priority has been given to addressing food insecurity due to climate change, such incentive 
mechanisms and business models have not been incorporated into the design of the project. It 
would be advisable to discuss, design and develop them as part of the knowledge products in 
component 3. 
13. 
The proposed agriculture and water conservation techniques are well-known and 
recognized agricultural practices that will produce ‘no regrets’ results. These techniques are 
based on a comprehensive stocktake of existing and traditional agricultural practices and crop 
calendars. As for the requested GCF grant funding, the proposal provides sound justification for 
the request of full concessionality, supported by the financial analysis, which shows marginal 
rate of return and net present value. 
Component 3: Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive governance 
systems at the local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages (total cost: USD 8.51 
million; GCF cost: USD 3.67 million, or 43 per cent) 
14. 
Component 3 aims to build the capacity of provincial and national actors, as well as local 
authorities, to integrate climate risks into their governance, planning and budgeting processes. 
Based on climate risk analysis and vulnerability mapping for each Area Council, a tailored social 
protection system will be established, including a cash transfer system, to protect the most 
vulnerable population against climate change. The second part of this component is to generate 
and disseminate knowledge management products based on lessons learned and best practices 
gleaned through this project.  
15. 
A concrete financial exit strategy is provided only to a limited extent. The proposed 
component offers a good opportunity to design and mainstream a financial exit strategy that is 
viable in the local context and the context of projected climate impacts, supported by a cash 
transfer system and business plans.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 107 
 
 
16. 
The proposed component is assessed to be adequate and reasonable, given the 
importance of sharing knowledge and good practices across communities and provinces. 
Considering the remoteness of the islands from each other, expensive travel and high costs of 
goods and services production, the most cost-efficient way should be used to disseminate the 
knowledge and know-how through established mechanisms, including CDCCCs.  
Project management (total cost: USD 1.47 million; GCF cost: USD 1.17 million, or 80 per cent)  
17. 
The GCF portion of the project management cost is about 4.7 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
  
                               Scale: N/A  
18. 
 The project targets the most vulnerable and marginalized communities in Vanuatu 
covering a vast area of islands, including some of the most remote islands in the Vanuatu 
archipelago covering all six provinces. A total of 90,157 direct beneficiaries, or 33 per cent of the 
population, will become more resilient and achieve diversified livelihoods through the 
sustainable use of the adaptation packages and access to climate information services fostered 
by the project. The packages and the information services will enable the target communities to 
diversify their livelihoods and make them less vulnerable to shocks and hazards as well as less 
prone to future shocks caused by cyclones.  
19. 
The project will further reduce food insecurity and malnutrition by diversifying the 
existing farming and food systems by promoting highly diversified local food products that will 
provide communities with a very varied, healthy, nutritious and sustainable diet. 
20. 
The project offers a unique platform for scaling up the best practices fostered by the 
adaptation packages, the strengthened resilience and the enhanced capacity at both government 
and community level. This will be ensured by an innovative project design adapting the 
packages and support to the specific needs of the circumstances and challenges of each 
community group through government and national partners.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
  
  
 
 
        Scale: N/A  
21. 
The Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project fosters innovative solutions to 
meet the current climate challenges faced by communities on a daily basis and empowers them 
to become less vulnerable and build a solid platform to further diversify their livelihoods and 
adapt to future challenges, including shocks and hazards from cyclones.  
22. 
By combining the adaptation packages, well designed and adjusted to each of the 
provinces, islands and local circumstances, farming and food systems, with access to detailed 
and continuous climate information and built capacity across all levels of Vanuatuan society, the 
project will be able to improve the current situation for the poorest and most vulnerable 
population groups. Furthermore, it will offer a long-term solution to the continued 
empowerment of communities across the archipelago in adapting to future challenges and 
shocks and strengthen local food systems to provide healthy and nutritious diets as well as 
fostering rural entrepreneurship. 
23. 
The adaptation packages offer a unique platform to cater to the demands, challenges, 
opportunities and investment options of each community and its local landscapes and food 
systems.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 108 
 
 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
  
 
        Scale: N/A 
24. 
The project empowers communities through capacity-building, ensuring better access to 
education services and the sustainable management of ecosystem services and enabling 
communities to diversify their food systems and create jobs and growth at the local level as well 
through the adaptation packages. This will allow communities to strengthen and diversify their 
household incomes and help to create robust productive landscapes.  
25. 
The project will further boost health conditions for targeted communities through 
better access to healthy and diversified diets with locally produced and processed food, and this 
access and processing will continue to be expanded and take a new direction throughout 
implementation and beyond.  
26. 
Furthermore, the project fosters strong gender mainstreaming across the activities, 
ensuring equal participation in decision-making across the community groups and at the 
provincial level.  
3.4 
 Needs of the recipient  
 
 
  
                    Scale: N/A 
27. 
The project targets the most needy, vulnerable and poorest communities across the 
archipelago. The targeted communities are also the most marginalized.  
28. 
Coronavirus disease 2019 has had devastating impacts on the local economies across 
the six provinces, with market access blocked to the local communities, not to mention the 
collapse of the tourism sector.  
29. 
Vanuatu regularly experiences category 5 tropical cyclones, causing significant damage 
to local infrastructure and food systems and presenting a challenge to the government in 
financing the rebuilding of multiple damaged areas.  
30. 
The project will build the capacity of government across all levels and in parallel with 
empowering communities to better withstand such shocks and hazards and boost local food 
systems to be more productive, resilient and long term oriented.   
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
  
 
        Scale: N/A 
31. 
The project objectives and structure are fully aligned with all strategic frameworks of 
the country.  
32. 
The first nationally determined contribution of Vanuatu underlined the key priority of 
adaptation solutions. The country’s national adaptation programme of action also focuses on 
adaptation, pointing to five priority areas headed by agriculture and food security.  
33. 
The updated nationally determined contribution zooms in on quantifiable adaptation 
targets seeking to further boost resilience in the agriculture and water sectors. Agriculture is 
targeted as a main strategy with the focus on household income and nutrition needs in a 
changing climate.  
34. 
National policies and strategies such as the National Sustainable Development Plan also 
point directly to the key priority of building adaptation solutions that focus on food and 
nutrition. In addition, the Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016–2030 
outlines the key importance of adaptation solutions.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness   
                                            Scale: N/A

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 109 
 
 
35. 
The structure of the proposed adaptation packages supported by the information 
services and capacity-building provides a platform for transforming local livelihoods, boosting 
resilience and modifying food systems to generate a multitude of services and opportunities for 
rural entrepreneurship and value chain development focusing on local production and 
processing.  
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
36. 
The project is classified as environmental and social safeguards category C. The project 
has developed an environmental and social assessment and residual risk management plan that 
provides for screening of proposed activities and management of potential minimal 
environmental and social residual risks and impacts. The environmental and social co-benefits 
include increased access to locally available food supplies; enhanced ecosystem services 
through reforestation, erosion control and shoreline protection; and increased access to 
education as a result of the enhanced capability to adapt to extreme climate events through 
better planning and implementation of disaster risk reduction strategies. The AE has requested 
minor revisions and clarifications of the plan, which will need to be addressed prior to Board 
circulation.  
37. 
The revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 
requires safeguarding from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed 
activities. As the Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project aims to support highly 
vulnerable remote and rural communities across all six provinces of Vanuatu, where custom 
laws and practices are predominately administrated by male chiefs in rural areas, the SEAH 
risks associated with the project need to be addressed.  
38. 
The project has incorporated screening and management of SEAH-related potential risks 
and impacts in its relevant safeguards instruments, such as the Residual Risk Management Plan. 
As SEAH stems from unequal relations and power dynamics resulting in a culture of 
discrimination and privilege, the project examines such risks with regard to the project 
workforce and affected communities. The project considers that project staff and consultants 
spending time in communities, including occasionally overnight, will have influence or relative 
power over the distribution of project inputs where community members may not be aware of 
or able to identify and report any SEAH incident.  
39. 
To resolve the SEAH risks associated with the unequal power dynamics, the project has 
identified relevant measures in the Residual Risk Management Plan to mitigate and manage the 
SEAH risks and impacts by providing awareness-raising and training to build capacities for both 
its workforce and affected communities on the SEAH policy and SEAH-related procedure for 
monitoring and reporting and the project grievance redress mechanism. The project also plans 
to identify and equip community child protection and SEAH focal points to monitor the conduct 
of project staff during project implementation and report concerns or incidents as they arise. To 
ensure that the project-specific grievance redress mechanism responds to SEAH incidents, the 
project will train staff to handle sensitive disclosures and make referrals to appropriate service 
providers. 
40. 
The project identifies SEAH mitigation measures, including integrating SEAH into staff 
induction and training, reflecting SEAH prevention and response in the planning and initiation 
of community-based activities and monitoring SEAH risks and incidents throughout project 
implementation. The project considers that putting the SEAH prevention and response 
measures into place will not imply additional costs to the project as they are seen or costed as 
part of the project design.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 110 
 
 
41. 
The SEAH safeguarding undertaken by the AE is aligned with the SEAH provisions of the 
revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The AE is required to take all necessary measures 
to ensure such alignment to prevent and respond effectively to SEAH in a survivor-centred and 
gender-responsive way.  
4.2 
Gender policy 
42. 
The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal and 
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. 
43. 
Vanuatu’s constitution provides rights to live freely without discrimination on the basis 
of sex. The country prepared the second national gender equality policy to enhance women’s 
economic status, mainstream gender equality into national sectoral policies, increase women’s 
participation in leadership and decision-making and foster gender-responsive community-
driven solutions to climate and disaster resilience. Vanuatu is a signatory to the Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. In addition, it has signed related 
regional commitments such as the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality Declaration. National 
institutional arrangements include the Department of Women’s Affairs situated in the Ministry 
of Justice and Community Services. The department is responsible for policy and programme 
development and supporting mainstreaming of gender into other government departments; 
however, it has limited technical and financial capacity at the national and provincial level to 
deliver on its mandate adequately.  
44. 
Social norms shape gender matters by giving men control over women’s behaviour and 
privileges to make decisions in traditional settings. Women have limited access to resources 
such as land, which is mediated through husbands and sons. Caring for family members, 
managing food gardens, fishing and water collection, handicraft work and selling produce at 
markets are roles assigned to women. Men have greater mobility and can be engaged in 
employment outside the home, including in urban centres and other countries.  
45. 
Women and men are active participants and producers in the fisheries and agriculture 
sectors. They grow different crops and use different levels of technology in agriculture. Women 
lead in weeding, planting and maintaining crops closer to home, while men take on clearing and 
ploughing land, including use of machinery. Women’s gender roles restrict their access to 
training and extension initiatives. Extension services and enterprise development training 
usually target male heads of household, thereby valuing men’s work over that of women. Deep 
water fishing with larger vessels for sale is a male-dominated activity, while women undertake 
coastal gleaning and fishing from canoes for food security, and aquaculture and fish processing 
to generate income. Although women participate in fishing their contributions are undervalued. 
The gender assessment also describes challenges faced by people with disabilities and the 
compounded issues of women with disabilities in Vanuatu. People with disabilities are targeted 
for stakeholder engagement, training and inclusion in committees. 
46. 
Community meetings, key informant interviews and women’s focus group discussions 
undertaken in the preparation phase of the project identified challenges associated with 
adapting to climate change and responding to natural disasters, the limited inclusion of women 
in community committees and the need for income generation. The following priorities were 
highlighted, especially by women: training on agricultural practices, value addition and financial 
literacy, food security and income diversification. Even though these priorities were identified, 
the gender assessment does not clearly describe the opportunities presented by the project to 
address them. Nonetheless, they are reflected in the gender action plan. 
47. 
The gender action plan submitted with the proposal contains activities aligned with 
those of the project, performance indicators, baseline, sex-disaggregated targets, timelines and 
responsibilities. The project aims to address the limited inclusion of women in community

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 111 
 
 
structures by targeting a gender balance in CDCCCs to improve women’s participation in 
leadership and decision-making positions at the community level. Project benefits will be 
accessible to both women and men and sex-disaggregated targets are included for each activity. 
Although the funding proposal has outlined in detail the activities that will be supported by the 
project, the gender action plan describes them broadly as project-provided resources which will 
be accessible to women and men equitably. The gender action plan includes opportunities for 
women and men to participate in training on climate-resilient agriculture, canoe making and 
value addition skills. This responds to issues raised in stakeholder engagement during the 
project’s preparation and the gender assessment. Furthermore, inputs will be provided in the 
form of seeds, seedlings, simple agricultural tools, food processing and preservation 
technologies and fishing equipment. Other project benefits include food processing and 
preservation equipment such as solar food dryers and freezers to support food security. Needs 
and priorities identified in the consultation process to deliver income-generating opportunities 
to enhance resilience to climate change are reflected in the gender action plan through the 
support to market access provided to women-led producer groups which will be established for 
bringing agricultural and fisheries goods and value addition. 
48. 
Implementation arrangements include a gender equality and social inclusion adviser for 
the project who will be included in the project management unit to supervise and guide the 
execution of the action plan. The Department of Women’s Affairs will be included in the project 
steering committee. Executing entities (EEs) will also participate in the implementation of all 
the activities in the action plan. In addition, costs allocated from the project’s budget are 
included for each activity listed in the action plan.  
49. 
The AE is required to collect sex-disaggregated data on all activities where communities 
will benefit from project-provided resources and report accordingly to GCF as per the action 
plan. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk) 
 
50. 
This is an adaptation project that seeks to support vulnerable rural communities in 
Vanuatu by implementing targeted adaptation actions and facilitating decentralized governance 
structures that enable rural populations to adapt to changing climate trends and reduce disaster 
risk. GCF is requested to provide USD 26.3 million in grants. Additional co-financing will come 
from the Government of Australia (USD 4.6 million grant), the Government of Vanuatu (USD 1.5 
million in-kind contribution) and the AE (USD 30,000 grant for project management costs).   
51. 
Vanuatu is a small island developing State. Moreover, given the public nature of the 
proposed activities and the difficulty of access to finance for community-based adaptation, the 
AE deems it appropriate to request grant funding.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
52. 
SCA is the AE of this project. It is a non-governmental organization based in Australia 
that operates internationally through its network. Globally, SCA is implementing a portfolio of 
over 100 resilience-related projects and programmes valued at more than USD 200 million, 
including those with explicit objectives to reduce climate and disaster risks, as well as to 
increase adaptive capacity and speed recovery from shocks and stresses. Specifically, SCA has 
implemented adaptation projects in countries including the Philippines, Bangladesh and 
Vanuatu.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 112 
 
 
53. 
The project will be co-executed by two entities, namely, the Government of Vanuatu, 
acting through MoCC, and Save the Children Vanuatu (SCV). MoCC will retain overall 
responsibility for the implementation of the project; it will be the lead EE for all outputs and 
activities. Both entities have experience in managing and delivering climate change programmes 
across Vanuatu at a range of scales and from a variety of funding sources; for example, MoCC is 
the co-EE for the Van-CIS-RDP project referred to in paragraph 8 above as well as the EE for a 
number of donor-funded projects, including via the Global Environment Facility. SCV is a 
separate legal entity that is managed by SCA and utilizes the SCA systems and processes. The AE 
has completed an initial partnership assessment for MoCC, which identified no red flag risks. 
However, an organizational review of SCV highlighted challenges in areas such as capacity and 
procedures. SCA expects remedial actions to address the identified shortcomings to be 
concluded in early 2022. 
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
54. 
Long-term sustainability: two out of the three major components in this project will be 
dedicated to awareness-raising and/or capacity-building in order to foster understanding of 
climate change impacts and develop local adaptation plans, strengthen the capacity of 
government officials and incorporate climate risk analysis and financing strategies into the 
planning process. It may take time for such support to eventually translate into concrete actions 
within communities. The lag may affect the long-term sustainability of the project.   
55. 
Financing risk: multiple aspects of the proposed exit strategy hinge on the fact that 
financial resources from the national government will be allocated to community-based 
adaptation activities. However, the national government does not currently have sufficient 
funding, given the political complexities with budget cycles and approvals. At the subnational 
level, little to no funding is invested in community-based adaptation as this is not featured in the 
planning process. Although this project is envisaged to raise awareness and influence the 
central allocation of funds, subsequent funding to ensure the sustainability of community 
resilience measures could become a challenge.   
56. 
Economic analysis: a cost–benefit analysis returns a project-level economic internal rate 
of return of -1 per cent. The benefits are estimated by valuing the avoided damage, erosion and 
carbon emissions, as well as calculating production and income increase for agricultural 
activities. The negative internal rate of return indicates that the total costs outweigh the 
envisaged economic benefits, thus giving rise to questions about the viability and effectiveness 
of GCF investment in this project.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
57. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains 
non-material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal. 
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk) 
58. 
Vanuatu is not the subject of any current targeted United Nations Security Council 
resolutions or sanctions regimes. 
59. 
SCA, as the AE, confirmed that no project activities will be undertaken in a jurisdiction 
which is subject to or affected by United Nations Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, no 
individual or entity that is listed on any United Nations Security Council sanctions list, including 
the United Nations Consolidated Sanctions List, will be involved in any manner with the project 
or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer or beneficiary.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 113 
 
 
60. 
SCA completed partnership assessments in October 2021 for its EEs, namely SCV and 
the Government of Vanuatu represented by MoCC, as follows: 
(a) 
SCV: the data collected for the assessment included a review of policies and procedures, 
summary findings of an audit completed by the SCA Global Assurance team in 2021 and 
discussions with the SCV team. The assessment found that SCV overall has strong 
systems, capacity and experience to implement the scope of work outlined in the 
funding proposal. No red flag risks were identified per the Initial Partnership 
Assessment (IPA); and 
(b) 
MoCC: the data collected for the assessment included a review of related policies, a 2020 
Public Finance Management Assessment by the Australian Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade for the Department of Education and the Government of Vanuatu 
overall, and discussions with MoCC staff. The assessment found that MoCC has the 
experience and expertise to successfully carry out the scope of work outlined in the 
project. Owing to limited access to MoCC staff during the review period, the data 
compiled by SCA on key areas of the MoCC financial systems are not fully complete and 
will require additional information gathering in collaboration with MoCC partners to fill 
gaps relating to controls, reporting, planning and staffing. Similarly, while SCA reviewed 
the Ministry of Finance and Economic Management and MoCC procurement guidelines, 
which were deemed adequate as outlined in their procurement manuals, it was unable 
to confirm how these policies and procedures are followed on a day-to-day basis. While 
the review identified no red flag risks, SCA will continue to collaborate with MoCC and 
plans to update the Initial Partnership Assessment (IPA) on an ongoing basis throughout 
project delivery and support MoCC in addressing any weakness as identified. 
61. 
SCA confirmed a broad array of control mechanisms established to address money-
laundering and terrorism financing risks, including: 
(a) 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy;  
(b) 
Regular vetting processes carried out for staff, partners and suppliers, in line with the 
SCA Staff and Partner/Supplier Vetting Guidelines; 
(c) 
Whistle-Blower Policy and Procedure; 
(d) 
Incident reporting mechanism for receiving and managing reports of suspected or 
alleged fraud, corruption or dishonesty, including anti-money-laundering and 
countering the financing of terrorism; 
(e) 
Reference and background checks carried out for new staff;  
(f) 
Partner assessment completed for all delivery partners and updated regularly; 
(g) 
Participatory programme design and implementation, including by the Government of 
Vanuatu and SCV; 
(h) 
Embedded Program Management Unit, which is jointly recruited by SCA; 
(i) 
Active Technical Working Group and Project Steering Committee approving 
disbursements; 
(j) 
Strengthened government financial management and procurement processes; 
(k) 
Financial management and procurement assessment conducted during 
effectiveness/start-up and regularly thereafter; 
(l) 
Audits and spot checks in relevant ministries; 
(m) 
Monthly budget v actual expenditure reports; 
(n) 
Rigorous background check on programme staff;

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 114 
 
 
(o) 
Electronic transfer of funds where applicable; and 
(p) 
Regular publicity about the programme, its targets and achievements. 
62. 
Similarly, SCA confirmed a broad array of control mechanisms established to address 
fraud and corruption risks, including: 
(a) 
Fraud, Bribery and Anti-Corruption Policy; 
(b) 
Whistle-blower Policy and Procedure; 
(c) 
Incident reporting mechanism for receiving and managing reports of suspected or 
alleged fraud, corruption or dishonesty; 
(d) 
Fraud refresher training for all SCV staff, consultants, MoCC staff and other government 
department staff and community volunteers involved in the project; 
(e) 
Strengthened government financial management and procurement processes and a 
programme operations manual for finance and procurement; 
(f) 
Financial management and procurement assessment conducted during 
effectiveness/start-up and regularly thereafter; 
(g) 
Regular audits; 
(h) 
Monthly budget v actual expenditure reports – Global Movement of Children (GMC) 
reports; 
(i) 
Rigorous background checks on programme staff (recruitment process); 
(j) 
SCV working closely with the Ministry of Infrastructure & Public Utilities (MIPU) to 
strengthen the MIPU procurement system to ensure that no fraudulent activities occur; 
(k) 
Robust internal financial guidelines and checks and whistleblowing policy; and 
(l) 
Monthly project monitoring reports – GMC. 
63. 
SCA confirmed that it does not to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries, either directly 
or indirectly, cash, vouchers or commodities. However, it advised that the project plans to 
distribute low-value, simple agricultural and offshore fishing equipment to targeted households. 
The project will also distribute food processing and preservation equipment (solar dryers and 
freezers) to a number of communities. This will be carried out as follows: 
(a) 
The agricultural and fishing equipment will be distributed direct to households via 
community-level agreements under the Community Adaptation Plan in each targeted 
community (which will be developed through a collaborative stakeholder engagement 
process, endorsed by community and approved by the EEs). Distribution will be 
undertaken by relevant government departments (Department of Agriculture and Rural 
Development [DARD], Vanuatu Fisheries Department [VFD] and Department of Local 
Authorities [DLA]); and 
(b) 
The food processing and preservation equipment will be distributed to community-level 
producer groups identified via the Community Adaptation Plan process. Again, 
distribution will be via relevant government departments and approved by the EEs 
through the Community Adaptation Plans. 
64. 
SCA advised that the project will provision limited materials and technology to CDCCCs, 
co-operatives and other established and government accredited institutions which will limit 
diversion or misuse. SCA confirmed that, for the materials and technology that are distributed, 
the project will proactively engage with CDCCCs to establish community buy-in, increase 
knowledge of proper use and regularly publicize accountability mechanisms such as the 
whistle-blower, complaint and grievance redress mechanisms. Project monitoring will include 
checking on the presence and use of any distributed materials districted by the project.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 115 
 
 
65. 
SCA confirmed that its Whistle-blower policy was provided during accreditation and 
applies to all SCA staff, SCV staff and partner organizations. Supplemental to the whistle-blower 
policy, SCA maintains a complaints process that is accessible via phone, email and post. 
66. 
Recommended risk rating: the Compliance Team of the Office of Risk Management and 
Compliance (ORMC) has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant GCF 
Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to 
compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the ORMC 
Compliance Team has determined a risk rating of medium and has no objection to this request 
proceeding to the next steps. 
67. 
The ORMC Compliance Team would like to remind SCA, as the AE, of its continuing 
obligations and responsibilities with regard to monitoring and reporting any risks with respect 
to money-laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited practices among the intended 
counterparties, EEs, beneficiaries, persons involved or any of the proposed activities. 
4.3.6. 
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment 
Risk assessment 
Overall project/programme 
Medium 
Pending capacity issues with SCV need to be 
addressed  
The Vanuatu Government’s continued 
willingness and ability to mobilize co-
financing will be critical for the sustainability 
of enhanced community resilience 
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability to implement 
the project/programme 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
68. 
SCA is the AE for this project. The Government of Vanuatu acting through MoCC and SCV 
will co-execute the project. 
69. 
SCV and MoCC will work with other government ministries and procured parties to 
deliver agreed national-level activities. The in-kind support to be received from the Government 
of Vanuatu is a 10.7 per cent allocation from their approved recurring ministry budgets. SCA 
will review monthly expense reports prepared by the ministries of recurring costs against the 
recurring budget and extrapolate and report on the cost in relation to this budget. The internal 
audit reviews will include the in-kind funding support from the Government of Vanuatu in their 
sample selections for review. The Programme Management Unit will monitor the in-kind 
contribution and report it as part of the Annual Progress Reports and audits. 
70. 
The EEs will follow the AE rules and policies. This requirement will be stipulated in the 
sub-agreements. 
71. 
Annual audit of the financial statements of the project will be completed by SCA’s 
independent external auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers. Two internal audit reviews are to be 
conducted by the SCA in-house Head of Internal Audit in years 2 and 5, which will focus on 
reviewing compliance with SCA policies and procedures and GCF requirements. The Australian 
accounting standards, which are aligned to International Financial Reporting Standards, will be 
used for project reporting.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 116 
 
 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
72. 
This is an adaptation project focusing on supporting highly vulnerable rural 
communities across Area Councils in Vanuatu to increase their resilience to climate variability 
and change by implementing targeted adaptation actions and facilitating decentralized 
governance structures that enable rural populations to adapt to changing climate trends and 
reduce disaster risk. The project’s adaptation packages provide a menu of actions to support 
households and communities in addressing key drivers of climate change vulnerability, 
minimize exposure and sensitivity and build resilience to unavoidable impacts. 
73. 
The project will reach and increase the adaptive capacity of 200,157 beneficiaries, out of 
which 90,157 are direct beneficiaries and 110,000 are indirect beneficiaries. It is the second 
GCF project supported in Vanuatu and will have strong synergies and build upon the work of the 
Van-CIS-RDP project.  
74. 
This is the first GCF project developed under the new GCF Integrated Results 
Management Framework. It is fully aligned with the requirements of the framework in relation 
to results management and uses the latest GCF funding proposal template.  
75. 
Annex 5 needs to add the key milestones and deliverables for each activity.  
76. 
Annex 11 is still to be updated in line with the Integrated Results Management 
Framework.  
4.6 
Legal assessment  
77. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 20 
December 2019 (the “AMA”), and it became effective on 20 May 2020. 
78. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion of its General Counsel dated 12 
August 2021 confirming that it has obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and 
authority to implement the project  
79. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Vanuatu. The GCF has signed a bilateral 
agreement on privileges and immunities with Vanuatu; however, such agreement is still 
pending its entry into force. This means that the privileges and immunities are only effectively 
accorded to GCF upon the agreement entering into effect. Therefore, until such moment, 
amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, 
which risks need to be further assessed.  
80. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
81. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 117 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP184 
Proposal name: 
Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project (VCCRP) 
Accredited entity: 
Save the Children Australia  
Country/(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential                                                                                  Scale: N/A 
1. 
This funding proposal for a small project in environmental and social safeguards 
category C is submitted by Vanuatu, a small island developing State1 in the Pacific, with 65 
inhabited islands and a population last recorded at 272,000. This is an adaptation project, with 
Save the Children Australia as the accredited entity (AE) and two co-executing entities – the 
Government of Vanuatu’s Ministry of Climate Change and Save the Children Vanuatu. The total 
cost of the funding proposal is USD 32.65 million, as detailed in paragraph 29 below. 
2. 
. Current available evidence, combining observed historical trends with future 
projections, indicates that a number of significant climate change challenges face communities 
in Vanuatu. Projected future trends in three key climate parameters are: 1) temperature: air and 
sea (increased minimum, mean and maximum daily temperatures and occurrence of events 
such as heatwaves); 2) rainfall patterns (increased duration of dry periods and changing 
frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall and rainfall associated with El Niño/Southern 
Oscillation); and 3) tropical cyclones (increased intensity, with extreme wind and waves, and 
intense rainfall and flooding). Category 5 cyclones in 2015 and 2020 caused loss of life and 
extensive damage to economic activities; the funding proposal shows that over the 42-year 
period to 2010, 101 tropical cyclones developed or crossed into the Vanuatu Exclusive 
Economic Zone, although the AE has not demonstrated a historical trend in relation to cyclone 
intensity. 
3. 
With about 80 per cent of the population of this Pacific island nation dependent on 
subsistence agriculture, climate change poses a significant risk to Vanuatu’s agriculture sector 
and food security. Agricultural activities in Vanuatu are particularly susceptible to climate 
change induced changes in rainfall patterns, extreme rainfall leading to flooding, droughts, 
heatwaves, salinization processes, increases in evapotranspiration, seasonal variations and 
reduction in freshwater availability. Under a Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 
scenario, soil moisture is expected to decrease significantly, with potential increased 
evapotranspiration, indicating significant stress on non-irrigated crops. These climate impacts 
are exacerbated by soil erosion and loss of soil fertility due to deforestation and environmental 
degradation. Prolonged and intense rainfall damages seedlings and encourages conditions that 
promote diseases and pests. Droughts create additional thermal stress on plants. Projected air 
temperature increases are likely to reach the maximum heat tolerance thresholds of some 
staple crops and induce heat stress and crop failure, especially in traditional crops such as 
 
1 Vanuatu graduated out of least developed country status in 2020.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 118 
 
 
 
cassava, taro and yam. Communities on Torres islands, South Santo, South Malekula, Central 
Pentecost, Epi, Erromango, Aniwa and Aneityum, in particular, have reported impacts from 
increased temperatures and droughts on declining crop yields and lowered livestock 
productivity during the 2015–2016 El Niño period. Coastal fisheries also contribute significantly 
to food security, with 60 per cent of rural households engaging in coastal fisheries activities, 
which, already at critical risk from non-climatic pressures such as overfishing and habitat 
degradation from pollution, are further threatened by climate change. Changes in ocean 
temperature and acidity are expected to impact on coral reef fish and invertebrate species in 
Vanuatu by altering their metabolic rates, growth, reproduction and survival, resulting in 
changes to species abundance, distribution and sizes that may reduce catches and food security. 
4. 
Despite investments by the government and its technical and financial partners in the 
agriculture and fisheries sectors in response to these threats, more comprehensive, integrated 
adaptation measures are required, firmly rooted in communities’ needs, including 
strengthening early warning to vulnerable communities of both slow and sudden onset 
disasters intensified by climate change. The project’s goal statement is that IF vulnerable 
remote and rural communities in Vanuatu access and utilize locally relevant climate 
information, integrate climate risks into community planning processes and are supported in 
implementing priority adaptation actions, THEN they will be more resilient to the impacts of 
increasing climate variability, extremes and change on their food security and livelihoods, 
BECAUSE their exposure and vulnerability to hazards will be reduced and their adaptive 
capacity increased. The project will work to achieve this goal via activities under three 
interlinked components:  
(a) 
Component 1: Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support 
local resilience to climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate 
information and early warning 
(b) 
Component 2: Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community 
adaptation needs to create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways 
(adaptation packages) 
(c) 
Component 3: Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive 
governance systems at the local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages. 
5. 
Adaptation impact. The project is expected to have adaptation impact by contributing 
to increased climate-resilient sustainable development in a number of ways – strengthening 
adaptive capacity and reducing exposure of vulnerable communities to climate risks; increasing 
generation and use of climate information in decision-making; and strengthening institutional 
and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and disaster risk reduction. Component 
2 involves implementing adaptation packages for climate-resilient agriculture, fisheries and 
diversified/enhanced livelihoods resilient to the conditions of flooding, storm surges, 
salinization, drought and heatwaves (marine and terrestrial). Activities under components 1 
and 3 will reduce the vulnerability of farmers and fishers through the use of improved climate 
information services and early warning systems through Community Disaster and Climate 
Change Committees (CDCCCs) for disaster preparedness and response, as well as through the 
adoption of resilient food preservation and processing techniques and income diversification.  
6. 
The project is designed to directly increase the climate resilience of 90,157 people in 
19,556 households and 282 communities across all six provinces (33 per cent of the total 
population or 43 per cent of the rural population), with a focus on the most vulnerable and 
socially marginalized groups. Project interventions should result in substantial reductions in the 
risk of loss of lives and assets due to reduced exposure to extreme weather events, as well as a 
significant increase in the number of people adopting climate-resilient livelihoods options. They 
will also increase the number of households with year-round food security. A further 110,000

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 119 
 
 
 
people will benefit indirectly from enhanced governance capacity, increasing the project’s total 
reach to 95 per cent of the rural population.  
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential                                                                    Scale: N/A 
7. 
The project aims to bring about a paradigm shift away from an agricultural system that 
is highly sensitive to climate change to climate-resilient food productive systems which ensure 
food and water security for farmers and fishers. Achieving reduced vulnerability and increased 
resilience requires a shift in agricultural and fisheries practices in Vanuatu. The project aims to 
achieve a transformation in the way adaptation actions are conceived and implemented, 
providing local communities with up-to-date climate information and projections; empowering 
them to make informed decisions about the nature, timing and type of adaptation actions they 
want to take; and resourcing them to follow through and feed results upward through 
governance structures to create a fundamental shift in the way adaptation is pursued. To date, a 
largely top-down approach to community-based adaptation has resulted in adaptation actions 
at the local level that are not community owned and, therefore, not consistently maintained or 
sustained after project funding concludes.  
8. 
In order to promote longer-term sustainability of any adaptation technologies provided 
to communities, the project will ensure that adaptation package actions and implementation 
align with and support existing government systems and processes. Importantly, the project 
will ensure that government systems and processes are reflective of local needs and have the 
capacity to support them by strengthening the current vision of decentralization. This is seen as 
a key paradigm shift in a country that has largely been governed under a centralized approach 
despite the dispersed and isolated population. Output 2.4 activities under component 2 will help 
targeted communities to diversify their livelihood options via supporting access to markets for 
agriculture/food commodities, creating new avenues for remote and rural communities to 
engage with private sector entities and increase the sustainability of project activities.  
9. 
The project also addresses scalability and replicability – it works with 29 of Vanuatu’s 
71 Area Councils and provides a model for village-level CDCCCs to guide both adaptation and 
disaster preparedness and response. According to the funding proposal, this model, with 
concomitant investments in early warning systems and Area Council planning and budgeting, 
“could be applied in all remaining communities in Vanuatu via a combination of domestic 
resources and future climate finance”. The independent TAP notes that the project does not 
itself establish a pathway to scaling up the approach across the whole country, and that such 
scaling up will in practice probably rely on follow-on official development assistance of one kind 
or another, given government’s small revenue base. On the positive side, component 3 of the 
project invests in knowledge-sharing and learning engagement between national and 
subnational government and has a specific output 3.2 for “Enhanced local-provincial-national 
linkages through knowledge management and creation of feedback loops”. This includes 
facilitating meetings between national and subnational government stakeholders, including 
non-governmental actors, to discuss actions to increase the emphasis on long-term community-
level priorities within national and subnational planning and budgeting processes. 
10. 
In terms of catalysing impact beyond a one-off investment, a project rooted in the 
agriculture and fisheries sectors would ideally seek to achieve market transformation that will 
ensure the maintenance and continued uptake of adaptation approaches and technologies at 
producers’ own cost post-project. In this regard, the VCCRP seeks to provide incentives for 
longer-term uptake of climate-resilient practices through helping producers to achieve 
increased profit margins through support to cash crop production, preservation and processing. 
Support for crop varieties resilient to climate change impacts, combined with investment in 
renewable-powered solar food dryers and fish freezers, and capacity development for 
preservation processes like salting and pickling, should significantly enhance yields and prevent

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 120 
 
 
 
food losses, improving food security even in the face of climate change. However, facilitating 
access to markets for surpluses remains a major challenge.  
11. 
The funding proposal identifies as one of three major existing barriers to effective and 
sustainable locally led adaptation in Vanuatu “Low incentives for private sector entities to 
engage with remote rural communities to support increased market access and help diversify 
livelihoods”. The project aims to introduce new livelihoods commodities (dried fruits, dried 
nuts, smoked fish, shell crafting, copra, coffee) in least 140 of the 282 target communities, 
establishing 90 women-led producer groups to support communities in bringing agricultural 
and fisheries goods to market and facilitating at least six private sector partnerships to support 
access to distant markets for commodities (assumed at one per province). If these economic 
activities could be put on a sustainable business footing, with strengthened supply chains 
including buyer contracts in place by the end of the project, this would indicate that a significant 
paradigm shift has taken place whereby the agriculture and fisheries sectors have reached a 
point where investments in climate change adaptation have become self-sustaining. 
12. 
This is noted in the project’s exit strategy with its six elements, one of which is to “Foster 
sustainable value chains in the local market. Food surpluses from agriculture and fisheries…are 
expected to be generated due to improvements in agricultural and fisheries practices, including 
through access to improved CIS, as well as significantly reduced losses from excess production 
and improved handling of produce. Establishing the value chains ensures a small but steady 
supply of income to the community with which the operation and maintenance of the installed 
processing technologies can be supported over the long term. Once communities have realized 
the potential of marketing food surpluses, this may lead to autonomous growth without the 
need for further external financial support, especially through fostering of twinning 
arrangements between local producers and private enterprises in the food sector”.  
13. 
There are a number of structural constraints, however, to the engagement of 
downstream private sector actors to help to bring products to markets such as Port Vila and its 
tourism sector, or cross-continental export markets. Like other small Pacific island countries 
with limited natural resources and narrow-based economies, Vanuatu is physically detached 
from major markets, has a small population spread across many islands, with trade balance 
skewed towards imports. The funding proposal notes the “long distances and limited 
transportation options between the project sites and the main commercial and residential hubs 
of Vanuatu” and the “poor communication and transport networks within and between islands”, 
and expresses the view that the “combination of extreme remoteness from major markets, very 
small size, dispersion over vast tracts of the Pacific Ocean, and environmental fragility results in 
very high cost of production of goods and services by both the private and public sector, leading 
to an assessment that the public sector is likely to remain the main source of formal sector 
employment and driver of economic activity in most Pacific Island countries for the foreseeable 
future”.  
14. 
The independent TAP asked the project proponents if it is realistic to attract private 
sector buyers or transport middlemen with small and unpredictable volumes of relatively low-
value produce that must travel long distances to market. In response, the AE noted that, “against 
a challenging backdrop there are success stories of local producers reaching domestic and at 
times export markets. Many of these examples are in the tourism industry where tourism 
service providers, including cruise ships, will purchase and use locally produced goods to 
support the local economy as part of the experience…they are selling”. It also noted that “a 
number of organizations and donors have been undertaking research in private sector and 
value chain analysis in Vanuatu over the years” and “a commonality across all studies and past 
and present projects is that it is not easy to engage the private sector, for the reasons outlined in 
the Funding Proposal. This is why we have purposely kept the target of this activity low (6) in 
comparison to the scale of the project.” The modest scale of the project’s ambitions in this

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 121 
 
 
 
regard make sense and are realistic but limit the extent to which a market-based paradigm shift 
to sustainable adaptation practices is possible. 
15. 
An additional concern on the sustainability of project outcomes relates to the project’s 
lack of a costed operation and maintenance (O&M) plan with a commitment by government 
implementing partners, at the various levels at which adaptation technology will be employed, 
to meeting these costs. The independent TAP is concerned about how equipment purchased 
through the project will be sustained in terms of operating costs, upkeep and eventual 
replacement; for example, smartphones, tablets, etc., in activity 1.1.1, satellite dishes and solar 
panels in activity 1.3.1, earth auger and rotavator in activity 2.2.2, solar food driers and solar-
powered freezers in activity 2.4.1 and quad bikes in activity 3.1.2. The funding proposal 
acknowledges the importance of O&M, referring in the exit strategy to “inevitable on-going 
operation and maintenance (O&M) related expenses associated with introduced adaptation 
technologies (including solar PV freezers and solar air driers) to reduce the likelihood of 
negative externalities such as equipment falling into disrepair or breaking down” and noting 
that project activities include “training for target communities on installation, operation, 
maintenance and repair of all equipment, and budget to provide spare parts or training in using 
local materials for repairs and maintenance. This guidance on post-sale/installation O&M 
considerations will also be supplied to the [Department of Climate Change] DoCC on the 
selection and procurement of adaptation technology services for use in communities.”  
16. 
In response to a question from the independent TAP on ensuring that O&M needs will be 
adequately resourced, the AE stated that “Options for resourcing the O&M will depend on the 
needs and cost. The two principal options that will be used are: 1) government funding through 
development expenditure incorporated into government budgets along with the wider 
adaptation options as described in the project’s sustainability plan (for example, for the 
maintenance of quad bikes); and 2) the collection of maintenance fees from users at the point of 
use of the equipment in the communities (such as for the rotavators and freezers)”. In response 
to follow-up questions, the AE acknowledged the importance of formal O&M planning and 
committed itself to continuing to work with the co-executing entities on this to enhance project 
sustainability: “The approach chosen and used will be discussed and agreed with CDCCCs, Area 
Councils, Provinces and relevant line ministries to ensure the approach is consultative and 
participatory, as well as technically robust and reflects the needs and desires of the end users – 
the communities”.   
1.3 
Sustainable development potential                                             Scale: N/A 
17. 
Environmental co-benefits. In terms of the environment, the project is expected to 
have extensive co-benefits. On the marine side, the project seeks to increase the sustainability of 
ecosystem services by reducing reliance on vulnerable resources (e.g., reef fish) as a primary 
food source in rural coastal communities. Sustainable fisheries practices and coastal zone 
management will lead to the implementation of protections for local coastal habitats (including 
reduced mangrove clearing, limited reef gleaning); establishing new or enhancing existing 
“tabu” areas for environmental conservation (including freshwater resources, reef fisheries); 
and rehabilitating key degraded coastal resources (including mangroves, seagrass meadows and 
coral reefs). For terrestrial ecosystems, the project will develop coastal and upland resource 
management plans; establish living barriers; support reforestation of damaged forests and 
water catchments; manage invasive vine species impacting watersheds; and establish new or 
strengthen existing community conservation areas.  
18. 
Social co-benefits. The project has a number of social co-benefits. Increasing social 
inclusion across all areas of community life – with a specific focus on ensuring that the voices of 
traditionally underrepresented groups (e.g., youth, people with a disability) are heard in 
climate-related decision-making forums. The project aims to increase broad community health

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 122 
 
 
 
outcomes by ensuring that communities have more secure access to locally available nutritious 
foods. Community adaptation planning and enhanced disaster risk reduction and response will 
enable increasing access to education, by ensuring that fewer school days are lost in the 
aftermath of extreme weather events. The project is also transformative in its focus on 
promoting women’s equitable representation in project activities and enabling greater 
economic empowerment and participation in decision-making by women, youth and people 
with a disability. 
19. 
Economic co-benefits. The project works to increase the household incomes of rural 
communities through livelihoods diversification and increasing access to markets. Component 2 
includes support to 261 communities on utilizing climate-resilient food preservation techniques 
to prevent food spoiling and wastage, and support to 140 communities on new livelihoods 
commodities (see para. 11 above). Communities will be supported in diversifying into new 
agricultural/food commodities and value added products that deliver greater income 
generating opportunities, including identifying local value added commodities with market 
potential and supporting processing. In collaboration with the Vanuatu Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry, private sector partnerships will be identified and established to further support 
community-level enterprise and enhance access to markets, and, where possible, support 
producer groups in transitioning into micro or small enterprises (including support in 
identifying longer-term sources of finance for business development). 
20. 
Gender-sensitive development impact. The project promotes increasing gender 
equality across all areas of community life, with a specific focus on ensuring that women’s 
voices are heard in climate-related decision-making forums and that the gendered nature of 
climate change impacts is a key component of all climate and development planning at the 
community and province level. This includes leadership training targeted at women, as part of 
capacity development for CDCCC members under component 1 to identify climate change and 
disaster risks at the local level and liaise on their needs with the National Disaster Management 
Office. In particular, the focus of output 2.4 on women is noted, including project interventions 
to i) introduce or scale up women-led local solutions for food processing and preservation, 
including identifying the foods most suitable for preservation and provision of processing 
equipment (solar dryers and freezers) to communities; ii) support women in diversifying into 
new agricultural/food commodities and value added products that deliver greater income-
generating opportunities, including identifying local value added commodities with market 
potential and supporting processing; and iii) support women-led enterprises in accessing 
private partnership options to access new (distant) markets for value added products.  
21. 
The independent TAP welcomes the inclusion in the gender action plan of childcare 
provision during project implementation to facilitate women’s full participation in project 
activities and decision-making forums. In response to a question from the independent TAP 
about the budgetary implications, the AE explained that the project takes two approaches to 
address women’s needs for support with childcare to enable them to engage in the project, 
neither of which will require GCF funds. The first approach is providing childcare for specific 
periods through existing Early Childhood Care and Development Centers that increasingly exist 
in communities (supported by government and organizations such as Save the Children) or 
through community groups and churches. The second approach is “to take the project to the 
women where they already regularly congregate. CDCCCs are mandated to include women (and 
the project will ensure gender balance) and they are increasingly represented in other decision-
making forums. Women leaders engaged by the project will then consult and engage with other 
women in the community and church groups where they already congregate and socialize”. This 
is welcomed as good practice in getting the details right to ensure women’s full and effective 
participation in project activities. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
               
                     Scale: N/A

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 123 
 
 
 
22. 
Vanuatu has the highest score in the world on the global disaster risk index – a score of 
49.74, indicating a high degree of physical exposure, relative vulnerability and resultant risk of 
loss of life from natural hazards. This is intensified by the predicted impacts of climate change 
discussed above, combined with adaptation deficits that need to be addressed to build 
community resilience to these impacts. Financing this adaptation gap has posed a significant 
challenge in Vanuatu, which, despite its graduation in 2020 from least developed country to 
lower middle-income country status, remains highly aid dependent. While steadily increasing 
economic and social indicators over recent decades are a positive sign for Vanuatu’s climate 
resilience, gains remain unevenly distributed and the most vulnerable people and communities 
will require adaptation assistance for the foreseeable future, particularly given the country’s 
significant exposure to extreme weather events and other hazards. The economic impact of the 
coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, with the collapse of the tourism sector and reduced tax 
receipts, combined with the loss and damage suffered from level 5 Tropical Cyclone Harold that 
hit the country in April 2020, pushed the domestic budget into deficit in 2020/21, and is likely 
to have set Vanuatu back to gross domestic product levels typical of least developed countries.  
23. 
Consultations in preparation for the project by the Ministry of Climate Change and Save 
the Children Vanuatu revealed significant climate-related impacts on agriculture and fisheries, 
and the ecosystems that support them. Domestic revenue remains insufficient to adequately 
fund essential services to a widely dispersed, largely rural population, and donor programmes 
are generally focused on immediate development priorities (e.g., economic growth, poverty 
reduction, health and education). Only a few initiatives focus on climate change or 
mainstreaming the management of climate change risks and the building of resilience building 
into production and governments sectors. While the Government of Vanuatu has access to 
strong technical climate change capacity, the capacity to deliver adaptation assistance to the 
local level – in ways that meet community needs and expectations – remains restricted. 
Communities in Vanuatu urgently need scaled up support to address immediate adaptation 
priorities and to support the integration of climate change into local planning processes.  
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
                     Scale: N/A 
24. 
The project is well aligned with Vanuatu’s policy framework, including its first and 
subsequent nationally determined contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement, which 
highlight adaptation to climate change as the country’s overriding concern. The focus of the 
project is aligned with the national adaptation programme of action (NAPA) and focuses on 
three of the five identified adaptation priority areas, namely: agriculture and food security; 
community-based marine resource management; and integrated water resource management. 
The project is also aligned with the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for Land-
Based Resources (2012–2022), the Disaster Risk Reduction and Disaster Management National 
Action Plan and the Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy (2016–2030). 
25. 
Vanuatu’s NAPA, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy and GCF country 
programme are also fully aligned with the country’s National Sustainable Development Plan, the 
highest public policy framework in Vanuatu, which explicitly includes climate change adaptation 
as a key sustainable development priority. Policy objectives include: “Enhance traditional 
agricultural practices, focusing on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation”; 
“Institutionalize climate change and disaster risk governance, and build institutional capacity 
and awareness”; “Improve monitoring and early warning systems”; “Strengthen post-disaster 
systems in planning, preparedness, response and recovery”; “Promote and ensure strengthened 
resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related, natural and man-made hazards”; and “Access 
available financing for climate change adaptation and disaster risk management”. 
26. 
Projected actions by the Government of Vanuatu on national priorities for climate 
change adaptation in 2021–2022 include efforts identified under its updated NDC (2020–2030)

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 124 
 
 
 
to provide for quantifiable adaptation targets. The updated NDC includes specific targets and 
indicators aimed at enhancing the resilience of the agriculture and water sectors, developed 
with the objectives of maintaining food, income and water security. The overarching goal for the 
agriculture sector is: “Agriculture is able to support household income and food needs in a 
changing climate”. Two targets have been established to meet this goal, focused on small and 
medium-sized enterprises and private sector operators to generate sufficient income to cover 
essential household needs and services in normal and stressed (climate, disaster and 
environmentally) times; and implemented measures for enhancing the resilience of subsistence 
agriculture in a changing climate in the six provinces. The VCCRP aligns well with the NDC goal 
and targets.  
27. 
Vanuatu has had five GCF readiness proposals approved from 2015 to date, with which 
the VCCRP is well aligned. In 2018, the Government prepared the GCF country programme for 
Vanuatu, complementing the NAPA and Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy and 
assisting the government with the prioritization of adaptation investments. The VCCRP is 
highlighted as a priority in Vanuatu’s GCF country programme, including in the 2021 update. 
The funding proposal has been developed through close cooperation between the AE and the 
project’s two co-executing entities. The national designated authority and senior staff from key 
departments of the Ministry of Climate Change have been engaged in the design process, and the 
national designated authority will co-chair the Project Steering Committee, maintaining a role in 
the oversight of the project and direct lines of communication with the Project Management 
Unit throughout implementation. 
28. 
Country ownership has been promoted through an extensive and comprehensive 
consultation process with the Ministry of Climate Change and line ministries via workshops and 
meetings, as well as wider engagement with civil society. Relevant stakeholders were identified 
through a mapping exercise and consultations built on stakeholder engagement between 2016 
and 2019 with key partners, government and communities, to develop the concept note. 
Consultation was participatory and voluntary, working closely with primary stakeholders who 
will play a part in implementation. The continued consultation during the design phase with 
government at all levels, civil society and other relevant stakeholders further progressed the 
project development and ownership; it included discussions on the project concept and details 
of the design process, feasibility study results, focus of the adaptation package, validation of the 
target beneficiaries and approval of the full funding proposal at the meeting of the National 
Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction in April 2021.   
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                                 Scale: N/A 
29. 
The total project cost is USD 32.65 million, 80 per cent of which is a USD 26.18 million 
GCF grant contribution. The remaining USD 6.47 million, or 20 per cent of the total project cost, 
is made up of grant and in-kind contributions from the Government of Vanuatu (USD 1.54 
million), Save the Children Australia (USD 300,000) and the Australian Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (USD 4.63 million). Government of Vanuatu contributions are in kind and are 
distributed across the three technical components of the project, but can be considered as 
significant given the country’s financial position as discussed above. The structure of the project 
as 100 per cent grant financed represents an appropriate level of concessionality in the 
country’s context, and the small profit margins expected on small-scale farming and fishing, 
combined with the public goods nature of ecosystem restoration, mean that the GCF project is 
not expected to crowd out potential private sector investments. 
30. 
The economic and financial analysis conducted for the project examined four specific 
adaptation actions deemed to be representative of the actions in the adaptation package menu, 
and found that all four have solid economic internal rates of return (EIRR) and can be justified 
on economic grounds: early warning system communications equipment (EIRR of 111 per

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 125 
 
 
 
cent); nature-based solutions – coastal management (EIRR of 12 per cent); climate-resilient 
agriculture, with taro and yam as examples (EIRR of 19 per cent for taro and 27 per cent for 
yam); and food processing and storage (EIRR of 81 per cent).  
31. 
Looking at the project overall, however, the economic analysis showed the project has 
an EIRR of only 3 per cent, which, while positive, is below the discount rate used of 5 per cent. 
This is because of the high non-economically assessable costs (non-investment costs) required 
to enable and support the adaptation investments, and to create transformational change in 
remote and rural communities that are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The 
AE suggests that these costs are high because of the need to address significant capacity gaps 
and constraints at all levels (government at national, provincial and Area Council levels as well 
as at the community level) to ensure that the project leaves behind significantly increased 
institutional capacity to enhance the sustainability and replicability of the project’s adaptation 
investments and catalyse transformation. Also significant is the high cost of delivering projects 
in Pacific small island developing States because of their remoteness from major markets, small 
size and dispersion over vast tracts of the Pacific Ocean, such that the technical assistance and 
travel costs of projects in these island nations are typically higher than those in other 
developing regions. 
32. 
Application of best practice technologies is also important to ensure cost-effectiveness 
of the GCF and co-financing resources. In relation to the restoration of coastal ecosystems 
(mangrove swamps, seagrass beds and coral reefs), the project budget is fairly limited (USD 
385,000) and has no detailed explanation of how it will be spent, or which of the wide variety of 
restoration techniques, some extremely costly (particularly those involving diving), may be 
utilized. There are also additional complexities involved where cyclones have damaged coastal 
ecosystems extensively, for example, cutting off mangroves from the freshwater supply 
providing optimal salinity levels for survival.2 The feasibility report (Annex 2) also does not 
provide any reflection on various approaches, techniques and costings, and methods and which 
have proved effective and cost-effective in recent restoration initiatives, including in the Pacific.  
33. 
In response to a question from the independent TAP on this, the AE said that the budget 
highlighted is only for actual restoration work, and that there is additional budget in other 
activities for the assessment of the most appropriate sites, methodology and associated risks 
and costs. The development of local community adaptation plans during project implementation 
will include a feasibility assessment of the most appropriate rehabilitation techniques specific 
to that community. The AE also stated that “the project will also draw on established techniques 
in Vanuatu (e.g., coral gardening), as well as elsewhere in the Pacific (e.g. mangrove restoration) 
and globally (e.g., seagrass restoration) when selecting methodologies for specific sites and 
communities to suit the site conditions and are cost-effective”. 
34. 
In follow-up discussions, the independent TAP reiterated its concern, indicating that 
many coral reef and seagrass restoration techniques may be beyond the reach of the project’s 
budget, and that it was difficult to assess the potential of the proposed mangrove restoration 
when no information was provided about the current state of degradation of the mangroves, 
including whether engineering works might be needed to reconnect mangrove swamps to 
freshwater sources where such connections have been disturbed by cyclones or human 
activities, to avoid the scenario in which newly planted mangrove propagules die en masse. In 
response, the AE stated that many of the Vanuatu islands’ coastal ecosystems are still in a 
relatively undamaged state and would need smaller investments to maintain their functionality 
as climate change buffers. A detailed assessment of the ecosystem condition and what is needed 
to restore functioning will thus need to be the starting point for assessments of potential 
 
2 See the recent report by The Nature Conservancy: Hurricane Damages to Mangrove Forests and Post-Storm 
Restoration Techniques and Costs; available at 
https://www.nature.org/content/dam/tnc/nature/en/documents/TNC_MangroveHurricaneDamages_Report.pdf.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 126 
 
 
 
approaches and techniques. Detailed monitoring mechanisms will need to be put in place to 
track progress of restoration efforts, including resultant changes in ecosystem functioning that 
buffer climate change impacts.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
35. 
The independent TAP recommends this funding proposal for approval, subject to one 
condition. In order to maximize sustainability of the project’s investments in equipment and 
technologies for adaptation, the independent TAP requests that an O&M plan be developed as a 
condition to first disbursement, as described below. Therefore, this endorsement by the 
independent TAP is subject to the following condition: 
Condition precedent to first disbursement by GCF under the funded activity agreement:  
(a) 
Prior to the first disbursement of GCF Proceeds for the Funded Activity, the accredited 
entity shall finalize and submit to the Fund a costed Operations and Maintenance (O&M) 
Plan for the project, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 127 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP184) 
Proposal name: 
Vanuatu community-based climate resilience project (VCCRP) 
Accredited entity: 
Save the Children Australia  
Country/(ies): 
Vanuatu 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
 
Impact potential 
SCA welcomes ITAP’s positive assessment of the project’s impact potential. This reflects the 
project’s focus on building the resilience of some of the most vulnerable people and 
communities in Vanuatu, a small island developing state only recently graduated from least 
developed country status (and whose economy has been substantially impacted by the 
COVID-19 pandemic). The project will directly reach over 40% of the rural population and set 
the foundations for a step change in the way community-based adaptation is undertaken in 
Vanuatu.  
Paradigm shift potential 
SCA notes ITAP’s assessment of the project’s paradigm shift potential. We note the concerns 
expressed on the private sector impact and need for an operations and maintenance plan. As 
ITAP notes, the project’s modest aims for private sector engagement make sense and are 
realistic. The project will work within the constraints of a largely subsistence and widely 
dispersed economy to support enhanced market engagement among targeted communities to 
help diversify livelihoods strategies and increase their resilience to climate change impacts. 
Regarding the project’s operation and maintenance, we note the need to develop a costed 
O&M plan for the project. We accept this condition and will ensure it is met prior to first 
disbursement of project resources.   
Sustainable development potential 
SCA welcomes ITAP’s positive assessment of the project’s sustainable development potential, 
particularly in relation to the focus on addressing gender equity issues and supporting 
women’s economic empowerment through supporting women’s decision-making roles in 
local climate governance mechanisms and promoting resilient livelihoods diversification 
activities as this is a key focus of the project.  
Needs of the recipient 
SCA welcomes ITAP’s positive assessment of the needs of the recipients, reflecting the urgent 
need for scaled up adaptation assistance to highly vulnerable remote and rural communities.  
Country ownership

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.32/02/Add.01 
Page 128 
 
 
 
SCA welcomes ITAP’s positive assessment of the project’s country ownership. The project has 
been developed via a highly collaborative and participatory process, ensuing high ownership 
by the participating government ministries and targeted communities.  
Efficiency and effectiveness 
SCA notes ITAP’s assessment of the project’s efficiency and effectiveness.  Regarding the 
project’s overall EIRR, as the ITAP assessment notes, the significant non-economically 
assessable costs and high cost of delivery context result in a low overall EIRR. This is offset by 
the economic and financial analysis findings that each of the assessable activities have strong 
EIRR. Furthermore, the project responds to the GCF’s objective to build the climate resilience 
of the most vulnerable communities, which requires substantial investments in non-
economically assessable activities to ensure the sustainability of project outcomes. We 
believe this investment in capacity building, its focus on highly climate vulnerable 
communities and its sustainability focus, along with the experience of the executing entities 
in delivering community-level projects will result in a highly efficient and effective project.  
Regarding ITAP’s concern around the ecosystems-based adaptation component, the 
community-level bio-physical assessments will be undertaken prior to any decisions being 
made on specific adaptation activities related to restoration of coastal ecosystems. These 
assessments will feed into the broader participatory community adaptation planning process 
to ensure high local ownership of resulting activities.  
We note ITAP’s assessment that ‘application of best practice technologies is also important to 
ensure cost-effectiveness of the GCF and co-financing resources’. We agree, however we 
would highlight here that best practice must also include a focus on the local context. The 
technologies that will be utilized under this project will support communities to achieve their 
adaptation objectives in a way that sits well in the local context. The project is also promoting 
best practice in processes, for example, support for highly participatory local adaptation 
planning processes and putting the principles for locally-led adaptation into practice.   
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
SCA welcomes ITAP’s overall positive assessment of the funding proposal and notes with 
gratitude the recommendation that the Board approves the Project.  
We note and accept the proposed condition on the development of a costed operations and 
maintenance plan for the project prior to first disbursement.  
As outlined above, we believe this project will have a transformative impact on the climate 
resilience of highly vulnerable remote and rural communities in the small island developing 
state of Vanuatu, who, through no fault of their own, are facing a context of escalating climate 
extremes which, unaddressed, will likely undermine their sustainable development potential. 
Remote and rural communities in SIDS face substantial adaptation capacity and finance gaps. 
We believe this project will showcase how scaling up locally-led approaches to adaptation 
and building local capacity to access and effectively utilise future flows of climate finance can 
help close both these gaps and provide a model for other SIDS with similar challenges.

=== PAGE 129 ===
Vanuatu Community-based 
Climate Resilience Project 
(VCCRP) 
Annex 8: Gender Assessment & Action Plan 
Accredited Entity: Save the Children Australia 
Version: B.32 
Gender documentation for FP184

=== PAGE 130 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
1 
Contents 
PART 1 VCCRP GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ANALYSIS/ASSESSMENT 2 
Introduction 
2 
Key Data  
3 
Laws, Policy and Institutional Arrangements 
4 
Social Norms and Beliefs 
5 
Roles, Responsibilities and Time Use 
6 
Decision Making, leadership and participation 
8 
Access to and Control of Resources 
9 
Gender-Based Violence 
9 
Community Profiles: Gender and Social Inclusion Focus 
11 
North Ambrym Area Council, Malampa 
11 
Project specific conclusions and recommendations 
15 
PART 2 VCCRP GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN 
18

=== PAGE 131 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
2 
Part 1 VCCRP Gender and Social Inclusion Analysis/Assessment 
Introduction 
1. The project aims to improve the adaptive capacities of rural communities and recognises that within
communities’ gender, age and disability influence adaptation capacities and that addressing structural
disadvantages is a precondition to adaptation.  This analysis considers the ways in which gender, age
and disability intersect with climate change and disasters in Vanuatu with a focus on rural communities.
The analysis sets out key data and analysis across six domains and includes recommendations for the
Project. The core approach is to embed gender equality and social inclusion across the Project activities
and operations. The Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan highlights actions included in the Project
wide logical framework.
2. The six domains of analysis are:
•
Law, policy and institutions.
•
Social norms and beliefs.
•
Roles, responsibilities and time use.
•
Decision making, leadership and participation.
•
Access to and control of resources; and
•
Safety, dignity and well-being.
3. The analysis and action plans are based on literature review, key informant interviews with national
government officials, and community profiles in North Ambrym, Epi and North West Santo, undertaken
through community meetings, surveys and women’s focus group discussions.
Methodology 
The assessment and action plan was prepared by the feasibility team located in Vanuatu and the GESI 
adviser based in Australia. The team used a combination of primary and secondary methods: 
•
Literature review of policy documents, project reports and published research
•
Women’s focus group discussions and community surveys in 8 communities across three provinces,
using standard question guides and in local languages.
•
Key informant interviews with national government staff including Ministry of Climate Change, Ministry
of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries, Forests and Biosecurity; Department of Women’s Affairs and
Department of Local Authorities.
•
Key informant interviews with disability NGOs.
4. Key Findings
•
National policies on climate change, agriculture, fisheries and gender equality recognise the
importance of gender equality and social inclusion in building community climate and disaster
resilience
•
Translating these policies into service delivery is hampered by limited expertise in gender
mainstreaming at national, provincial and area levels of government. Support is needed for area and
province level staff to undertake gender and social inclusion analysis with communities and integrate
findings into annual planning, budgeting and reporting systems
•
At family level women and men report a high level of shared decision making. Men are seen as heads
of households and social norms privilege male decision making in traditional, formal and community
settings. At community level NGO’s have supported inclusive decision making in Community Disaster
and Climate Change Committees (CDCCCs) which has created space and shifted norms around
participation of women, people with disability and youth in decision making.
•
Under customary law women’s entitlement to land and natural resources are mediated through
husbands and sons. This has significant implications for economic development, food security and
gender-based violence.
•
In rural communities while women and men are equally active producers in agriculture and fisheries,
the majority of extension and training programs are tailored to the needs and interests of male
producers.

=== PAGE 132 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
3 
•
Women and girls work significantly more hours than men, with less time for leisure or rest.  In rural
Tanna women worked twice as many hours as men. Impacts of climate change such as drought,
heavy rains, sea level rise and rough seas all increased women’s workloads.
•
Service providers need to shift approach to recognise that rural livelihoods are family enterprises, with
women making up half of rural producers. Engaging families rather than just male heads of household
using the family teams approach is an effective way of reaching women and men, recognising and
building on the work of all family members
•
Already high levels of gender-based violence are amplified in the aftermath of disasters, due to
displacement, breakdowns in services and increased pressure on families with loss of food stores and
access to water.
Key Data 1 
•
The population of Vanuatu is 272,459 (Male 138, 265/Female 134,194)
•
The annual population growth rate is 2.3%, one of the highest rates in the world.
•
Vanuatu is one of only two countries in the world where there are no women in Parliament.2
•
Vanuatu’s HDI score is 0.609 (2019) which put the country in the medium human development
category – positioning it at 140 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 2005 and 2019 Vanuatu’s
HDI increased by 6.1% (Vanuatu Human Development Report). The Gender Development Index
which provides the sex-disaggregated data of the three dimensions measured in the HDI was not able
to be calculated in 2019 due to a lack of data. Similarly, the Gender Inequality Index for Vanuatu has
not been measured.3
•
The country has a young population with 39% under 15 years of age, and 26 % aged 15-29. Life
expectancy for women is 72.2 years and 69 years for men.
•
Three quarters of ni-Vanuatu live in rural areas and rely on agriculture, marine and forest resources.
•
12.7% of the population live below the National Poverty line.4 57% of people below the poverty line
live in rural areas and poverty is concentrated amongst female headed households.
•
The disability prevalence rate is estimated at 2.6%, with 22% of the population reporting some level
of difficulty in functioning5. Rates of disability are higher in rural areas and increase with age. There
is no difference in disability prevalence between women and men.
•
The infant mortality (death< 1 year) is 28/1,000 births6 while 28.9% of children under 5 are stunted7.
•
Early marriage is widespread, 22% of women aged 20 – 24 were first married before 18. 17% of girls
in rural areas aged 15-19 have started childbearing.
•
The maternal mortality rate is 72/100,000 live births, 8% of deaths of females of reproductive age are
maternal deaths8.
•
60% of women have experienced sexual or physical violence
•
The literacy rate is 88.3% for men, 86.7% for women. 80% of women in rural areas reported being
literate compared with 98% of women in urban areas9. People with disability are less than half as
likely to read or write Bislama or other language compared with people without disability. Women with
disability less than half as likely to read or write compared men with disability.10
•
The school enrolment rate of girls as a percentage of that of boys was 95.2 at the primary level and
101.5 at the secondary level (UNICEF 2013). The 2016 Mini Census reported 11% of children aged
6-13 years were not attending school and most of these children were in rural areas.
1 Data is from the VNSO Mini Census 2016 (unless specified) 
https://vnso.gov.vu/images/Public_Documents/Census_Surveys/Census/2016/2016_Mini_Census_Main_Report_Vol_1.pdf  accessed 15 January 2021 
2 World Economic Profile, Global Gender Gap Report, 2021, Insight Report, March 2021, p15 (Accesses 8 November 2021: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf) 
3 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/VUT.pdf
4 VNSO, Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2010 
5 International Centre for Evidence in Disability (ICED), Water, Women and Disability Study Report, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine 2020 
https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/research/centres/international-centre-evidence-disability/research. Accessed 20 Jan 2021. Disability prevalence data for Vanuatu is gradually evolving with 
different methodologies applied in the 2009 Census, 2013 Demographic Health Survey, 2015 Pilot Survey on Disability and the Vanuatu Education Information Management System. 
This data is drawn from the most recent research using the Washington Group short set across the population of SANMA and TORBA  
6 VNSO, VMoH, Vanuatu Demographic Health Survey 2013 
https://vnso.gov.vu/images/Special_Report/Vanuatu_Demographic_and_Health_Survey_Report/2013_VDHS_FINAL_Report.pdf accessed 15 January 2021 
7 UNIFC, WHO and World Bank (2020). Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates Expanded Database: Stunting. July 2020 edition. New York. 
https://data.unicef.org/topic/nutrition/malnutrition/ Accessed 19 Jan 2021 
8WHO maternal health by country estimates https://www.who.int/gho/maternal_health/countries/vut.pdf?ua=1 Accessed 19 Jan 2021 
9 2009 census 
10 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020

=== PAGE 133 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
4 
•
Children with disability are up to 10 times less likely to attend school11 with girls more disadvantaged
than boys: In 2013 15% of girls and 28% of boys with disability had ever attended school.12
•
The majority of people in Vanuatu rely on subsistence income, with little difference in participation
rates between rural men 47% and women 44%.
•
Women constitute 49.5% of agricultural producers and spend more time than rural men on agricultural
production, income generation and household work. Women’s incomes are on average lower than
men’s incomes. 13
•
40% of women declared unpaid family work as their main employment compared with 20% of men.
•
There were no women elected to the Vanuatu National Parliament in 2020, a situation that has
persisted for three terms. Since independence in 1980 five women have been elected to Parliament.
•
At subnational level a quota system introduced in 2013 has led to increased number of women elected
or appointed to municipal and provincial councils.14
•
The World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report, 2021 saw Vanuatu as the lowest performer
in Asia Pacific region in closing gender gaps. Since 2006 (since WEF started reporting) no progress
has been made in closing gender gaps.15
Laws, Policy and Institutional Arrangements 
5. The Constitution of Vanuatu (1980) states that people have the right to live freely and without
discrimination of the grounds of sex, race, place of origin, religious or traditional beliefs, political opinions
or language. The Constitution also acknowledges special measures to benefit females, children, young
persons and member of under privileged groups and inhabitants of less developed areas.  Vanuatu is
signatory to key international human rights treaties: Convention on the Elimination and Discrimination
Against Women (ratified 1995); the Convention on the Rights of the Child (ratified 1993) and Convention
on the Rights of People with Disability (ratified 2008). In 2011 Vanuatu signed the United Nations joint
statement on ending acts of violence and related human rights violations based on sexual orientation and
gender identity. Vanuatu is also signatory to regional commitments in the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality
Declaration and the Pacific Platform for Action on Gender Equality and Women’s Human rights (2018-
2030).
6. The National Sustainable Development Plan (2016 – 2030) sets out specific policy objectives for gender
equality and social inclusion in education (2.1), health (3.1), government planning and budgeting (4.1),
protection from violence and discrimination (4.2), and empowering people with disabilities and improving
accessibility (4.3, 4.5). 16
7. The country is preparing to launch the second National Gender Equality Policy (NGEP 2020 - 2030).
Implementation of the first National Gender Equality Policy (2015 – 2019) delivered gains against strategic
objectives of enhancing women’s economic status; mainstreaming gender equality into national sectoral
policies (and planning to some extent); and advancing efforts to reduce gender-based violence and
increase women’s participation in leadership and decision making. The new NGEP includes an additional
strategic area: Fostering gender-responsive and community-driven solutions to climate and disaster
resilience. The addition of this strategic area reflects experience from TC Pam that addressing disaster
preparedness and response at community and household level is an effective entry point for shifting social
norms about gender and disability.17
8. Priority actions in the NGEP relevant to building climate and disaster resilience cover job creation and
skills development for women in agriculture, fisheries, handicrafts and tourism, including women with
disabilities (2.2.2); Enhancing rural women’s access to markets, land, credit and financial literacy training
(2.2.3); Increasing women’s participation in decision making processes and leadership including in
emergencies (3.1.3 and 5.3.1) Engaging women with disabilities in leadership and decision making roles
(3.1.4); increasing capacity of climate change and disaster governance bodies (CDCCCs, area and
11 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020 
12 VNSO, VMoH, VDHS 2013 
13 FAO, Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu 2020 
14 Department  of Women’s Affairs, National Gender Equality Policy 2020-2030 (draft)  
15 World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap Report, 2021, Insight Report, March 2021(accessed 8 November 2021: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf)
16 Government of Vanuatu National Sustainable Development Plan 2016 to 2030. Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan, 2016 
17 Webb J, Damon, C, Savua I, Marango J, Maliliu E, Toto M, Charley JB, Silas M & Silas S, Does Gender Responsive Disaster Risk Reduction Make a Difference? A comparative 
study of Category Five Tropical Cyclone Pam in Vanuatu, CARE International in Vanuatu, Port Vila, 2017

=== PAGE 134 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
5 
provincial councils) to plan for and respond to needs of vulnerable groups (5.1.2); allocation of budgets 
for gender analysis and specific gender activities ( 5.1.3);  Funding and supporting women led initiatives 
that contribute to adaptation (5.3.2); Embedding gender and social inclusion outcomes in tourism and 
productive sector recovery (5.3.3). Provincial gender action plans have been developed with specific 
priorities drawn from the NGEP.  
9. Vanuatu’s National Disability Inclusive Development policy (2018 – 2025) commits to mainstreaming the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities to ensure that development efforts meet the particular needs and 
priorities of persons with disabilities and that targeted disability specific services are made available. The 
policy also commits to improving data collection, coordination between sectors, enhancing access, raising 
awareness of the rights of people with disabilities and providing support specifically to women and girls 
with disabilities. 
10. To date the Ministry of Justice and Community Services18 has lead responsibility for women children and 
disability. The Ministry’s Department for Women’s Affairs (DWA), Child Desk and Disability Desk are 
responsible for policy and program development and supporting mainstreaming into other parts of 
government, however, are under resourced. Annual budgets only cover staff costs and not programming, 
and technical expertise to support mainstreaming across government is limited. DWA has 14 staff 
including one in each province. DWA plays a convening role across the desks including leading the 
Gender and Protection Cluster at national level, with subgroups on children, disability and leadership. The 
Cluster is active in both peacetime and response and with the establishment of DWA in provinces efforts 
to build provincial gender and protection capabilities are a priority.  
11. Sectoral policies for climate change and disaster risk reduction (CCDRR Policy)19;  agriculture, fisheries, 
livestock and forestry20 all include language on gender equality and inclusion. The CCDRR policy 
specifies participation of women, youth and people with disability in Community Disaster and Climate 
Change Committees (CDCCCs). The other policies address extension and training services, 
representation in decision making, as well employment opportunities in departments. In 2017 the Council 
of Ministers identified five priority ministries for gender-based budgeting:  agriculture/fisheries, climate 
change, lands, education and local authorities.  
12. The legal and policy framework provides a solid basis and direction for mainstreaming gender equality 
and social inclusion in climate and disaster resilience action. The CCDRR, agriculture, fisheries, forestry 
and livestock policies do not specify how departments should go about gender and social inclusion work 
or set indicators or targets to generate action and accountability. A recent FAO assessment of the 
enabling environment for gender equality in the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries, Forests and 
Biosecurity (MALFFB) found that there is substantial staff interest in understanding more about gender 
equality and social inclusion and how to translate this into their work. The gap is in financial and human 
resources to implement gender mainstreaming.21 MALFFB has extension officers in all six provinces and 
is supported by the Vanuatu Agricultural and Research and Technical Centre and the Vanuatu Agricultural 
College, neither of which have specific programmes targeting women/girls or people with disabilities.22 
13. Support is required for departments to translate policy into practice and accelerate gender-based planning 
and budgeting as per the Council of Ministers decision in 2017. Technical resources are needed to 
support departments to undertake gender and social inclusion analysis and integrate findings into annual 
planning, budgeting and reporting, at national and subnational levels.  
Social Norms and Beliefs 
14. Social norms and expectations shape the ways in which different groups can access information about 
climate change and disasters and how they can adapt and respond. In Vanuatu social norms give men 
control over women’s behaviour and privilege male decision making in traditional, formal, community 
settings. Gender based violence is widespread and continues to be accepted as a way of enforcing 
expectations and exerting power.23,24 People with disabilities face stigma and isolation underpinned by 
negative beliefs and shame about disability.  
 
18 In late 2020 the Government moved to abolish the Ministry of Justice and Community Services and absorb functions into other Ministries, this change is currently being contested.  
19 Vanuatu Government, Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy 2016-2030, Government of the Republic of Vanuatu, Port Vila, 2015 
20 Vanuatu Government Agriculture Sector Policy 2015 – 2030; National Livestock Policy 2015 -2030, National Fisheries Policy 2016 -2031, National Forest Policy 2013 – 2023.  
21 FAO, Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu 2020  
22 FAO Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Vanuatu 2020 
23 Vanuatu Women’s & VNSO, Vanuatu National Survey on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence, Port Vila, 2011 
24 FAO Country Gender Assessment pg 56

=== PAGE 135 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
6 
15. In rural areas, kastom governance is the main form of community organisation and social protection 
(Vanuatu has no non-contributory formal social welfare programs).25 Kastom is usually patrilineal with 
male chiefs presiding. While women go to chiefs when facing abuse or family conflict, family and 
community are prioritised above individuals in decision making. Beliefs and practices vary widely between 
islands but are widely observed and co-exist with people’s strong faith in Christianity. Kastom has 
changed over time with foreign contact, devaluing the role of women in decision making. According to the 
NGEP 2020, “Whilst kastom bestowed authority to men with chiefly titles, decisions were shared and 
agreed to by both spouses within the extended family unit. The role played by women in household 
decision-making no longer exist or constitute modern notions of kastom.”26 Community profiles undertake 
in the feasibility stage of this project indicate a more nuanced picture at household level with women 
reporting more shared decision making.  
16. Social norms towards early marriage and childbearing are persistent especially in rural areas. 22% of 
women aged 20 to 24 years were first married or in union before age 18.27 17% of girls in rural areas (15-
19) have started childbearing compared with 12% in urban areas.28 Opportunities for education, 
employment, mobility are all the more restricted once childbearing starts. Unmarried women and girls live 
with their families and move to their husband’s home on marriage, to a different community or island, 
away from social supports. A woman’s entitlement to land and other natural resources is through her 
husband and sons, leaving women vulnerable if she is unmarried, the relationship breaks down or her 
husband dies, and she has no sons.  Women with disability are three times as likely to be widowed or 
divorced as compared with men with disability and nine times more likely to have never married as 
compared with women without disability.29 This has direct impact on access to land and resources for 
women with disability.  
17. There are significant taboos associated with menstruation, internalised by women and girls including the 
belief that menstruating women and girls will kills crops if they touch them, they must not work in gardens, 
cook food or lift heavy objects. They must also collect their own water for bathing and washing their 
reusable menstrual products, wash their own menstrual products and use separate toilets and bathing 
shelters.30  
18. People with disability in Vanuatu face significant stigma and isolation due to negative social norms and 
beliefs. Parents can be ashamed of sending children with disability into public so do not send them to 
school31, particularly where children experience intellectual disability. People with disability are seen only 
as vulnerable and excluded from community decision making. Government and CSO programs on food 
security, water security and livelihoods are not targeted to people with disabilities and they are unable to 
access mainstream opportunities.32 Vanuatu has no non-contributory social welfare programs.  
Roles, Responsibilities and Time Use 
19. Social norms and expectation underpin roles and responsibilities for women and men and girls and boys. 
Rural families operate as a family unit to undertake productive work. Women are expected to care for all 
family members manage food gardens, fishing and water collections for family consumption, host guests, 
weave mats and handicrafts, sell produce at markets and also provide support to local community and 
church. Men have greater mobility and are engaged in outside employment and politics, as well as 
community and church activity. Both women and men are engaged in agriculture in almost equal numbers 
though they may grow different crops and use different levels of technology.33 Generally women tend to 
have “lighter” agricultural roles of weeding, planting and maintaining crops closer to home, while men take 
on “heavier” roles of clearing and ploughing land including use of machinery. Fishing in deeper water with 
larger vessels for fish for sale is a predominantly male role, while women engage in coastal gleaning and 
fishing from canoes for food security.  Women also participate in aquaculture and fish processing to 
generate income.34  Social norms associated with who is a fisher tend to focus on male roles in deeper 
water, neglecting the role of women who harvest close to shore. This both underestimates the impact of 
 
25 Vanuatu has no non-contributory formal social protection pensions or payments. The Vanuatu National Provident Fund is a contributory fund open to formal and informal workers, 
however only 10 % of rural women and 18% of rural men have an account FA) pg41.   
26 NGEP 2020 – 2030 pg 5 
27 VNSO and SPC, Vanuatu Demographic and Health Survey 2013 p 85 
28 VNSO, VMoH VDHS 2013 
29 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020 
30 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020 
31 VNSO, UNICEF Children, Women and Men with Disabilities in Vanuatu: What do the data say? 2014 
32 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020 
33 FAO Country Gender Assessment p1 
34 FAO Country Gender Assessment p11

=== PAGE 136 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
7 
fishing pressure along the coast and undervalues the contributions of women.35 Few fisheries programs 
benefit women or transformed gender relations, and inclusive approaches are hampered by limited 
knowledge and capacity of fisheries managers and institutional cultures.36  
20. People with disabilities are equally likely to take part in productive activities as people without disability 
but are less likely to be employed outside the home due to barriers to education, training and employment. 
37 Information on specific roles of people with disability in agriculture or fisheries in Vanuatu is not 
available.  
21. Overall women and girls work significantly more hours than men, with less time for leisure or rest. FAO 
rural case studies of time use in Tanna showed women worked twice as many hours as men.38 When 
faced with this data men in the community were surprised and many indicated a willingness to take on 
more work so there is better balance in families. Climate changes including drought, heavy rains, rough 
seas and sea level rise increase women’s workloads in a number of ways:  reducing productivity of 
household gardens; reducing productivity of materials for handicraft production; increasing time and 
distance for water collection and reducing opportunity for gleaning and fishing. Communities in North 
Ambryn, Epi and West Santo all experience three or more months water shortages, requiring greater 
travel to collect drinking water and increasing incidence of water borne diseases. After disasters (and 
during the pandemic)39 women’s care burden increases substantially with closure of kindergartens and 
schools, loss of homes and gardens and water sources.  
22. Labour migration is an increasingly important feature of rural livelihoods as the need for cash grows. Most 
labour migrants are men, moving to urban centres or Australia and New Zealand for seasonal agricultural 
or other low or semi-skilled work. Women from rural areas participate in migration to urban areas to work 
in domestic roles in extended family or kinship groups. Migration generates substantial remittances that 
are used for family and productive purposes such as school fees, health care, improving housing and 
water supply, purchasing boats and machinery. Migration also creates pressure on families with increased 
work burdens on women left to care for children, elderly and family members with disability. Women have 
greater autonomy and financial decision-making power while male partners are away, and relationship 
tensions increase both during separation and on return.  
23. Women and girls’ roles and workloads restrict access to training and extension initiatives that could assist 
with adaptation strategies such as livelihood diversification. When family incomes are under pressure the 
needs of girls and family members with disability are the first to be compromised with reduced spending 
on rehabilitation and healthcare, withdrawal of girls from school and early marriage. While primary and 
secondary school participation rates have improved, on marriage girls and women’s ability to participate 
in further education and training is restricted.  
24. Agricultural extension services and enterprise development training at local level tends to be targeted to 
male heads of household, with men’s work valued over women’s work. Service providers need to shift 
approach to recognise that rural livelihoods are family enterprises, with women making up half of rural 
producers. Engaging families rather than just male heads of household is an effective way of reaching 
women and men, recognising and building on the work of all family members.40 The family farm teams 
approach combines technical extension/training with modules to identify family goals, roles, how work 
burdens can be shared, and improving decision making and communication.41 The approach has been 
pioneered by CARE Australia in PNG and is being used with success across Melanesia. The family farm 
teams approach can also address the increased risks of gender-based violence that women can face 
when they increase their incomes.42 Building on women’s existing roles including targeting capacity 
support to women in markets and in women’s church groups are also entry points.  
 
35 Thomas et al, Why they must be counted: Significant contributions of Fijian women fishers to food and security and livelihoods Ocean and Coastal Management 205 (2021) 105571 
36 Mangubhai, S., Lawless, S., 2021. Exploring gender inclusion in small-scale fisheries management in Melanesia. Marine Policy 123, 104287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpol.2020.104287. 
37 VNSO, UNICEF Children, Women and Men with Disabilities in Vanuatu 2014 
38 FAO Country Gender Assessment p 47 
39 Care International in Vanuatu, Rapid Gender Analysis COVID-19 Vanuatu 2019 
40 FAO, Country Gender Assessment  
41 Pamphilon B., Mikhailovich K., “ Bringing together learnings from two worlds: Lessons from a gender-inclusive community education approach with smallholder farmers in Papua 
New Guinea”, Australian Journal of Adult Education 57/2 July 2017; Family Farm Teams, Transformative Agriculture and Enterprise Development Program https://tadep-
png.com/project/family-farm-teams/ 
42 Eaves R. Kouro G., Steven S. and Subalik I. “Do No Harm Research: PNG” 2018 ANU; Eaves R. Lusby S., Araia T., Maeni M., Martin R. “Do No Harm Research: Solomon Islands” 
2018 ANU.

=== PAGE 137 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
8 
Decision Making, leadership and participation 
25. Decision making is male dominated in Vanuatu. Since independence in 1980 only five women have been 
elected to Vanuatu’s national parliament, and there are no women in Parliament in 2021, While women 
have competed in election none have been successful in the last three elections. At subnational level a 
quota system introduced in 2013 has led to increases in the number of women elected or appointed to 
Municipal and Provincial councils where women now make up about one third of members. While there 
are no women mayors there are some women in deputy mayor roles. In the public sector women are 
better represented in leadership.  Two of seven director generals are women (notably in in the MCC and 
MJCS) and 8/43 directors were women in 2019.43 At the international level women have led Vanuatu 
delegations to the UNFCCC COP (2017 and 2019) and women’s representation in delegations has been 
30-50% since 2017.   
26. Social norms about masculinity and leadership are slowly changing. At community level while male chiefs 
head the kastom governance structure, community committees for climate and disasters, water and 
village development provide a framework for women, people with disability and youth to participate and 
take on leadership roles particularly when supported by NGOs. Activities to build confidence and skills of 
women, people with disability and youth have increased community acceptance of their leadership 
capabilities.  
27. The Vanuatu Gender and protection cluster was established in 2014 and has built a strong network of 
government, international and national NGO partners focused on disaster management, as well as 
disaster risk reduction and climate action. The national cluster is chaired by DWA with NGO support, and 
includes subcommittees on children, leadership and disability. The cluster has been an important venue 
for building skills, awareness and systematic tools for more inclusive disaster preparedness and 
response. Challenges faced by the Cluster include securing financing from government for program 
implementation, influencing mainstreaming in other clusters and building provincial cluster mechanisms. 
There is a risk that action on gender and protection is left only to the gender and protection cluster or 
DWA, rather than embedded into the operations of all clusters, provincial and municipal emergency 
operations.  
28. Women have low levels of representation in the formal private sector but are active in small and medium 
enterprises based on agriculture, handicrafts and food production. Market associations and loans and 
savings cooperatives have large numbers of women members including in leadership roles. These 
provide an important entry point for business skills development (eg UN Women Markets for Change, 
VANWODs financial literacy and savings and loans groups) but have not yet been targeted for climate 
adaptation and resilience building. While women in most communities are excluded from kastom 
leadership roles they do play an active part in church communities including leadership of women’s groups 
and youth groups. 
29. At the household level men are seen as the head of household. In the FAO Tanna case study women 
reported many decisions are made by women and men together, but that men are the final decision 
makers. In Women’s Focus Groups in North Ambryn and Epi, North West Santo women reported that 
most decision making was shared between women and men. Project interventions using a family 
approach are important to reinforce existing shared decision making, instead of privileging male decision 
making.  
30. People with disability report isolation and stigma, as well lack of accessibility as barriers that prevent 
participation in community events and committees. Examples include CDCCC meetings being held in 
“open” settings that people with disabilities cannot access, or fear shame and ridicule.44 In some cases 
teachers take on the role of representing people with disability instead of communities supporting people 
with disability themselves to have voice. NGO and CSO activism by Vanuatu Disability Promotion and 
Advocacy Association, Vanuatu Society for People with Disability and Rainbow Theatre (Won Smal Bag) 
and the Vanuatu Civil Society Disability Network is challenging this exclusion. After TC Harold there was 
recognition by government and donors that data systems needed to improve to better support people with 
disabilities in disasters.45 The Vanuatu Skills Partnership is also demonstrating change employing seven 
people with disability as trainers, and 42% of industry trainers in the productive sectors are women. 46 
 
43 Vanuatu Government, NGEP 2020 – 2030 (draft)  
44 UNDP, USAID Building the Resilience of Persons with Disabilities to Cope with Climate Change in the Asia Pacific Region, Vanuatu Country Report 2019 
45 A new program to improve province and area level disability data through the Ministry of health information management system is being designed with support from; SPC.  
46 Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development, Vanuatu Snapshot 2020

=== PAGE 138 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
9 
Access to and Control of Resources 
31. 97% of land in Vanuatu is under customary ownership which is largely patrilineal. Men have control over 
land, marine and forest resources, while women have access or use rights to natural resources in line 
with existing divisions of labour. There can be restrictions on women’s access when menstruating or 
during pregnancy.47 On marriage women move to their husband’s community or island and access to 
resources is through him. Women with disability are less likely to marry and so face double exclusion to 
resources. Widows and female headed households also face exclusion or marginal access to natural 
resources.  
32. Women in rural areas earn income through marketing crops and fish, processing copra, cooking food and 
handicrafts. Fewer than one in five women have a bank account, though village loans and savings 
schemes are widespread and an important way for women to increase access to finance. Without land 
as collateral women struggle to access larger loans.48 Women’s focus group discussions identified a 
priority for financial literacy training.  
33. Small and medium enterprise development provides an opportunity to diversify livelihoods and also 
integrate climate and disaster resilience into existing enterprises such as handicrafts. It is important that 
enterprise development is linked to markets with sound value chain analysis. This requires climate change 
and DRR delivery partners to work with market development programs.49   
34. People with disability have low access to assistive devices and rehabilitation services, less than 20% 
have ever heard of assistive devices or rehabilitation services. Of those just over half of the people who 
needed services had received them.50 
35. Access to and control of agricultural and marine machinery is gendered in many countries, including 
Vanuatu, with women having less access than men to tools, machinery such as grass cutters, food 
processing (dryers and grinders) motorbikes, trucks or generators. Technology such as solar energy 
systems, fridges, lighting, drying and processing machines, improved cookstoves contribute to adaptative 
capacity. It will be important to ensure these technologies are available to women as well as men, and 
that women and people with disability have opportunities to train in maintenance and management of new 
technologies.   
36. Women’s role in household food production is an area to target.  Childhood nutrition data in Vanuatu 
shows a quarter of children are stunted and Women’s Focus Groups identified changing rainfall as 
impacting on the variety of foods they can grow and families can eat, with a drop in leafy greens and 
vegetables.  There is increased reliance on imported, less nutritious food which has negative health 
implications however this food is also attractive as it reduces women’s time burden. Similarly traditional 
food preservation techniques can be important disaster preparedness measures, however there is a cost 
in women’s work burden. Adaptive technology that also reduces women’s unpaid care workloads is more 
likely to be taken up. 
37. Access to mobile phones is a significant asset in Vanuatu with mobile networks improving 
communications and putting communication into the hands of individuals. Most households have a mobile 
phone, though data on who owns and uses the phone within the household is not available. A recent 
initiative – Women Wetem Weta – has established a mobile SMS network translating weather and health 
warnings from VMGD and MoH in Port Vila and sending to women network leaders in rural areas using 
low bandwidth SMS and social media to maximise reach. These women are then responsible for sharing 
information with their community through meetings, forwarding SMS and visits including to people with 
disabilities in their community. To start the initiative rural women leaders were given phones and data 
credit as they did not have these resources themselves. The initiative effectively uses technology and 
builds on women’s social roles, while empowering them with critical information. This initiative is not 
operational in all project areas.  
 Gender-Based Violence 
38. Vanuatu has a high prevalence of gender-based violence (GBV), in particular violence against women 
and girls. In 2011, research showed that 60% of women have experienced some form of physical and/or 
 
47 ICED Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020; and Braaf, Initial Gender and Social Inclusion Assessment for Vanuatu GCF Consortium, 2017 
48 Bowman, Cutura, Ellis and Manuel Women in Vanuatu Analyzing Challenges to Economic Participation, 2009 World Bank 
49 Talanoa Consulting, Women’s Resilience to disaster and climate change in the Pacific: Needs and Gaps Analysis 2019 
50 ICED, Water, Women and Disability Study Report 2020.

=== PAGE 139 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
10 
sexual violence.51  Violence is seen as an acceptable way of controlling behaviour and enforcing 
expectations on women and children. In rural settings, social norms and kastom decision making by 
village chiefs can place community harmony above the safety of individual women and children. While 
the Family Protection Act was passed by parliament in 2008 services for victims of gender-based violence 
are limited with little available in rural areas and low usage of protection orders. In a 2015 study 74% of 
women in Malekula had never heard of a domestic violence protection order, compared with 38% of 
chiefs, and only 6% of had used one.52 In 2020, a free telephone hotline service was established to 
provide assistance to victims to domestic violence and counselling for women and girls.53 
39. Sexual and physical violence is also high against women and girls with disabilities, both physical and
mental. Family members are often afraid to leave women and girls with disabilities alone in the home for
fear of sexual abuse by male community members.54
40. In the aftermath of disasters GBV is amplified. Where families lose homes and are displaced, lack of safe
housing, lighting, water and sanitation facilities increases risk of gender-based violence. Breakdowns in
health and GBV support services, transport routes and policing prevent women and girls from seeking
assistance. Loss of food crops and stores have been identified as contributing to increased gender-based
violence when women are unable to feed their families or earn income.  Climate change and disaster
impacts on water sources and agriculture mean women and girls need to travel further to farm and collect
water, creating increased risks to women and girls of sexual assault and harassment. Flooding and storm
surges block transport routes preventing pregnant and lactating women from accessing essential health
services, high risk home births were reported after TC Harold as women were unable to reach health
facilities.55 There is ever-growing evidence that climate-induced disasters exacerbate early child
marriages and forced unions. Although there are many factors that contribute to child marriage, such as
poverty and social norms that value community cohesion over the best interests of girls, there is growing
evidence that families also resort to marrying off their daughters as a direct response to the effects of
shocks to household income, property and livestock as a result of floods, cyclones and droughts etc.56
Additionally, disasters often lead to the closures of schools, and girls not in school is a major risk factor
for child marriage. As child marriage increases, poverty deepens and hence the vulnerability of
communities to climate change increases.
41. Child protection concerns have also been reported following TC Harold and with COVID19.57 Both girls
and boys are not able to attend school and families are not able to home school. They have been required
to work including carrying water loads beyond their capacity, and there are reports of verbal and physical
abuse.
42. Gender and protection assessments following TC Harold (and with COVID19)58 identified common
priorities for action including:
•
Increasing GBV support services and policing,
•
ensuring chiefs and service providers have an understanding of GBV risks after disasters
•
improving access to child, maternal and sexual and reproductive health services
•
putting child protection measures in place
•
psychological first aid
•
improving women’s leadership role in CDCCC, provincial emergency operations, women, church and
youth groups.
43. Research following TC Pam59 showed the effects of the disaster are amplified for people with disability –
they were 2.5 times more likely to have been injured (men twice as much as women), few had assistive
devices and some were lost in TC Pam. Adults with disability also had less access to DRR efforts, with
women more excluded than men.  Women with disability also had less access to response and recovery
51 Vanuatu Women’s Centre, 2011 The Vanuatu National Survey on Women’s Lives and Family Relationships Port Vila, Vanuatu.  
52 Policing and Justice Sector Support Program Vanuatu, 2016, Conflict Management and Access to Justice in Rural Vanuat 
53 VBTC https://www.vbtc.vu/en/domestic-violence-victims-to-access-new-free-phone-help-line 
 accessed 19 January 2020 
54 Braaf, 2017 
55 Vanuatu National Disaster Management Office, TC Harold Detailed Sectoral Assessment June 2020 
56 McLeod, C; Barr, H; and Rall, K (n.d.,) “Does climate change increase the risk of child marriage? A look at what we know – and what we don’t – with lessons from Bangladesh and 
Mozambique,” Columbia Journal of Gender and Law (accessed online 5 Nov 2021)  
57 Vanuatu National Disaster Management Office, TC Harold Detailed Sectoral Assessment June 2020 
58 Vanuatu National Disaster Management Office, TC Harold Detailed Sectoral Assessment June 2020  
59 CBM-Nossall Institute Disability Inclusion in Disaster Risk Reduction: Experiences of people with disabilities in Vanuatu during and after TC Pam 2017

=== PAGE 140 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
11 
efforts compared with men with disability. While access to services was poor for entire communities, 
access to disability services was worst, and both adults and children with disability reported lower 
wellbeing than people without disability.  Gender and protection assessments after TC Harold60 found 
that people with disabilities lost access to already limited services and were solely reliant on family 
support. Family resources and time were under pressure and basic needs of people with disabilities were 
not met.  
44. Throughout Vanuatu few facilities are accessible. Evacuation centres, particularly in rural areas are not 
accessible (e.g. buildings have stairs) and do not have water and sanitation facilities. Even if some 
evacuation centres are accessible (as is the case in Port Vila) people with disabilities prefer to avoid these 
as they risk facing discrimination and abuse.61 While awareness of disaster risks faced by people with 
disabilities is increasing action has failed to adequately consult with people with disabilities. During the 
Ambae volcano eruption people with disabilities were prioritised for relocation but were moved to the 
evacuation centre but without assistive devices and carers. Inclusion of people with disabilities in planning 
decisions is critical - at community level there has been some progress with NGO engagement to support 
participation of people with disabilities in CDCCCs. This has helped to build confidence of people with 
disability and shifted community attitudes and behaviour.  
Community Profiles: Gender and Social Inclusion Focus 
45. Profiles of eight communities are presented here, based on community meetings and women’s focus 
group discussions which identify gender-based differences. Data on people with disabilities, children and 
the elderly was not specifically addressed in the consultations and so profiles are limited in considering 
intersecting issues.  
North Ambrym Area Council, Malampa 
46. There are slightly more women (55%) than men in each community of 250 – 350 people and an estimated 
55% are aged 0-25 years. 3-5% have a lot of difficulties in functioning across one or more of six areas. 
All communities have active chiefs who organise community work. All have village development councils 
and plans, CDCCCs, as well as women’s groups, church and youth groups.  One community has a water 
committee, and some have a health committee, market committee and savings group. All have CDCCCs, 
with women in varying numbers, there are no people with disabilities on CDCCCs.  Women are members 
of some committees but do not chair committees. The main income sources are kava, livestock, fish and 
local produce sales. Women also earn money through baking.  For all communities the Area council and 
administrator was seen as working well with them, but they had little contact with provincial or national 
departments.  
Ranon community 
47. This community has a market house but limited access to banking. Women do not have access to 
microloans, but have, with men attended financial literacy training. The community has poor access to 
the health clinic, high seas can prevent access to the area health centre, a priority concern for women. 
The community has good access to water close to homes with supply managed by a water committee 
with 4 women and 4 men members. There is a high level of concern about increasing drought events, 
cyclones and volcanic ashfalls. Women identified contamination of water, water borne illness, food crop 
productivity and road access to health care as key challenges associated with climate change and 
disasters. The community faces food security challenges due to cyclones, overuse and degradation of 
land. There is good connection to the Digicel network and handheld radios, and most but not all 
households have a mobile phone.  The CDCCC has 1 female/9 male members and has had some training 
on DRR and climate change where women and youth participated however awareness of risks and 
adaption opportunities is low. The main DRR action taken has been to build stronger homes. Some people 
have access to safe shelter during cyclones, though these do not have private washroom facilities or 
emergency supplies. The main external assistance has been food relief and to the school, the community 
has no funding for CCDRR work. Women in the community are active in the VDC in roles of secretary 
and treasurer, school and youth organisations and some are confident to participate actively in community 
meetings. They generally feel respected by men. Additional to family agriculture/fishing they earn money 
 
60 Vanuatu National Disaster Management Office, TC Harold Detailed Sectoral Assessment June 2020 
61 UNDP, USAID Building the Resilience of Persons with Disabilities to Cope with Climate Change in the Asia Pacific Region, Vanuatu Country Report 2019

=== PAGE 141 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
12 
from kava and baking. Women have mobile phones and direct access to information about weather and 
disaster warming from VMGD. Following disasters women noted an increase in overall conflict in the 
community but were unsure about family violence. Women go to the chief’s council for support if they face 
problems. Decision making about large household purchases and women visiting the health centre are 
shared by men and women while women are able to decide themselves about small purchases. They are 
also able to decide themselves about visiting relatives or friends outside the community.  
48. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: training on food security and sewing to diversify incomes.  
Magam Community 
49. Cyclones, drought, and volcanic ash are key concerns identified in this community. Cyclones have 
damaged buildings and cut road access preventing them from transporting goods to market. There are 
water shortages for 3-4 months a year and water has to be collected from 1km away, there is no water 
committee. Women are on the village council (3 women, 5 men), kindergarten committee  and CDCCC, 
where they are active according to the community consultation.  However in the women’s focus group 
women noted feeling afraid to share ideas and speak freely in community meetings with men discouraging 
women when they return to their families. There are no people with disabilities on the CDCCC. One 
woman has unsuccessfully stood for election at provincial or national level.  
50. There are 7 concrete buildings used as cyclone shelters, but do not have private toilet facilities for women 
and men. After disaster events women noted the level of conflict and family violence is about the same, 
and for support women report being able to go to the chief, police and church leaders. About half the 
women have access to microloans and have attended financial literacy training. There are no community 
funds for CCDRR action. Most women have access to a mobile phone, there is good access to the 
Vodafone network and they get warnings and weather information from VMGD through social media. 
Women are able to decide themselves to visit the health centre (there is no health facility in the 
community) and make small household purchases, while large purchases and visits to family outside the 
community are decided by women and men together. Women earn money through baking bread and 
donuts.  
51. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: assistance with food security and financial literacy.  
Fonmur/Nazareth Community 
52. Cyclones, drought, and volcanic ash are key concerns identified by women, damaging gardens and water 
systems and creating food and water shortages. Water borne diseases and flu are challenges associated 
with cyclones. Drought damages gardens and causes a shortage of drinking water for 4 months of the 
year with water springs 1km away. There is no water committee in the community. Heavy rain erodes soil 
and volcanic ash affects gardens and water sources. Damage to roads and buildings from cyclones are 
also significant challenges. Levels of conflict and family violence are about the same before and after 
disasters, and women go to the Chief to seek support for abuse. Most women in the community are able 
to speak at public meetings and women are office bearers in the CDCCC, there are no people with 
disabilities on the CDCCC.  The community does have a disaster/evacuation and CC/DRR plan with 
support from Care. The school is used as shelter for some people though these were damaged in TCH. 
The community does not have funds for CCDRR activities. A small number of women have mobile phones 
and receive information from Facebook or the internet about weather and disasters. There is good access 
to the Vodaphone network. Decisions about visiting the health centre, small and large household 
purchases, visiting outside the community are made by women and men together. Less than half of the 
women have access to microloans 
53. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: agriculture training 
Varsu Area Council, Epi Island, Shefa Province 
54. In this area council the three communities consulted range from 280 – 333 people, with 55% women, and 
55% aged 0-25 years. 3-5.7% have a lot of difficulties in functioning across one or more of six areas. All 
communities have active chiefs who organise community work. All have village development councils and 
2 have development plans. All communities have women’s groups, church groups, youth groups and 
water, health and market committees.  Two communities have micro-finance or savings groups, and 
women have access to loans in one community. The main income sources are kava, handicrafts, peanut 
and copra sales. There are no functional CDCCCs, evacuation or climate adaptation plans or access to

=== PAGE 142 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
13 
funds for CCDRR activities. One community rated their relationship with provincial authorities to be very 
good, the other two rated the relationship as OK. They had little or no interaction with national ministries.  
Nikaura community 
55. This community has been affected cyclones, heavy rains and flooding and associated landslides as well 
as drought. Women identified fear of sea level rise preventing pregnant women from road travel to 
hospital, as well as impacts on income generation. In heavy rains older women cannot go to gardens, and 
it is also hard for children to travel. Women have observed an increase in pests and diseases in vegetable 
gardens and changes in seasons for planting. There are water shortages throughout the year, and water 
collection is insufficient for both village supply and upland gardens. Sediment affects water which is 
collected by container 2km from homes. Bush toilets are close to houses which creates hygiene problems 
during floods.  
56. Some women are able to speak and share ideas in community meetings, and there are some women in 
leadership roles such as the Treasurer of the village council. Women feel men show them respect. Women 
earn money from selling agricultural produce, cooked food, weaving and handicrafts, fishing, and sale of 
livestock. There is a women’s building where meetings, activities and marketing takes place, however the 
market house is small and lacks shelter during rain.  
57. There have been projects in the last five years on violence against women. After cyclones and floods 
women noted violence in home and conflict in the community goes down. Women can go to the nassara 
and chief for support regarding abuse and domestic problems. Women are able to make their own 
decision to seek health care and make small purchased, while decisions about expensive items varies 
between households.  
58. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: Financial management, income generating activities, value 
adding opportunities for export of products , improving health access for women (cancer and other 
women’s health checks), food preservation for disaster, food security training, DRR training to cope with 
all disasters. 
Mate Wan Community 
59. This community is affected by cyclones, flooding, drought and volcanic activity. There are extremely rough 
seas and storm surges make roads impassable. Heavy rains damage food gardens and make it difficult 
for children to go to school. Food gardens are also affected with women reporting a lack of vegetables 
and fruits. Women also identified illness, income security, food security, water security as risks associated 
with climate change with water shortages 3months/year. They also noted a lack of facilities, training and 
poor infrastructure (roads and wharf) as challenges. Some women are able to speak and share ideas at 
community meetings and there is a women’s church group. There are no women in the village council or 
other committees.  Women earn money from weaving/handicrafts and sale of agricultural produce and 
cooked food. Women go to the chief, church and family for support regarding abuse or domestic conflict 
and note that both domestic violence and community conflict reduce after disasters. While some women 
have mobile phones none receive climate, weather or disaster information. Women are able to decide 
themselves about visiting people outside the community and men and women decide together about 
household purchases.  
60. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: Training in DRR, personal finance, Climate Change 
Adaptation & mitigation, Food Security and nutrition.  
Ngala(lopevi) community  
61. This community is affected by cyclone, drought, rough seas and volcanic ash fall. Roads and schools 
have been destroyed and during flooding roads and paths are impassable. Women identify population 
growth straining resources, inadequate access to health facilities and water as major problems. Water 
collection is by bucket 300m away, with sediment affecting water sources. Bush toilets are close to houses 
which creates hygiene problems during floods. Lack of water storage is leading to low vegetable 
production and impact on nutrition and food security. Women are also concerned about loss of housing 
during disaster events.  
62. Some women are able to speak and share ideas at community meetings, and there is a women and girls 
church group and handicrafts group. The village council has 3 men and 3 women and a woman chairs 
the school committee. Women earn money through weaving and handicrafts, sale of cooked food,

=== PAGE 143 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
14 
agricultural produce and livestock. Challenges include lack of health services, poor water storage and low 
greens and vegetable consumption.  Women are able to go chiefs regarding abuse or domestic problems, 
and they report less domestic violence and community conflict after disasters. Women are able to decide 
on large household purchases themselves, while decisions about a woman going to a health centre, small 
purchases and visiting family outside the community are shared between women and men. Some women 
have mobile phones but face communication problems due to limited access to phone networks. Women 
have not received information about climate and weather forecasts or disaster warnings.  
63. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: DRR training, food safety training, value-added production 
training, first aid training, financial literacy training, health and nutritional training, improve communication 
phone networks.  
64. North West Santo Area Council, Santo Island, Sanma Province 
65. The two communities consulted in this area council varied significantly: Olpoe is a large community of 
410 people (55% male), while Penaoru has 74 people (55% female). 55% of the population in both 
communities is aged 0-25years.  In Olpoe 1% of the community have a lot of difficulties in functioning 
across one or more of six areas, while the rate in Penaoru is over 5%.  Both communities have active 
chiefly leadership, but no community disaster or climate change committee, plans or funding.  Copra is 
the main source of income, followed by cacao.  
Olpoe community 
66. Drought is the main risk faced in this community, affecting kava and food crops. Women report feeling 
afraid to speak and share views in community meetings. Women are involved in a range of committees 
including church, cooperative (2 women/3 men), boat committee (2 women, 3 men) and violence against 
women committee, but are not represented in the village council. Women earn income from sale of 
agricultural products, handicrafts, fishing and livestock, as well as copra and cacao.  
67. There are water shortages for 5 months a year, with a 4km walk for water and few improved toilets. 
Women identify flooding and heavy rain as harming crops and contaminating water supply. They are 
concerned about river and coastal erosion and sea level rise. Rough seas also prevent travel to access 
services. Most women have mobile phones and have received information about climate and weather 
forecasts and disaster warning. The community has a good relationship with the area administrator and 
the Director of Department of Women’s Affairs recently visited the community. Women decide themselves 
about small and large household purchases and visiting outside the community, while men and women 
decide together about visiting health care.  
68. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: Food security training & activities, personal finance trainings 
on how to manage income 
Penaoru community 
69. This community faces drought, fire and storms causing river flooding which has destroyed houses, fruit 
and cash crops. They experience water shortages throughout the year and have few improved toilets. 
Illnesses such as red eye, malaria and dengue are a concern. Poor weather and rough seas blocks 
access to markets and services. Children are cut off from school due to storm surges and women are 
unable to access food gardens during heavy rains. Women have to travel to Luganville to give birth if they 
have already had 5 children, however transport is difficult.  
70. Some women are able to speak freely at community meetings, and women are active in aid (health)post, 
water, environment and church committees.  They earn money from weaving/handicrafts, livestock as 
well as sale of copra, cacoa and agricultural products in Luganville. They have received small business 
management training. While a small number of women have mobiles phones there is no network access 
in the community and radio Vanuatu is available at night only.  Women are concerned that they cannot 
receive cyclone and tsunami warnings because of the lack of a phone network. Women decide 
themselves about small and large household purchases and visiting outside the community, while men 
and women decide together about visiting health care. The community rates the relationship with area 
administration as poor.  
71. Priorities identified in Women’s Focus Group: Weaving, savings & loan programs, first 
aid training, DRR training, Income generating activities, training to women selling produce at markets:

=== PAGE 144 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
15 
value-adding production training. Nutritional training. Leadership training. Cervical cancer awareness & 
other health and hygiene training. 
Project specific conclusions and recommendations 
72. It is important that the project benefits women, people with disability and youth, as well as men, and that 
power dynamics currently undermining community resilience are transformed. Project interventions 
should support women, people with disability and youth to access climate information, and resources and 
skills to adapt livelihoods. To support lasting change the project must also address underlying social 
norms and behaviours associated with work roles and workload, leadership and violence, including child 
marriage and forced unions. This means going beyond equitable participation and individual self-
improvement activities for women, people with disability and youth to also lift women’s voice and agency 
and transform power dynamics at household, community, area and province levels that serve to reinforce 
inequality.  
73. A “twin track” approach to disability inclusion is needed – working directly with people with disability and 
DPOs, and also mainstreaming disability inclusion into the wider community and government systems. 
Vanuatu Society of Disabled People and Vanuatu Skills Partnership are key partners for building skills 
and training; while Vanuatu Disabled People’s Association (Santo) and Rainbow Theatre are important 
advocacy organisations.  
Household and Community level 
74. At the household and community level the following approaches should be prioritised:  
• 
Family teams – work at household level and engage male and female heads of household in planning 
and implementation of adaption actions to ensure that women’s and men’s roles in agriculture and 
fisheries are accounted for. This approach also creates opportunities to address social norms about 
unpaid work and sharing workloads more equally. Modules address family goal setting and finances; 
planning family farm (or other enterprise); feeding the family and nutrition; and communication and 
decision making in the family. Working at this level will also enable identification of family members 
with disability, to link with disability inclusive skills/training, as well as participation in CDCCCs. 
• 
Ensure project supported infrastructure is accessible and reduces risks of gender-based violence. 
Emergency shelters should be prioritised for accessibility and wash facilities. Infrastructure projects 
should include women in management and leadership positions, and create opportunities for skills 
training of women, youth and people with disability and opportunities for work at equal pay with men. 
Codes of conduct, awareness raising, complaints mechanisms and survivor-centred response should 
be available on any GBV issues raised through building processes.  
• 
CDCCC 
o Train all CDCCC on disability inclusive DRR 
o Identify and support people with disability in the community to be represented on the CDCCC 
and participate in activities run through the CDCCC.    
o Ensure women and youth are represented on the CDCCC, including 50% target for women’s 
representation. 
o Provide targeted training and coaching support to women and people with disability to build 
confidence to engage actively in CDCCs.  
o Provide training to CDCCC members on women’s empowerment and GBV (e.g. roles, norms 
and values that determine what men and women do, how men and women prepare for, react 
to and recover from disasters and the impacts of gender inequality, discrimination, GBV and 
child marriage and forced unions) and disability. 
o Emergency planning at community level should clearly identify people at highest risk and 
target support to ensuring their safety.  
o CDCCC should be able to undertake rapid needs assessments clearly identifying needs of 
women, children, elderly and people with disabilities. 
• 
Work with chiefs, church and other male champions to raise awareness on the impacts of societal 
inequality on poverty and climate change and change attitudes and beliefs around gender roles and 
responsibilities and negative attitudes about the capabilities of women, youth and people with 
disability in the community.

=== PAGE 145 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
16 
• 
Support the participation of women and girls and persons with disabilities by subsidising transport 
costs and providing childcare arrangements at meetings, workshops and other project-related 
activities. 
• 
Create extension and training programmes are tailored to the needs of women (as well as men) to 
address the current gap and bias towards men’s needs. 
• 
Include anti-child marriage efforts into awareness raising activities and adaptation planning 
processes. 
• 
Target adaptation activities to women through existing women’s groups eg market groups and church 
groups, and support women led adaptation initiatives eg in aquaculture, agriculture, value 
adding/diversification and ecotourism.  
• 
Provide climate and weather information in multiple formats (written, graphic, audio – visual) and 
mediums (eg mobile phone sms, social media, radio, community meeting, home visits) 
Area level 
75. Area administration and area councils are critical for service delivery and accountability to communities. 
Recommendations at this level: 
• 
Train area administration staff on how to collect and assess gender and disability-disaggregated data 
and integrate gender equality, disability inclusion and child protection into adaptation plans, budgets, 
and monitoring. This should include ongoing mentoring to support area staff to implement 
commitments. 
• 
Build facilitation skills in the family teams approach for MALFFB extension staff and NGO partners.  
• 
Support MALFFB to improve gender balance in field/extension staff, to improve engagement with 
women in communities. Priorities identified by women include food security, diversification and value 
adding and financial literacy. Training should include provision for childcare and catering; and be timed 
when women are most likely to be available. Technology training will need to have specific approaches 
to engaging women and girls and people with disabilities. 
• 
Support MALFFB to partner with disabled people’s organisations and Vanuatu Skills Partnership to 
design and deliver trainings so people with disability can participate. This should include providing 
transport, accessible venues, interpreter and caregiver support.   
• 
Maintain up to date data on people with disability in the area council, and their specific needs so these 
can be rapidly addressed in disasters. 
• 
Support two-way communications systems between area administration and CDCCCs, for early 
warning of disaster events and seasonal climate forecasts, and also for communities to submit rapid 
assessments after a disaster. Systems need to be established to ensure assessments are transmitted 
from area to provincial or national operations centres to trigger timely responses, including with 
information on people with disabilities.  
• 
Area councils: 
o Support capacity building for women, people with disability and youth to participate in area 
councils as active, confident members.   
o Provide transport, accessible venues and accommodation; interpreter and caregiver support; 
childcare and catering; and time meetings when women are most likely to be available. 
 
Province level 
76. Improving linkages and coordination between the provincial and area levels are important for gender and 
social inclusion particularly as government staff from the Department for Women’s Affairs (DWA) and 
NGOs and disabled people’s organisations are at provincial level. Priorities here would be: 
• 
Support implementation of provincial gender action plans for training Provincial disaster committees 
in gender and protection; establishing women led adaptation initiatives; and supporting representation 
and leadership by women; and providing livelihoods training to people with disabilities.  
• 
Building DWA staff capacity at province level to coordinate across government and NGOs, including 
the gender and protection cluster, as well as support mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion 
into province and area operations for MALFFB and MoCC.

=== PAGE 146 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
17 
• 
Allocate funding to enable provincial Department for Women staff to travel to, and work with, area 
administration on gender focused adaptation activities including GESI training for CDCCCs, women’s 
leadership development and women led adaptation initiatives  
• 
Improve two way communication links and protocols to ensure that Early Warning Systems (EWS) 
reach area and community level, and information (including rapid needs assessment) from 
communities goes up to province and national level for timely response.  
• 
Maintain accurate data about people with disability to enable service delivery and disaster 
preparedness and response is a priority.  
• 
Many NGOs and other organisations eg VSDP, VDPA, VSP/TVETs and VANWODS have provincial 
operations, with established relationships with provincial, area and community leaders. VCCRP 
should engage these organisations as project partners as they have a track record and critical 
relationships in each province.  
 
Project operations 
77. It is important to promote the value that gender equality and social inclusion is core to project effectiveness 
– if we care about community resilience then everyone’s needs are important, and everyone’s 
contributions need to be recognised. This should be articulated by project leadership and through project 
communications. 
78. Mainstreaming targets should be set across the project operations to drive accountability: 
• 
50% female staff 
• 
targets for women in leadership positions  
• 
targets for recruitment, training and promotion of people with disability.  
• 
All project staff should be trained in gender equality and social inclusion 
• 
Findings from this report should be disseminated to SC staff and partners 
• 
Position descriptions for technical staff should include their ability to understand and address the 
needs of diverse groups 
• 
Employ at least one full time GESI technical adviser and additional technical support on disability 
inclusion, with experience in analysis, planning and monitoring. The advisers must be able to mentor 
and train government counterparts at MoCC, MALFFB and province DWA staff and have budget to 
travel to province and area level. 
• 
Project communications should be designed to challenge social norms. For example, by using 
appropriate language; and showing women of all ages and people with disability in active leadership 
roles.  
• 
MEAL activities should track changes in knowledge, attitudes, perceptions and behaviours related to 
gender equality, preferably at outcome level. 
• 
Regular review of GESI Action Plan, and adaptations made to Action Plan and project implementation 
as needed. 
79. Implementation arrangements should engage partners with a track record of working with communities in 
each particular province. Expertise in gender equality and disability inclusion may need to be centralised 
through organisations such as VDPA (disability inclusion) and Care (family teams); Vanuatu Women’s 
Centre for support on gender-based violence, working with men and boys, relationship building; Save the 
Children and World Vision on school based DRR.  
80. Referral pathways and relationships should be established with other organisations to deal with specific 
issues eg VANWODS access to finance, savings and loans groups and enterprise skills development; 
Vanuatu Women’s Centre for GBV services; Area and provincial health services, especially for access to 
reproductive and sexual health services.

=== PAGE 147 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
18
Part 2 VCCRP Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
Component 1: Government, civil society and communities are strengthened to support local resilience 
to climate change impacts, including by providing access to climate information and early warnings  
 
 
Project Activities  
Indicator & Targets 
Timeline 
 Responsibilities 
Cost 
Output 1.1:  Community-based climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction mechanisms are 
strengthened  
 
 
Activity 1.1.1   
Establish CDCCCs (where 
necessary) and build their capacity, 
including strengthening social 
inclusion and gender-balance 
• 
Gender balance in CDCCCs in target 
communities (50% F, 50% M) 
(Baseline 0%) 
• 
Gender balance in leadership of CDCCCs 
(50% F, 50% M) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
At least one person with disability is on 
CDCCC in target communities 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
At least two youth on CDCCCs in target 
communities (1 F, 1 M on each CDCCC 
totalling 282 F and 282 M) 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Women, people with disability and youth on 
CDCCC report being confident to share their 
views and be respected 
Year 1-4 
DoCC 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$101,614 (Activity 
1.1.1.2, budget 
assumptions A2, A5 & 
A6) 
Activity 1.1.2 
Increase CDCCC member capacity 
to identify climate change and 
disaster risks at the local level 
 
• 
100% of men, women and youth trained in 
leadership, including targeted training for 
women in leadership and children/youth 
engagement, ensuring that all CDCCC 
members respect women’s decision-making 
roles (282 workshops total) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
100% CDCCC members trained in gender-
based risks of climate-induced hazards; 
gender-sensitive data collection and analysis 
(disaggregated by sex, age and ability) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Year 1-6 
DoCC 
DLA 
SC Vanuatu 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor  
$38,566 (Activities 
1.1.2.1-1.1.2.2, budget 
assumptions A12-14)

=== PAGE 148 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
19
• 
95% targeted CDCCC members with increased 
understanding of the implications of climate 
change  
(Baseline: Approx. 15% nation-wide [<25% 
female]) 
 
Output 1.2:  Communities have increased understanding of climate change impacts and are supported 
to develop inclusive local adaptation plans  
 
 
Activity 1.2.1 
Community awareness raising on 
climate change risks to food 
systems, livelihoods and disaster 
risk via targeted IEC materials and 
information sessions managed by 
Area Council Climate Change 
Officers and CDCCCs 
 
• 
Equal participation in community awareness 
raising sessions (50% F, 50% M) (32 
workshops total) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
50% Area Council Climate Change Officers 
engaged under the project are women 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
IEC materials highlight key concerns as 
identified by women, men, girls and boys 
• 
5% of participants are people with disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
95% targeted women, men, children and youth 
with increased understanding of the 
implications of climate change  
(Baseline: Approx. 15% nation-wide [<25% 
female]) 
Year 1-6 
DoCC 
DLA 
SC Vanuatu 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$197,080 (Activities 
1.2.1.1-1.2.1.5, budget 
assumptions A22-27) 
Activity 1.2.2 
Identify key local issues that drive 
climate vulnerability and use this to 
develop local adaptation plans and 
measure program impact 
• 
Equal number of male and female participants 
in community consultations, including separate 
women and youth consultations (50% F; 50% 
M) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
5% of participants in community consultations 
are people with a disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
All consultation reports identify distinct issues 
for women, men, young people and people with 
disabilities 
 Year 1-6 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$189,383 (Activities 
1.2.2.1-1.2.2.4, budget 
assumptions A33-38) 
Activity 1.2.3 
Development of inclusive 
Community Adaptation Plans and 
• 
100% Community Adaptation Plans include the 
perspectives, needs and capacities of women, 
men, girls and boys and people with disability 
 Year 1-6 
DLA 
DoCC 
PMU Team Leader 
$211,925 (Activities 
1.2.3.1-1.2.3.3, budget 
assumptions A44-48)

=== PAGE 149 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
20
identification of key resilience 
building actions (selected from 
adaptation package menu) 
 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
100% of community adaptation packages 
respond to all of the needs identified in the 
Adaptation Plans and includes activities 
specifically focused on the needs of women, 
children, youth and persons with disabilities 
(Baseline: 0%) 
GESI Advisor 
Output 1.3:  Communities have increased access to climate information services and early warning 
systems and the skills to utilise them as adaptation tools  
 
 
Activity 1.3.1 
Develop and distribute CIS IEC 
products to support community 
adaptation awareness raising and 
adaptation planning processes 
• 
All CIS communications (660 messages) are 
delivered in formats accessible to people with 
disability 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
50% CIS communications (330 messages) are 
targeted at women  
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
50% CIS communications (330 messages) are 
targeted at women  
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
29,210 people target community members with 
increased understanding of application of CIS 
to agriculture/fisheries (8,763 F, 20,447 M – 
30% female as fishers skew male) 
(Baseline: 720-1,380 people nation-wide 
[<25% female]) 
Year 1-6 
DoCC 
NDMO 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$44,442 (Activity 
1.3.1.3-1.3.1.5, budget 
assumptions A54, 
A60, ) 
Activity 1.3.2 
Build capacity of Area Council 
Climate Change Officers and 
CDCCCs to effectively utilize CIS in 
community planning processes 
 
• 
Training materials include a strong focus on 
gender and disability 
• 
Equal numbers of men and women in Area 
Councils and CDCCCs trained in the use of 
CIS resources (50% F, 50% M) (44 workshops) 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Equal number of male and female participants 
in community consultations, including separate 
women and youth consultations (50% F; 50% 
M) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Year 1-4 
DoCC 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$172,532 (Activities 
1.3.2.1-1.3.2.3, budget 
assumptions A67-
A72)

=== PAGE 150 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
21
Component 2: Scalable, locally appropriate actions are implemented to meet community adaptation 
needs to create climate-resilient, sustainable development pathways  
Project Activities  
Indicator & Targets 
Timeline 
 Who is 
responsible 
cost 
Output 2.1: Local natural resources are more resilient to climate change impacts through 
implementation of nature-based solutions  
 
 
Activity 2.1.1 
Support adaptations that strengthen 
or rehabilitate coastal protection 
barriers, reduce risk of 
flood/landslides and improve water-
security through nature-based 
solutions 
• 
Assessment of men’s and women’s roles in 
natural resource management and findings 
incorporated into adaptation plans and 
activities, including efforts to address the 
skewed division of labour towards women  
• 
50% of participants in activities are women 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
5% of participants in activities are people with 
disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
Women and men have equitable access to 
project-provided resources to implement 
nature-based solutions  
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DoA 
DoWR 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$1,43,461 (Activities 
2.1.1.1-2.1.1.6, budget 
assumptions B1-7) 
 
Activity 2.1.2  
Introduce/scale up improved 
agriculture methods to minimize 
erosion and reduce impact of pests 
and diseases 
• 
50% participants in education and training 
sessions are women (7,822 F) (130 workshops 
per year) 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
50% of scaled-up/introduced methods support 
women’s agricultural roles and support ways of 
addressing skewed division of labour 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
At least 5% of participants in education and 
training are people with disability 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Women and men have equitable access to 
project-provided resources to implement 
nature-based solutions 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Women are 50% of participants in development 
of demonstration sites 
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DoA 
DoWR 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$369,536 (Activities 
2.1.2.1-2.1.2.4, budget 
assumptions B14-19)

=== PAGE 151 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
22
Activity 2.1.3  
Support communities to protect and 
rehabilitate habitats that support 
fisheries, particularly degraded coral 
reefs, seagrass meadows and 
mangroves 
• 
50% participants in education and training 
sessions are women (43 workshops per year) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
Women and men have equal voice in decisions 
on priority areas and targets for action 
• 
50% participants in rehabilitation action and 
invasive species management and women 
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DoA 
DoWR 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$175,304 (Activities 
2.1.3.1-2.1.3.5, budget 
assumptions B26-32) 
 
Output 2.2: Climate-resilient agriculture for food security and livelihood development  
 
 
Activity 2.2.1 
Support adaptations to traditional 
farming methods to increase climate-
resilience and increase food security 
• 
Stocktake of existing and traditional agricultural 
practices outlines women and men’s roles, 
needs and challenges and identifies strategies 
to address the skewed division of labour 
• 
50% participants in education and training 
sessions are women (15,600 F) (28 workshops 
per year) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
Women are 50% of participants in development 
of demonstration sites 
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DoA 
DoWA 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$744,679 (Activities 
2.2.1.1-2.2.1.4, budget 
assumptions B38-43) 
 
Activity 2.2.2 
Introduce/scale up adoption of 
climate-resilient native food and 
cash crop varieties 
• 
Women and men have equitable access to 
project-provided resources to implement 
climate-resilient agriculture initiatives 
• 
50% farmers implementing climate resilient 
agriculture techniques are women (11,700 F) 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Women and men benefit equally from 
increased household food security  
Year 2-6 
DoA 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$635,887 (Activities 
2.2.2.1-2.2.2.3, budget 
assumptions B50-53) 
 
Activity 2.2.3 
Establish/scale-up community-, 
school- and home-based kitchen 
gardens for enhanced nutrition 
utilsiing climate-resilient crops 
• 
At least 50% participants in education and 
training sessions are women (141 workshops 
per year) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
5% of participants in education and training 
sessions are people with disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
Women and men have equitable access to 
project-provided resources to implement 
climate-resilient food security initiatives 
Year 1-4 
DoA 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$439,090 (Activities 
2.2.3.1-2.2.3.3, budget 
assumptions B60-65)

=== PAGE 152 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
23
• 
50% participants in development of kitchen 
gardens in schools and communities are 
women (87 plots per year in years 3-5, total 
261 plots) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Output 2.3: Climate-resilient fisheries for food security and livelihood development  
 
 
Activity 2.3.1 
Build community capacity on coastal 
resource management and 
monitoring that supports sustainable 
fisheries 
• 
50% of participants in training are women 
(Baseline: 0%) (28 workshops per year) 
• 
5% of participants in training are people with 
disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
50% of community ‘champions’ are women 
(202 F) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Year 1-6 
DoF 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$255,726 (Activities 
2.3.1.1-2.3.1.3, budget 
assumptions B72-77) 
 
Activity 2.3.2 
Support communities to adopt 
primary community-based fisheries 
management to reduce climate 
change impacts 
 
• 
30% of participants in leadership training are 
women (2,700 F) (fishers in Vanuatu are 
predominately men) (28 workshops per year) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
30% of targeted fishers diversifying resources 
are women (2,040 F) fishers in Vanuatu are 
predominately men) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Year 1-6 
DoF 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$242,985 (Activities 
2.3.2.1-2.3.2.4, budget 
assumptions B78-82) 
 
Output 2.4: Women-led climate-resilient food processing and preservation established to support food 
security and diversification of livelihoods options   
 
 
Activity 2.4.1 
Introduce or scale up women-led 
local solutions for food processing 
and preservation 
• 
100% of technology owned and managed by 
women-led producer groups 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
Support 30 youth entrepreneurs (100% 
women) to operate and/or maintain 
perseveration technologies 
Year 2-6 
DLA 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$2,578,623 (Activities 
2.4.1.1-2.4.1.3, budget 
assumptions B89-94) 
 
Activity 2.4.2 
Support women to diversify into new 
agricultural/food commodities and 
value-add products that deliver 
greater income generating 
opportunities 
• 
At least 90 women-led income diversification 
initiatives implemented, with at least 30 led by 
young women, including skills development for 
value-add products (28 workshops per year) 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
Women and men benefit equally from 
increased household incomes generated from 
project support 
Year 2-6 
DLA 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$1,850,130 (Activities 
2.4.2.1-2.4.2.2, budget 
assumptions B101-
105)

=== PAGE 153 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
24
Activity 2.4.3 
Support women-led enterprises to 
access private partnership options to 
access new (distant) markets for 
value-add products 
 
• 
90 women-led producer groups established 
and operational 
(Baseline: 0) 
• 
6 women-led partnerships with private sector 
entities established (assumes 1 per province) 
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DLA 
DoWA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor 
$325,420 (Activities 
2.4.3.1-2.4.3.2, budget 
assumptions B1127-
117) 
 
  
Component 3: Institutional adaptive capacity is enhanced by building adaptive governance systems at 
the local level and enhancing local-provincial-national linkages   
 
 
Output 3.1: Adaptive local governance systems strengthened through sub-national planning  
 
 
Project Activities 
Project tasks  
Deliverables  
 
 
Activity 3.1.1 
Support Area Council and Province 
officials to incorporate climate risk 
analysis and financing strategies into 
Area Council development plans and 
budgets 
• 
Consolidation of community analysis provides 
gender and disability disaggregated information 
(Baseline: not currently disaggregated)   
• 
Area Council training on the integration of 
climate change risks and adaptation actions 
into planning and budgeting processes 
includes tools on how to analyse plans form a 
gender and disability perspective and are 
gender balanced  
• 
At least 60% of targeted Area Councils 
operationalise gender-responsive budgeting 
practices 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
100% of Area Council and Province officials 
receive training in gender-based risks of 
climate-induced hazards; gender-sensitive data 
collection and analysis (disaggregated by sex, 
age and ability) (6 workshops per year) 
(Baseline: 0) 
Year 1-6 
DLA 
DwoA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor  
$123,914 (Activities 
3.1.1.3/3.1.1.6, budget 
assumptions C3/4) 
 
Activity 3.1.2  
Build the capacity of local authorities 
to support operations of the 
CDCCCs and ongoing inclusive local 
adaptation planning processes  
• 
Training to build capacity of Area Councils to 
support the ongoing operations of CDCCCs to 
include both women and men and seek gender 
balance (6 workshops per year) 
Year 1-6 
DoCC 
DLA 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor  
$522,330 (Activity 
3.1.2.2, budget 
assumptions C11) 
 
Activity 3.1.3  
Support NDMO to design and 
establish a gender and shock-
• 
Design of the shock responsive social 
protection system responds to the needs of 
women and people with disability  
Year 1-4 
NDMO 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Advisor  
Match funding 
Australian DFAT

=== PAGE 154 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
25
responsive social protection system 
designed for the needs of the most 
vulnerable households. 
(Baseline: no social protection system) 
 
Output 3.2: Enhanced local-provincial-national linkages  
 
 
Activity 3.2.1 
Capture lessons learned, emerging 
themes and best practices at the 
community level to ensure sub-
national and national planning 
processes are informed by local 
needs and that local actions support 
national objectives 
• 
10 (of 30) annual knowledge management 
products focus specifically on progress on 
gender equality, disability inclusion and youth 
participation and GESI issues mainstreamed 
into all other knowledge products 
(Baseline: 0 products)  
• 
At least 50% of participants in annual national, 
regional and/or international forums are women 
(Baseline: 0%) (4 workshops per year) 
• 
At least 30% of participants in annual national, 
regional and/or international forums are youth 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
At least 5% of participants in annual national, 
regional and/or international forums are people 
with disability 
(Baseline: 0%) 
• 
At least 30% of annual national, regional and/or 
international forums focus specifically on 
climate change and GESI-related issues (5 
forums) 
(Baseline: 0%) 
Year 1-6 
DLA 
PMU M&E Specialist 
GESI Advisor  
$230,173, (Activities 
3.2.1.1-3.2.1.3, budget 
assumptions C26-
C31) 
 
Activity 3.2.2 
Support local authorities in 
monitoring and evaluation of national 
CCDRR policies at the local level 
and increasing dialogue between 
stakeholders at all levels  
• 
Community level data includes indicators to 
report on Provincial Gender Action Plans, 
including:  
• 
Participation of Women, youth and people 
with disability  
• 
Leadership by women, youth and people 
with disability 
• 
Women led adaptation initiatives 
• 
Youth led adaptation initiatives 
• 
Skills development for people with 
disabilities 
(Baseline: data not captured) 
Year 1-6 
DLA 
PMU M&E Specialist 
GESI Advisor  
$57,401 (Activities 
3.2.2.1-3.2.2.2, budget 
assumptions C36-
C39)

=== PAGE 155 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
26
•
At least 50% of participants in annual
dialogues are women (1 workshop per year)
(Baseline: 0%)
•
At least 30% of participants in annual dialogues
are youth
(Baseline: 0%)
•
At least 5% of participants in annual dialogues
are people with disability
(Baseline: 0%)
Project Operations: Mainstream gender and social inclusion across project operations 
Project Staff demographics 
•
50% of project staff are women
•
5% of project staff are people with disability
•
50% of project leadership positions are held by
women 
Throughout project 
PMU Team Leader 
Recruitment officer 
No additional cost 
Project staff capacity 
•
All staff receive training in gender equality and
social inclusion within year 1
•
Position descriptions for Technical Staff include
their ability to understand and address the
needs of women, people with disability and
youth
•
Full time GESI Advisor in Project
Year 1 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Adviser  
Training time and 
budget 
Support to Government 
•
GESI Advisor to train and coach staff in MoCC,
Department of Women’s Affairs (province
level), and other key partners on
mainstreaming GESI into plans, budgets and
monitoring
•
Funding to enable province DWA and MALFFB
staff to travel to communities for adaptation
activity implementation and monitoring
Throughout project 
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Adviser  
Training time and 
budget

=== PAGE 156 ===
Vanuatu Community-based Climate Resilience Project 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan
27
Project Communications 
Community level considerations 
•
Findings of this GESI assessment be
disseminated to project staff, government and
partners in Year 1 of implementation
•
Project communications represent women,
youth and people with disability in positive,
empowered roles and use appropriate
language and deliver in accessible formats.
•
The project will publicise the grievance redress
mechanism through means that ensure the
process is accessible to both women and men.
When making decisions about the locations
and modalities to receive grievances the
project will ensure accessibility to all affected
stakeholders, in particular girls and women and
that it responds effectively to SEAH in a
survivor-centred and gender-responsive
manner
•
Women’s time and care work will be
considered in decisions on timing and location
for all community level activities. Childcare
facilities will be provided where required during
project activities (i.e. at workshops) and will be
communicated to participants prior to
commencement of activities
•
Shifting gender norms is a key component of
Save the Children’s approach to programming.
Behaviour change communications (utilizing
resources from other SC projects in Vanuatu)
will be utilized in community engagement and
training
Year 1 
Communication 
Manager 
GESI Adviser  
PMU Team Leader 
GESI Adviser  
PMU time 
______________________________________
