=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20250609160403+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20521
ModDate: D:20250609160558+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20521
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
30 June – 3 July 2025
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
Provisional agenda item 11
9 June 2025
Consideration of funding proposals –
Addendum XIV
Funding proposal package for FP272
Summary
This a ddendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled “Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial
Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial river
basins of Nepal”;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF public
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any,
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies.

=== PAGE 2 ===
.
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 103
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 104
Secretariat’s assessment 107
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 125
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
134
assessment
G ender documentation 138
Disclaimer:
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by
the Green Climate Fund.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake
Project/Programme title: Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced
flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal
Country(ies): Nepal
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Date of first submission: 2023/09/13
Date of current submission 2025/05/20
Version number V.012

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all
relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60.
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard
time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all
relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60.
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard
time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
A
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or
Project Public
programme private sector
Not applicable
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution1
Mitigation total Enter number % Enter number %
Energy generation and access Enter number % Enter number %
☐
Low-emission transport Enter number % Enter number %
☐
Buildings, cities, industries and appliances Enter number % Enter number %
☐
A.4. Result area(s) Forestry and land use Enter number % Enter number %
☐
Adaptation total Enter number % Enter number %
Most vulnerable people and communities 55 % 35 %
☒
Health and well-being, and food and water security Enter number % Enter number %
☐
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 25 % 35 %
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 20 % 30 %
A.6. Expected
A.5. Expected mitigation Total Beneficiaries: 2,298,303
adaptation
outcome 55% of which are women and 45%
outcome men.
N/A
(Core indicator 1: GHG
(Core indicator 2: Indirect:
emissions reduced, avoided or Direct: 385,956
direct and indirect 1,986,980
removed / sequestered)
beneficiaries reached) 1.3% 6.6%
A.7. Total financing (GCF
49,944,050 USD
+ co-finance2)
A.9. Project size Small (Upto USD 50 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding
36,158,230 USD
requested
Grant 36,158,230USD
A.10. Financial ☒
Equity Enter number
☐
instrument(s) requested Loan Enter number
☐
for the GCF funding ☐ Results-based payment Enter number
Guarantee Enter number
☐
A.11. Implementation
7 years (84 months) A.12. Total lifespan 20 years
period
A.13. Expected date of Click or tap to enter a date.
A.14. ESS category B
AE internal approval
A.16. Has
A.15. Has this FP been
Readiness or PPF
submitted as a CN Yes No Yes No
☒ ☐ support been used ☐ ☒
before?
to prepare this FP?
A.18. Is this FP
A.17. Is this FP included
included in the
in the entity work Yes No Yes No
☒ ☐ country ☒ ☐
programme?
programme?

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  |  | Project | A.2. Public or
private sector |  |  | Public | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) |  |  | Not applicable |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1
 |  |  | Mitigation total |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Energy generation and access
☐ |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Low-emission transport
☐ |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Buildings, cities, industries and appliances
☐ |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Forestry and land use
☐ |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Adaptation total |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | Most vulnerable people and communities
☒ |  |  |  | 55 % | 35 %
 |  |  | Health and well-being, and food and water security
☐ |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 |  |  | ☒
Infrastructure and built environment |  |  |  | 25 % | 35 %
 |  |  | ☒
Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  |  |  | 20 % | 30 %
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered) |  |  | N/A |  | A.6. Expected |  | Total Beneficiaries: 2,298,303
55% of which are women and 45%
men. | 
 |  |  |  |  | adaptation |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | outcome |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Core indicator 2: |  | Direct: 385,956 | Indirect:
1,986,980
 |  |  |  |  | direct and indirect |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries reached) |  | 1.3% | 6.6%
 | A.7. Total financing (GCF |  | 49,944,050 USD | A.9. Project size |  |  |  | 
 | + co-finance2) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | A.8. Total GCF funding |  | 36,158,230 USD |  |  |  |  | 
 | requested |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding |  |  | Grant 36,158,230USD
☒
Equity Enter number
☐
Loan Enter number
☐
Results-based payment Enter number
☐
Guarantee Enter number
☐ |  |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period |  |  | 7 years (84 months) | A.12. Total lifespan |  |  | 20 years | 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  |  | Click or tap to enter a date. | A.14. ESS category |  |  | B | 
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ | A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP? |  |  | Yes No
☐ ☒ | 
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme? |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.2. Public or
private sector

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome

(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered)

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

--- Table 8 on Page 5 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 9 on Page 5 ---
Click or tap to enter a date.


--- Table 10 on Page 5 ---
A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP?

--- Table 11 on Page 5 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?

--- Table 12 on Page 5 ---
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme?

--- Table 13 on Page 5 ---
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
A
A.19. Complementarity
Yes No
and coherence ☒ ☐
The National Executing Entity for this project is the Government of Nepal, represented
by the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) under Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI) of Nepal - which will be responsible for
implementation and serve as UNDP's Implementing Partner (IP).
The Host Country will receive the funds through the Ministry of F inance, which will play
A.20. Executing Entity an intermediary role in distributing the funds to the IP and Responsible Parties through
information the appropriate channels/systems
The project activities will be implemented through the IP and other responsible parties,
namely National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA), and
Ministry of Forests and Environment and its departments — including the Department of
Forest and Soil Conservation (DoFSC) and the Department of National Parks and
Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC).
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
1. Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC) situated in South Asia with a landscape defined by a variable topography
and climate, ranging from subtropical conditions in the lowland plains to sub-zero climates in the steep Himalayan
Mountains. While climate change is observed across the country, the rate of temperature increase is more
pronounced at higher altitudes3. This temperature rise accelerates the rate of glacial retreat, increasing the size of
glacial lakes located in these high-altitude areas and, in turn, their likelihood of breaching in the form of Glacial
Lake Outburst Floods (GLOF). The risk of GLOFs is further exacerbated by increasing temperatures which increase
the rate of snow and ice melt and the proportion of precipitation falling as rain, which increases the volume of the
lakes, thereby reducing the amount of ‘freeboard’ (the vertical distance between the top of the dam wall and the
maximum water level), which increases the likelihood of overflow and the intensity of resulting floods4.
2. The Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5 climate scenarios project that temperatures and
monsoon rainfall will continue to rise in the future, both increasing lake water volumes and the probability of
avalanches, rockfalls and dam wall collapse, which trigger GLOFs. In particular, Nepal’s Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes are at exceptionally high risk of breaching. These four lakes have already
exhibited considerable increases in volume, accelerated degradation of their ice-cored moraines, and a reduced
amount of ‘freeboard’ as a result of climate change. Combined, these factors have destabilized the lakes, exposing
the Gandaki Basin and the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to the threat of a GLOF event. Given the steep
topography of these basins, flooding from GLOFs and heavy monsoon cloudbursts often triggers landslides that
threaten the lives and livelihoods of local indigenous communities. 5
3. Since the 1970s, 26 GLOF events have been recorded across 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes, resulting in
catastrophic consequences that have ranked Nepal, alongside Bhutan, as the most economically impacted country
by glacial flood impacts. GLOFs cause severe flooding, landslides and mudflows that damage infrastructure and
private assets, and disrupt transportation networks, agricultural production, power supplies from hydropower plants
and tourism activities. In addition, floods often have substantial health impacts, with water- and vector-borne
diseases spreading widely after flood events. Damages from GLOFs are often irreparable for decades, with
considerable economic costs, particularly to downstream populations. Flood models predict that a breach of any of
the high-risk glacial lakes will result in an economic loss of up to US$109 million6, although this conservative figure
excludes additional losses to hydropower plants and the subsequent financial ramifications of disrupted power
supply. Because of the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes’ increasingly high risk of
breaching, these lakes have been prioritised for urgent adaptation actions under the proposed project. Without
intervention, these glacial lakes could breach at any given moment, adversely impacting vulnerable Nepalese
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the fin ancial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF
contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the
funding proposal.
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.
3 DHM, 2017. Observed Climate Trend Analysis of Nepal (1971-2014). Department of Hydrology and Meteorology, Kathmandu
4 ICIMOD and UNDP. 2020. Research Report. Available at: https://lib.icimod.org/record/34905
5 ICIMOD and UNDP. 2020. Research Report:. Available at: https://lib.icimod.org/record/34905
6 Annex 3: Financial and Economic Appraisal

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
 | A.19. Complementarity |  | Yes No
☒ ☐
 | and coherence |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information |  |  | The National Executing Entity for this project is the Government of Nepal, represented
by the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) under Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI) of Nepal - which will be responsible for
implementation and serve as UNDP's Implementing Partner (IP).
The Host Country will receive the funds through the Ministry of F inance, which will play
an intermediary role in distributing the funds to the IP and Responsible Parties through
the appropriate channels/systems
The project activities will be implemented through the IP and other responsible parties,
namely National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA), and
Ministry of Forests and Environment and its departments — including the Department of
Forest and Soil Conservation (DoFSC) and the Department of National Parks and
Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC).
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  | 
1. Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC) situated in South Asia with a landscape defined by a variable topography
and climate, ranging from subtropical conditions in the lowland plains to sub-zero climates in the steep Himalayan
Mountains. While climate change is observed across the country, the rate of temperature increase is more
pronounced at higher altitudes3. This temperature rise accelerates the rate of glacial retreat, increasing the size of
glacial lakes located in these high-altitude areas and, in turn, their likelihood of breaching in the form of Glacial
Lake Outburst Floods (GLOF). The risk of GLOFs is further exacerbated by increasing temperatures which increase
the rate of snow and ice melt and the proportion of precipitation falling as rain, which increases the volume of the
lakes, thereby reducing the amount of ‘freeboard’ (the vertical distance between the top of the dam wall and the
maximum water level), which increases the likelihood of overflow and the intensity of resulting floods4.
2. The Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5 climate scenarios project that temperatures and
monsoon rainfall will continue to rise in the future, both increasing lake water volumes and the probability of
avalanches, rockfalls and dam wall collapse, which trigger GLOFs. In particular, Nepal’s Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes are at exceptionally high risk of breaching. These four lakes have already
exhibited considerable increases in volume, accelerated degradation of their ice-cored moraines, and a reduced
amount of ‘freeboard’ as a result of climate change. Combined, these factors have destabilized the lakes, exposing
the Gandaki Basin and the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to the threat of a GLOF event. Given the steep
topography of these basins, flooding from GLOFs and heavy monsoon cloudbursts often triggers landslides that
threaten the lives and livelihoods of local indigenous communities. 5
3. Since the 1970s, 26 GLOF events have been recorded across 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes, resulting in
catastrophic consequences that have ranked Nepal, alongside Bhutan, as the most economically impacted country
by glacial flood impacts. GLOFs cause severe flooding, landslides and mudflows that damage infrastructure and
private assets, and disrupt transportation networks, agricultural production, power supplies from hydropower plants
and tourism activities. In addition, floods often have substantial health impacts, with water- and vector-borne
diseases spreading widely after flood events. Damages from GLOFs are often irreparable for decades, with
considerable economic costs, particularly to downstream populations. Flood models predict that a breach of any of
the high-risk glacial lakes will result in an economic loss of up to US$109 million6, although this conservative figure
excludes additional losses to hydropower plants and the subsequent financial ramifications of disrupted power
supply. Because of the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes’ increasingly high risk of
breaching, these lakes have been prioritised for urgent adaptation actions under the proposed project. Without
intervention, these glacial lakes could breach at any given moment, adversely impacting vulnerable Nepalese |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
A
communities. Marginalized groups — including indigenous peoples7 and women8 — residing downstream of glacial
lakes are particularly vulnerable to climate change-induced disasters, largely because of a lack of gender sensitivity
and social inclusivity in planning for disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation actions, development
and post-disaster relief. Moreover, gender norms, imbalanced division of labour, unequal wages, and less access
to and control over land and other productive assets for women result in fewer livelihood options available to
women, making them more vulnerable to the impacts of GLOF events.
4. While the Government of Nepal (GoN) acknowledges the need to prioritise investment into proactive GLOF risk
reduction strategies, the country has limited technical, financial and institutional capacity to design and implement
interventions with sustainable GLOF risk reduction and adaptation benefits. These limitations are further
constrained by the country’s increasing public debt burden, which climbed from 26% of GDP in 2016–2017 to 30%
in 2018–2019, with projections to increase in the future9. By 2022, central government debt has reached 41% of
GDP10. Based on these factors, Nepal’s efforts to address the impacts of GLOFs have been reactive and project-
based, which are ineffective and insufficient to build the long-term climate resilience of Nepal’s population. This
constraint has left many downstream indigenous communities highly vulnerable to GLOFs and monsoon flooding.
Without external support, the GoN will remain unable to invest in the necessary GLOF risk-reduction strategies
required to protect the most vulnerable communities in the country or support major economic sectors following
GLOFs and other extreme events.
5. Approximately USD36 million of GCF funds are being requested alongside USD14 million in cofinance to reduce
the risk and impacts of GLOFs at the four priority glacial lakes by shifting towards a proactive approach to GLOF
risk reduction in Nepal. The priority glacial lakes were identified based on extensive consultations and modelling
by ICIMOD and UNDP, in collaboration with GoN, that identified potentially-dangerous glacial lakes (PGDLs) in the
Hindu Kush Himalayan region using remote sensing11. The proposed project presents an integrated approach to
GLOF risk management in Nepal by addressing institutional and technical capacities, physical protection (both
grey12 and green13 infrastructure approaches), hazard monitoring and early warning. This integrated approach will
utilise GCF funds to: i) lower the water levels of the Hongu 2 Lake by 1 m and the Thulagi, Lower Barun and
Lumding Tsho Lakes by 3 m to reduce their risk of breaching; ii) implement Eco-Disaster Risk Reduction (Eco-
DRR14) interventions in mountain ecosystems comprising a hybrid of nature-based and grey-engineering solutions
to mitigate the residual flood impacts from a GLOF; iii) establish and implement early warning systems (EWS) to
alleviate damages and prevent the loss of lives from GLOFs; and iv) strengthen the technical and institutional
capacity of Nepal’s Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) to plan for and respond to GLOFs and floods.
These interventions will catalyse a shift from a need- and project-based approach towards proactive and pre-
emptive approaches, engendered through strengthened capacity among institutions and communities. This
paradigm shift in GLOF management will reduce the risk and impact of GLOFs and climate change-induced
extreme flooding on vulnerable communities in Nepal, ensuring that livelihoods, agriculture and infrastructure are
safeguarded. Moreover, the long-term sustainability of GCF’s investment has been accounted for in the
development of a robust operations and maintenance (O&M) plan, which carried across all physical interventions
of the project. While ownership of project O&M will be held by DHM and the Department of Forest and Soil
Conservation (DoFSC) – having formally committed financial and human resources to this end – several other
stakeholders, including local authorities, community leaders and private-sector partners have indicated
commitment to the success of interventions and form an integral part of long-term sustainability.
6. The combination of interventions described above will reduce flood risks associated with glacial lakes across over
11,000 km2, delivering considerable adaptation benefits to the communities located in the Gandaki Basin and
7 for example, the Dalits people of the Hil l and Terai areas
8 in particular, women from marginalised indigenous groups
9 International Monetary Fund. (2020). 2020 Article IV Consultation — Press Release; Staff Report; And Statement by The Executive
Director for Nepal (Issue 20)
10 Public Debt Management Office (pdmo.gov.np) https://pdmo.gov.np/downloadfiles/Final-compiled-Annual-debt-Report-2078-
1680509833.pdf
11 Further details on the selection of the priority glacial lakes can be found in Section 4 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
12 Grey infrastructure has been defined, in the context of this project, as conventional structural measures such as gabions, concrete
revetments and flood walls.
13 Green infrastructure has been defined, in the context of this project, as biological measures which make use of Nature-based
Solutions and live plant species to mitigate and reduce the risk and impact of floods.
14 Eco-DRR combines natural resource management and ecological engineering with other DRR methods to have more effective
disaster prevention, reduce the impact of disasters on people and communities, and support disaster recovery: UNDRR (2020),
Ecosystem-Based Disaster Risk Reduction: Implementing Nature-based Solutions for Resilience, United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction – Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
A
Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins. The reduced flood risk from lake lowering interventions is expected to reduce
economic losses in Nepal by US$86.9 million. While the economic benefits are substantial relative to the
investment, these reduced damages are of a public good nature — hPPPighlighting the needs for GCF grant
support, as the interventions will not generate direct financial returns to support the use of alternative finance
instruments. Overall, the project will confer direct adaptation benefits and indirect benefits to 385,956 and 1,912,347
vulnerable people in Nepal respectively, by reducing the adverse impacts of GLOFs on human life and enabling
the population to prepare for and respond to these extreme events accordingly. This will include specific focus on
the unequal vulnerabilities of different groups of society, including women and indigenous groups. Further benefits,
including health benefits from the reduced impact of flooding as a result of adopting the downstream Eco-DRR
interventions in the mountain ecosystems, are expected with Nepal continuing to set an example for innovative
approaches to GLOF risk reduction that can be readily scaled up and replicated across the region.
7. The project’s activities have been designed to sustain the paradigm shift and impact of project interventions
discussed above, with a strong focus on country ownership. These activities will be embedded into existing national
entities, including: i) the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) housed within the Ministry of Energy
Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI); ii) the Ministry of Finance (MoF), which is the National Designated
Authority (NDA) for Nepal; and iii) other government institutions proposed as responsible parties of this project. The
project’s development involved stakeholders from relevant Nepalese government ministries and departments, civil
society organisations (CSOs), women’s groups and private sector entities to ensure that the expectations and
concerns of local stakeholders were incorporated into the project’s design and that these individuals, particularly
women, will be effectively involved and equally represented throughout the implementation process. Public-private
partnerships will be developed to support the scaling, operation and maintenance of project interventions beyond
the lifespan of the project. The project is aligned with several national priorities, including Nepal’s Climate Change
Policy (2019), National Adaptation Plan (NAP) (2021-2050) and Nepal’s Third National Communication (TNC) to
the UNFCCC (2021).`

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Context
8. Nepal is located in Southern Asia, with a land area of 147,000 km2 and a population of 29 million people. The
country’s topography varies dramatically, with an elevation range of 8,849 m in a span of only 80 km — with flat,
lowland Terai Plains (less than 70 masl) along the southwest border with India to the high, steep Himalayan
Mountains in the northeast (reaching 8,848.6 masl). This variable terrain influences the local climate, with polar
conditions at higher altitudes, intermediate cold climates south of the higher peaks, transitioning into tropical regions
along the southern border. In addition to this geographic variation in climate, Nepal experiences temporal climate
variation, with hot, wet summers and mild, dry winters. Summer rainfall is strongly influenced by the monsoon, which
brings heavy rainfall. The impact of the monsoon, combined with the steep topography, exposes Nepal to numerous
climate-induced natural hazards, including severe thunderstorms, landslides, extreme rain-induced flooding and
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) in high mountain areas. The geophysical setting combined with the socio-
economic status and exposure of local/indigenous populations and infrastructure, lead to high impacts and
associated risks from climate-induced hazards, particularly GLOFs and flooding.
9. Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC), ranked as the 26th-poorest nation globally and the second poorest in
South Asia, with approximately a quarter of the population living below the poverty line. Socio-economic
development is constrained by several factors, including the limited provision of basic services and resources.
Although 87% of the population has basic access to water, available water is often not safe for consumption and
the incidence of water-borne diseases is high. Limited access to electricity and transportation for many communities
in remote areas further reduces access to goods and services. These challenges to economic development are
exacerbated by the impacts of natural hazards, which lead to the loss of lives and resources, damage to
infrastructure, and considerable declines in economic productivity during recovery efforts; the destruction of roads
by natural disasters often cuts communities off from relief efforts, delaying critical aid and recovery.
Baseline scenario – Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
10. Glacial lakes are formed when a glacier
erodes the underlying terrain and
subsequently melts, filling the depression
with fresh water. The resulting lakes are
either dammed downstream by moraines15 or
ice. Many of these lakes are considered
extremely dangerous as their dam walls are
unstable and have the potential to burst,
resulting in devastating Glacial Lake Outburst
Floods (GLOFs) as shown in Figure 1 below.
In Nepal, there are 3,800 glaciers and 2,000
glacial lakes. Of these, 47 are considered
potentially dangerous based on: i)
characteristics of the lakes and their dams; ii) Figure 1. Basic glacial lake structure and the sequences of triggers that cause
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) .
the activity of the source glacier; and iii) the
morphology of the surroundings16. An example of one of these potentially dangerous glacial lakes is presented in
Figure 1.
15 A moraine is any glacially formed accumula tion of unconsolidated glacial debris that occurs in both currently and formerly glaciated regions on
Earth, through geomorphological processes.
16 Bajracharya et al (2020). Research Report. ICIMOD and UNDP.

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Context
8. Nepal is located in Southern Asia, with a land area of 147,000 km2 and a population of 29 million people. The
country’s topography varies dramatically, with an elevation range of 8,849 m in a span of only 80 km — with flat,
lowland Terai Plains (less than 70 masl) along the southwest border with India to the high, steep Himalayan
Mountains in the northeast (reaching 8,848.6 masl). This variable terrain influences the local climate, with polar
conditions at higher altitudes, intermediate cold climates south of the higher peaks, transitioning into tropical regions
along the southern border. In addition to this geographic variation in climate, Nepal experiences temporal climate
variation, with hot, wet summers and mild, dry winters. Summer rainfall is strongly influenced by the monsoon, which
brings heavy rainfall. The impact of the monsoon, combined with the steep topography, exposes Nepal to numerous
climate-induced natural hazards, including severe thunderstorms, landslides, extreme rain-induced flooding and
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) in high mountain areas. The geophysical setting combined with the socio-
economic status and exposure of local/indigenous populations and infrastructure, lead to high impacts and
associated risks from climate-induced hazards, particularly GLOFs and flooding.
9. Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC), ranked as the 26th-poorest nation globally and the second poorest in
South Asia, with approximately a quarter of the population living below the poverty line. Socio-economic
development is constrained by several factors, including the limited provision of basic services and resources.
Although 87% of the population has basic access to water, available water is often not safe for consumption and
the incidence of water-borne diseases is high. Limited access to electricity and transportation for many communities
in remote areas further reduces access to goods and services. These challenges to economic development are
exacerbated by the impacts of natural hazards, which lead to the loss of lives and resources, damage to
infrastructure, and considerable declines in economic productivity during recovery efforts; the destruction of roads
by natural disasters often cuts communities off from relief efforts, delaying critical aid and recovery.
Baseline scenario – Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
10. Glacial lakes are formed when a glacier
erodes the underlying terrain and
subsequently melts, filling the depression
with fresh water. The resulting lakes are
either dammed downstream by moraines15 or
ice. Many of these lakes are considered
extremely dangerous as their dam walls are
unstable and have the potential to burst,
resulting in devastating Glacial Lake Outburst
Floods (GLOFs) as shown in Figure 1 below.
In Nepal, there are 3,800 glaciers and 2,000
glacial lakes. Of these, 47 are considered
potentially dangerous based on: i)
characteristics of the lakes and their dams; ii) Figure 1. Basic glacial lake structure and the sequences of triggers that cause
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) .
the activity of the source glacier; and iii) the
morphology of the surroundings16. An example of one of these potentially dangerous glacial lakes is presented in
Figure 1.

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
11. A GLOF occurs when there is a
breach of a glacial lake17. In the
Himalayas, the primary GLOF trigger
is an avalanche entering a lake,
causing a tsunami-like wave that can
overtop and erode the terminal
moraine, and generate the ensuing
flood. Other triggers include: i)
displacement waves from rockfalls; ii)
moraine failure due to dam settlement
and/or piping; iii) degradation of ice-
cored moraines; iv) seismic activity; or
v) rapid input of water from extreme
rainfall events or from a GLOF
upstream. The unpredictable nature of
GLOFs and the interdependence of
their trigger mechanisms make it
difficult to quantify the threats they
pose. Historically, GLOFs have had
Figure 2: Thulagi Glacial Lake in Nepal. This lake is considered one of 47 potentially
catastrophic consequences in Nepal
dangerous glacial lakes in Nepal1.
through the direct impacts of flooding
and secondary impacts such as landslides, erosion, and sedimentation in river valleys. Damages caused by GLOFs
in Nepal are immense, with each outburst resulting in the potential loss of human lives, destruction of houses and
whole villages and loss of critical infrastructure such as roads, bridges and hydropower plants. Often, damages are
irreparable for years or even decades, with considerable costs to the economy and impacts on downstream
populations. A total of 26 GLOF events have been recorded in Nepal since 1977 and the country has been ranked
alongside Bhutan as having the overall greatest national-level economic consequences of glacier flood impacts,
excluding deaths. Figure 4 below is a screengrab from a video showing the severe damage to infrastructure from a
GLOF experienced among downstream communities.
Figure 3. Damage to infrastructure from a GLOF experienced by downstream communities in Yangle Kharka, Sankhushabha
District, Nepal in 201718.
17 Further details on what triggers a GLOF are presented in Section 3 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
18 Scientific American. Full video available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BDPbtP-0AW8.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
12. In addition to GLOFs, Nepal is susceptible to floods resulting from extreme rainfall events, which have similar but
less intense impacts on the population in comparison to GLOFs. During heavy monsoon cloudbursts, flash floods
occur in the mountains, while in the southern plains, water breaches riverbanks and inundates large areas of land.
Furthermore, given the steepness of slopes and the swift flow of water bodies, heavy rains and flash floods often
trigger landslides that cause extensive loss of life and damage to infrastructure and the environment. The
vulnerability to floods in Nepal was demonstrated by the tragic floods experienced across several districts aroundin
September 2024. Extreme rainfall led to flash flooding and landslides that killed at least 224 people and injured a
further 15819, with the Nepal Red Cross reporting damages to at least 5,300 households (impacting approximately
26,500 people) across the affected districts. The floods also affected access to basic services such as water,
transportation, communication and electricity services, particularly in rural areas where such services take time to
restore20.
Climate rationale
Climate change impacts on glaciers and GLOFs21
13. Records show an increase in the frequency of GLOFs in recent decades in response to rising temperatures
associated with climate change, which increase the rate of glacial retreat, thereby elevating the volume of glacial
lakes. In addition to an general warming trend of 0.6°C–1°C per decade in the high mountainous and Himalaya
areas, Nepal has experienced significant extreme temperature trends, including increases in extreme temperatures
as well as shortening of cold spells in most of the country22. As a result of this warming, most glaciers have lost
mass more rapidly since the 1960s, with unprecedented losses over the last decade.
14. As glaciers retreat, the surface area and volume of a glacial lake at their base increases, creating a heightened risk
of a GLOF. Future climate projections under RCP4.5 show increases of 1.3°C and 1.72°C projected by 2065 and
2100, respectively, with more extreme increases under the RCP8.5 scenario, reaching 1.07°C by 2045, 1.82°C by
2065, and 3.58°C by 210023. Glacier mass loss is projected to accelerate throughout the 21st century, with a loss of
between 40 ± 25% and 69 ± 21 % of 2015 glacier volume expected by 2100 in RCP 2.6 and RCP 8.5, respectively.
This accelerated loss of glacial mass contributes to increasing glacial runoff, which subsequently increases the
probability of a GLOF event being triggered by other hazards, such as avalanches, rockfalls, heavy rainfall and
earthquakes.
15. In addition to accelerating glacial retreat, other climate change related factors contribute to the increased risk of
GLOFs, including: i) more intense and frequent rainfall and rainfall-induced floods, which increase the risk of rainfall-
triggered GLOFs; and ii) the degradation of ice-cored moraines as a result of rising temperatures, which destabilizes
dam walls and increases the risk of breaching. The climate drivers of increased GLOF risk due to climate change
are listed below (see Annex 2, section 3 for further details):
• Increasing temperatures which accelerate glacial and snow melt, increase the volume of water in glacial lakes,
as well as destabilising ice core dam walls and surrounding frozen slopes;
• Increasing rainfall intensity which increases likelihood of flood and landslides triggering a GLOF event;
• Increasing water volume of glacial lakes increases the likelihood of a breach as a result of the elevated pressure
on moraine and ice dams;
• Reduced amount of ‘freeboard’24 between the maximum water level and the top of the dam with the increased
lake volume, thereby increasing the likelihood of overflow;
• Increased volume of water in the glacial lake, resulting in more intense floods and posing a greater risk to the
populations downstream.
16. In Nepal, glacier areas have decreased by 24% in the 33 years between 1977 and 2010. Much of the resulting
meltwater has settled in glacial lakes. Indeed, evidence from several glacial lakes in Nepal indicates that they have
been expanding as temperatures increase. In particular, Thulagi Glacial Lake in Manang district has increased in
area from 0.72 to 0.94 km2 since 1990, while Lower Barun Glacial Lake in Sankhuwasabha district has increased in
area from 0.64 to 2 km2 for the same period. Similarly, Lumding Tsho Glacial Lake in Solukhumbu district has
increased in area from 0.2 to 0.77 km2 from 1962 to 2000 (See Section 4.4. of Annex 2 for more details on the
impacts on these four high priority glacial lakes). These increases, combined with other characteristics of the lakes,
19 2024 September Floods and Landslides: S ituation Report
20 Nepal Flood and Landslide Response 2024 - DREF Operational Update
21 See Section 4.4. of Annex 2- Feasibility Study for more details on the CC impacts
22 Government of Nepal. Department of Hydrology and Meteorology. 2017. Observed Climate Trend Analysis of Nepal (1971-2014).
23 MoFE, 2019. Climate change scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan (NAP). Ministry of Forests and Environment, Kathmandu
24 the vertical distance between the top of the dam wall and the maximum reservoir water level

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
have resulted in these lakes being categorised as Rank I on the ICIMOD list of Potentially Dangerous Glacial Lakes
(PDGLs). The categorisation of these lakes was confirmed through a joint study between UNDP and ICIMOD in
2020, which identified 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes (21 of which were in Nepal), based on the following
criteria : i) characteristics of the lakes and their dams, such as the area of the lake and the condition of the dam; ii)
the characteristics of the source glacier (such as the condition of hanging glaciers, the distance to lakes, the
steepness of glacier tongues etc.); and iii) the physical condition of the surroundings (such as the presence of large
snow avalanche sites immediately above the lake and potential rockfall or rock slide sites around the lake). This
study informed the selection of target lakes for this project based on whether: i) the lake is large with the possibility
of expansion due to calving of glaciers; ii) the lake is retained by the loose moraine end dam; iii) there is an outlet
that allows overflow to pass over/through the moraine or if all water is collected within the lake; iv) there is a steep
outlet slope; v) there is a hanging source glacier; and vi) there are chances of snow and/or ice avalanches and
landslides impacting the lake and dam. The proposed lakes are all located in the northern Himalayan region of Nepal
and are the only Rank I PDGLs identified in both the 2011 and 2020 studies for Nepal, which are yet to be mitigated.
Three of these lakes are located in the Koshi Basin, with the Lumding Tsho and Hongu-II in the Solukhumbu district
and draining into the Dudhkoshi sub-basin, and Lower Barun in the Sankhuwasabha district draining into the Arun
sub-basin. Thulagi is located in the Manang district, and forms part of the Marsyangdi sub-basin in the Gandaki
Basin and . As temperatures increase with climate change, these lakes will likely expand further, increasing the risk
of GLOFs.
Table 1: Summary of Climate Trends and projections25
Climate Variable Baseline Trend Projection
Average • National: 12.1°C • National: ↑ 0.055 ˚C yr-1 • RCP 4.5: ↑ 0.92˚C by 2045, 1.3˚C
Temperature • The High Mountains: • High mountainous areas: by 2065 and 1.72˚C by 2100
o Summer 5–15°C o ↑ 0.06°C–0.12°C yr-1 • RCP 8.5:↑ 1.07˚C by 2045, 1.82˚C
o winter <0°C by 2065 and 3.58˚C by 2100
• High Mountain areas
RCP 4.5: ↑ 0.95˚C by 2045,
o
1.36˚C by 2065 and 1.79˚C by
2100
RCP 8.5: ↑ 1.09˚C by 2045,
o
1.86˚C by 2065 and 3.69˚C by
2100
Average Maximum • National: 23.6°C • National: ↑ 0.04°C yr-1 • RCP 4.5: ↑ 1.8˚C by 2059 and
Temperature • High mountainous areas: 2.5˚C by 2099
↑ 0.07°C–0.3°C yr-1 • RCP 8.5: ↑ 2.4˚C by 2059 and 5˚C
o
by 2099
Average Minimum • National: 11.6˚C • National: ↑ 0.002 °C/yr-1 • RCP 4.5: ↑ 1.7˚C by 2059 and
Temperature • High mountainous areas: 2.5˚C by 2099
<4˚C • RCP 8.5: ↑ 2.4˚C by 2059 and 5˚C
by 2099
Temperature • Warm Days: 36.5 days • ↑ Number of warm days and • ↑ Number of warm days by 87.33%
Extremes • Warm Nights: 36.5 days nights (RCP4.5) and 124.7% (RCP8.5) by
• Cold Days: 36.5 days • ↓ Number of cool days and 2065
• Cold Nights: 36.5 days nights • ↑ Number of warm nights by
• Cold Spell Duration: 20.3 • ↓ Cold spell duration 115.7% (RCP4.5) and 159.2%
days (RCP8.5) by 2065
• ↓ Number of cool days and nights
• ↓ Cold spell duration by 63.9%
(RCP4.5) and 73.3% (RCP8.5)
Average Rainfall • Annual: 1,830 mm • National: ↓ 1.3 mm yr-1 • RCP 4.5: ↑ 2.1% by 2045, 7.9% by
• Monsoon: 250–450 mm per • High mountainous areas: ↓ 2-4 2065 and 10.7% by 2100
month mm yr-1 • RCP 8.5: ↑ 6.4% by 2045, 12.1% by
• Monsoon Season: -7.5 to +9 2065 and 23% by 2100
mm yr-1
Extreme Rainfall • Rainy days: 166.4 days • Number of rainy days increasing • Rainy days: -3 days (RCP4.5) and -
• Very wet days: 18.1 days significantly in the northwestern 1.6 days (RCP8.5)
• Extremely wet days: 3.5 districts • Very wet days: +0.3 days (RCP4.5)
days and +2.2 days (RCP8.5)
25 See Annex 2 for further details and source s.

--- Table 1 on Page 12 ---
Climate Variable | Baseline | Trend | Projection
Average
Temperature | • National: 12.1°C
• The High Mountains:
Summer 5–15°C
o
winter <0°C
o | • National: ↑ 0.055 ˚C yr-1
• High mountainous areas:
↑ 0.06°C–0.12°C yr-1
o | • RCP 4.5: ↑ 0.92˚C by 2045, 1.3˚C
by 2065 and 1.72˚C by 2100
• RCP 8.5:↑ 1.07˚C by 2045, 1.82˚C
by 2065 and 3.58˚C by 2100
• High Mountain areas
RCP 4.5: ↑ 0.95˚C by 2045,
o
1.36˚C by 2065 and 1.79˚C by
2100
RCP 8.5: ↑ 1.09˚C by 2045,
o
1.86˚C by 2065 and 3.69˚C by
2100
Average Maximum
Temperature | • National: 23.6°C | • National: ↑ 0.04°C yr-1
• High mountainous areas:
↑ 0.07°C–0.3°C yr-1
o | • RCP 4.5: ↑ 1.8˚C by 2059 and
2.5˚C by 2099
• RCP 8.5: ↑ 2.4˚C by 2059 and 5˚C
by 2099
Average Minimum
Temperature | • National: 11.6˚C
• High mountainous areas:
<4˚C | • National: ↑ 0.002 °C/yr-1 | • RCP 4.5: ↑ 1.7˚C by 2059 and
2.5˚C by 2099
• RCP 8.5: ↑ 2.4˚C by 2059 and 5˚C
by 2099
Temperature
Extremes | • Warm Days: 36.5 days
• Warm Nights: 36.5 days
• Cold Days: 36.5 days
• Cold Nights: 36.5 days
• Cold Spell Duration: 20.3
days | • ↑ Number of warm days and
nights
• ↓ Number of cool days and
nights
• ↓ Cold spell duration | • ↑ Number of warm days by 87.33%
(RCP4.5) and 124.7% (RCP8.5) by
2065
• ↑ Number of warm nights by
115.7% (RCP4.5) and 159.2%
(RCP8.5) by 2065
• ↓ Number of cool days and nights
• ↓ Cold spell duration by 63.9%
(RCP4.5) and 73.3% (RCP8.5)
Average Rainfall | • Annual: 1,830 mm
• Monsoon: 250–450 mm per
month | • National: ↓ 1.3 mm yr-1
• High mountainous areas: ↓ 2-4
mm yr-1
• Monsoon Season: -7.5 to +9
mm yr-1 | • RCP 4.5: ↑ 2.1% by 2045, 7.9% by
2065 and 10.7% by 2100
• RCP 8.5: ↑ 6.4% by 2045, 12.1% by
2065 and 23% by 2100
Extreme Rainfall | • Rainy days: 166.4 days
• Very wet days: 18.1 days
• Extremely wet days: 3.5
days | • Number of rainy days increasing
significantly in the northwestern
districts | • Rainy days: -3 days (RCP4.5) and -
1.6 days (RCP8.5)
• Very wet days: +0.3 days (RCP4.5)
and +2.2 days (RCP8.5)

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
• Extremely wet days decreasing • Extremely wet days: +0.9 days
in the northern and mountain (RCP4.5) and +1 day (RCP8.5)
districts
Impacts of GLOFs and potential for risk reduction
17. Given the magnitude of GLOF events, their impacts on settlements, roads, bridges, hydropower projects and other
infrastructure can be severe, as well as causing significant losses of lives and livelihoods. Flood models26 for the
beaching of the four highest priority glacial lakes (Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2) predict
economic losses27 totalling US$ 67.4–109.2 million28. The specific losses for each lake are summarised in Table 3
though these estimates do not include potential losses to hydropower plants and the subsequent economic
ramifications of disrupted power supply. Without intervention, these glacial lakes risk breaching and the risk
increases with climate change. However, these risks can be reduced significantly through the implementation of
appropriate risk mitigation and adaptation measures such as: i) manually lowering each of the glacial lakes, thereby
reducing their total volume and subsequently reducing the GLOF risk/magnitude; ii) constructing check dams and
other downstream mitigation measures, such as flood walls, gabions and revetments, as well as Nature-based
Solutions (NbS) such as brush layering and reforestation, to reduce residual flood impacts; and iii) establishing and
implementing early warning systems (EWS) to reduce damages and prevent loss of life. (See Section 5.1.3 of Annex
2 for more details on option assessed).
18. It is estimated that, by manually lowering the Thulagi, Lower Barun and Lumding Tsho Lakes by 3 m, and the Hongu
2 Lake by 1 m and installing the proposed downstream GLOF risk reduction measures, the total potential damages
associated with a GLOF can be reduced by US$ 45.1–86.9 million29 based on two different probability models of a
GLOF occurring at any of the four target glacial lakes. Specifically, the project considered an Annual Probability
Scenario (Scenario I) — which used historical records from 1980 to 2017 to calculate the percentage chance of a
GLOF per year assuming a similar rate of occurrence in the future — and a Return Period based Probability Scenario
(Scenario II) — which accounted for the probable magnitude of a GLOF as well as the return-period for an event of
a given size. Damages were calculated based on modelled flood depth and velocities mapped over at-risk
infrastructure and livelihood activities in the potential flood areas, as well as the potential for loss of life. The details
of these models and their results are available in Annex 3: Financial and Economic Appraisal. Comparing expected
losses and intervention costs with projected benefits (including discount factors), the Net Present Value (NPV) of
the proposed project was calculated to be US$86,919,219 for the Annual Probability Scenario, and US$45,126,562
for the Return Period based Probability Scenario30. Under both scenarios, the interventions save 1,932 lives, 420
houses, 1,201 hectares of cultivated land and 8,180 GWh of electrical production, resulting in high benefit to cost
ratios of 4.9 and 8.02 for Scenarios I and II respectively. Thus, the implementation of these measures will clearly
safeguard the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable communities in Nepal in an economically sensible way.31
Complementarity with existing projects, programmes and initiatives32
19. In recent years, numerous projects, programmes and baseline investments have been implemented in and around
Nepal to address GLOF risk and alleviate the impact of glacial flooding. Lessons learned and best practices from
these initiatives have been incorporated into the proposed project's design to replicate successful adaptation
techniques and ensure complementarity between the proposed project and existing actions, with the most relevant
initiatives identified during project development. An analysis of identified projects was later conducted to prevent the
duplication of or adverse impact on ongoing initiatives, with GCF resources intended to complement and build on
existing initiatives, specifically filling in gaps and areas not yet covered by baseline investments. Achieving
complementarity between various initiatives will depend on the implementation of proposed activities, such as the
expansion of recently-upgraded climate monitoring and early warning systems to include glacial lakes, as well as
ensuring that means for monitoring glacial lakes will be funded beyond the project’s lifespan. The most relevant
26 Hydraulic modelling used a 6-step approac h: i) Breach Parameter Analysis; ii) Breach Hydraulic Modelling; iii) Froehlich Breach Peak Flow; iv) Breach
Hydrograph Adjustment; v) Flood Routing of the Hydrograph; and vi) Flood Hazard Mapping. See Annex 24 for more details.
27 Damages were assessed based on GLOF downstream flood modelling, with flood velocity and depth as the primary parameters. Damage risks were
considered for the projected flood areas, focusing on population performing livelihood activities such as agriculture, housing and settlements and the
developed infrastructures (e. g. roads, trail bridges, bridges, etc.). Damage estimates were based on the calculation of the mean impacts of multiple
dam breach scenarios. See Annex 23a for more details.
28 These potential economic benefits are cumulative across all four lakes and are estimated over a 25-year time horizon.
29 The high value of losses can be attributed to the exposure of hydropower installations to the GLOF impacts and the associated loss of revenue of
these installations. The remaining losses are predominantly contributed to by public infrastructure and real estate.
30 The NPVs are cumulative across all four lakes and are estimated over a 25-year time horizon.
31 See Section 5.3. of Annex 2- Feasibility Study for more details on the economic impacts of GLOFs in Nepal.
32 A comprehensive list of baseline projects, programmes, initiatives and other past and ongoing projects related to the proposed project are
presented in Section 7 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.

--- Table 1 on Page 13 ---
 |  | • Extremely wet days decreasing
in the northern and mountain
districts | • Extremely wet days: +0.9 days
(RCP4.5) and +1 day (RCP8.5)

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
initiatives (determined by the parameters discussed above) are presented below and include a description of how
the proposed project will complement existing investments.
20. The Nepal Climate Change Support Programme II (NCCSP II) (2019-2024, UK Aid, US$3.1 million) NCCSP II is the
third instalment of a programme that has been implemented by the Ministry of Forest and Environment (MoFE) and
26 local governments in 14 districts in Nepal, with support from UNDP. In the first phase (NCCSP I), UNDP provided
technical assistance to the MOPE and GoN to implement the NAPA. The focus was 80% on local level actions to
implement local adaptation programmes of action (LAPA) and 20% on strengthening institutional capacity and
national-level coordination of Nepal’s efforts to alleviate the impacts of climate change. These efforts will be
expanded in the forthcoming second phase (NCCSP II) of the project. Phase I and Phase II of the project are bridged
by the NCCSP I-Transition Extension (TE), which provides support and technical assistance to 26 local governments
across 14 districts to implement multiple Climate Resilient Development Projects (CRDPs). The NCCSP I-TE
supported 78 CRDPs between 2018–2019 and is currently engaging with the abovementioned local governments
to expand on this number. The proposed project will complement this initiative by addressing community resilience
through the co-development of community response mechanisms (Activity 2.2) and expanding on protecting
wetlands and settlements (Output 3). Expanding these initiatives from districts located in neighbouring provinces to
those targeted by the NCCSP II will enable the proposed project to fill gaps in community coverage and complement
the activities implemented under NCCSP II.
21. Improving Climate Resilience of Vulnerable Communities and Ecosystems in the Gandaki River Basin, Nepal
(2020—2026, IUCN, US$27.4 million)
This IUCN project aims to improve the resilience of vulnerable communities and ecosystems in the Gandaki River
Basin by working across traditional political and administrative boundaries to plan and implement climate change
adaptation measures33. There is strong complementarity with the proposed project in that the project area overlaps
with the Thulagi Lake area, thereby providing a foundational entry point for implementation in the region. The high
risk of the area necessitates further adaptation action to complement the adaptation measures supported by the
ongoing IUCN-supported project. The proposed project will build on this existing initiative’s knowledge management,
technical capacity and ecosystem restoration efforts by expanding similar approaches into the other target areas.
Additionally, the proposed project will work in synergy with the IUCN-supported project implementation unit to
incorporate ecosystem-based climate change adaptation approaches into government policies and plans. The GLOF
and flash flood risk and impact reduction measures under Output 3 of the proposed project will complement the
capacity building- and knowledge management-based interventions of this IUCN project to elevate the impact of
GCF resources.
22. Developing Climate Resilient Livelihoods in the Vulnerable Watershed in Nepal (2020—2024, GEF LDCF, US$42.9
million)
23. The objective of this project is to develop climate-resilient community livelihoods through integrated watershed
management practices by establishing the necessary policies and institutional frameworks. The project will introduce
and scale-up integrated watershed management practices and climate-smart agriculture in four major watersheds:
Dudhkoshi, Molung, Llkhu and Sunkoshi Canyon within the lower Sunkoshi basin. An additional focus of this project
is to strengthen hydrometeorological monitoring, which will be complemented by the hydrometeorological monitoring
systems developed and strengthened by the proposed project in neighbouring areas, creating a more
comprehensive network. The design of the proposed additions to the hydrometeorological monitoring equipment
under this project and the associated EWS will consider the work done under the GEF project, ensuring that there
is no overlap and that stations are optimally positioned to maximise coverage over the target areas.
Saptakoshi High Dam Project (ongoing, Government of Nepal, US$ 23.8 million)
24. The Saptakoshi High Dam is a multipurpose project on the Saptakoshi River of Nepal. The project’s primary focus
is to generate hydropower and control floods in southeast Nepal and neighbouring India. Catastrophic flooding
resulting from the erosion of the river’s embankments in 2008 catalysed this project’s efforts, including the
development of a 296 m-high multipurpose dam that will help control downstream flooding and provide 3300 MW of
electricity and irrigation potential. The improved control of downstream flooding under this project will complement
the residual flood risk and impact reduction measures under Output 3 of the proposed project.
Building a Resilient Churia Region in Nepal (BRCRN) (2020-2027, GCF, US$47.3 million)
33 GCF FP131: Improving Climate Resilie nce of Vulnerable Communities and Ecosystems in the Gandaki River Basin, Nepal. 2021.
Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/fp131-iucn-nepal_0.pdf

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
25. The BRCRN project aims to confront climate change challenges in Nepal by enhancing the resilience of ecosystems
and vulnerable communities in the Churia region. This GCF-funded project will promote widespread adoption of
climate-resilient land use practices, confront the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation and build
resilience to climate-induced hazards in the region, contributing to Nepal’s nationally determined contribution (NDC).
The BRCRN project will support CBOs in adopting and investing in climate-resilient, sustainable natural resource
management approaches, complementing CBO capacity-building activities under Output 3 of the proposed project.
In addition, the BRCRN project will support integrated river system-level planning on various government, CBO and
other partner levels, which will further complement the climate risk and hazard information planning interventions
under Output 1 of the proposed project.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Problem statement
26. To date, 26 GLOF events have been recorded in Nepal since the 1970s. The accelerated melting of glaciers caused
by climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of GLOFs in Nepal. This trend is expected to continue
to worsen under future climate scenarios. The impacts of GLOFs for the largely Indigenous communities living
downstream of glacial lakes are considerable. In addition to flooding, GLOFs cause landslides and mudflows that
threaten lives and livelihoods, as well as causing significant damage to infrastructure and private assets, while also
disrupting transportation networks, agricultural production, power supply from hydropower plants, and tourism
activities in the country. These GLOF events also have considerable economic impacts, where a single GLOF has
the potential to cause more than US$100 million in damages. There are 47 Lakes in Nepal currently considered
potentially dangerous, of which four have been prioritised for urgent adaptation action: the Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Glacial Lakes. Technical and fiscal limitations have reduced the capacity of the
Government of Nepal (GoN) to secure adequate, sustainable adaptation interventions, infrastructure and EWS to
alleviate the impacts of GLOFs, leaving many of Nepal’s downstream populations at increased risk. Moreover, the
GoN’s capacity to fund and implement adaptation measures has been severely limited by other extreme events that
require significant investment for recovery efforts.
27. Where implemented, efforts to address the impacts of GLOFs has been reactive and project-based, limiting the
capacity to build resilience. In addition, the density of the current hydrometric network is insufficient to meet the
intensified monitoring requirements that climate variability and the increasing risk of GLOF events require. While
DHM has recently updated climate risk monitoring and national early warning system capacity under the World Bank
project ‘Building Resilience to Climate Resilient Hazards’, these improvements are unable to quantify and track
GLOF risk in Nepal effectively. These limitations have persisted as the project did not include monitoring systems
at glacial lakes or supply ongoing funds for operations, maintenance and additional personnel beyond completion
in 2019. In addition, watershed management and EbA approaches to GLOF risk reduction have largely depended
on external funds, leading to further limitations of GoN’s risk reduction capacity. Without intervention, the increased
volume of glacial lakes, the consequent trigger risk and subsequent magnitude of GLOFs are expected to continue
to rise, posing a major risk to downstream communities.
Preferred adaptation solution
28. There is an urgent need in Nepal to shift away from a reactive, project-based response to GLOFs towards building
sustainable national capacity to respond to an impending GLOF event and implement tangible and cost-effective
GLOF risk reduction measures both up- and downstream. This integrated approach to the reduction of GLOF risk
and the associated impacts on downstream communities — including direct economic loss reduction — should
comprise: i) physical risk reduction measures at the four glacial lakes in Nepal most at risk of breaching, namely the
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes, through the field-tested method of lake lowering; ii)
downstream, watershed-level interventions such as reforestation and forest cover maintenance as well as flood
defence infrastructure reinforced by bioengineering technologies to complement the physical risk reduction
interventions (lake lowering) and reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF event on vulnerable downstream
communities; iii) interventions to strengthen technical and institutional capacity at the national level to integrate
climate risk and hazard information into planning, policy and response strategies; iv) a GLOF early warning system
(GLOF EWS) to generate and disseminate improved GLOF- and climate change-related information to national and
local decision-makers; and v) community-level GLOF awareness and early warnings to promote appropriate
response strategies and develop long-term adaptive capacity. To ensure the sustainability and scalability of
interventions, the project should facilitate strong public-private partnerships, particularly with the energy and tourism
sectors which stand to benefit directly from GLOF risk reduction and have the potential to contribute to the
operations, maintenance, and scaling of interventions. This integrated approach was co-designed with national

--- Table 1 on Page 15 ---
25. The BRCRN project aims to confront climate change challenges in Nepal by enhancing the resilience of ecosystems
and vulnerable communities in the Churia region. This GCF-funded project will promote widespread adoption of
climate-resilient land use practices, confront the challenges of deforestation and forest degradation and build
resilience to climate-induced hazards in the region, contributing to Nepal’s nationally determined contribution (NDC).
The BRCRN project will support CBOs in adopting and investing in climate-resilient, sustainable natural resource
management approaches, complementing CBO capacity-building activities under Output 3 of the proposed project.
In addition, the BRCRN project will support integrated river system-level planning on various government, CBO and
other partner levels, which will further complement the climate risk and hazard information planning interventions
under Output 1 of the proposed project.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Problem statement
26. To date, 26 GLOF events have been recorded in Nepal since the 1970s. The accelerated melting of glaciers caused
by climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of GLOFs in Nepal. This trend is expected to continue
to worsen under future climate scenarios. The impacts of GLOFs for the largely Indigenous communities living
downstream of glacial lakes are considerable. In addition to flooding, GLOFs cause landslides and mudflows that
threaten lives and livelihoods, as well as causing significant damage to infrastructure and private assets, while also
disrupting transportation networks, agricultural production, power supply from hydropower plants, and tourism
activities in the country. These GLOF events also have considerable economic impacts, where a single GLOF has
the potential to cause more than US$100 million in damages. There are 47 Lakes in Nepal currently considered
potentially dangerous, of which four have been prioritised for urgent adaptation action: the Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Glacial Lakes. Technical and fiscal limitations have reduced the capacity of the
Government of Nepal (GoN) to secure adequate, sustainable adaptation interventions, infrastructure and EWS to
alleviate the impacts of GLOFs, leaving many of Nepal’s downstream populations at increased risk. Moreover, the
GoN’s capacity to fund and implement adaptation measures has been severely limited by other extreme events that
require significant investment for recovery efforts.
27. Where implemented, efforts to address the impacts of GLOFs has been reactive and project-based, limiting the
capacity to build resilience. In addition, the density of the current hydrometric network is insufficient to meet the
intensified monitoring requirements that climate variability and the increasing risk of GLOF events require. While
DHM has recently updated climate risk monitoring and national early warning system capacity under the World Bank
project ‘Building Resilience to Climate Resilient Hazards’, these improvements are unable to quantify and track
GLOF risk in Nepal effectively. These limitations have persisted as the project did not include monitoring systems
at glacial lakes or supply ongoing funds for operations, maintenance and additional personnel beyond completion
in 2019. In addition, watershed management and EbA approaches to GLOF risk reduction have largely depended
on external funds, leading to further limitations of GoN’s risk reduction capacity. Without intervention, the increased
volume of glacial lakes, the consequent trigger risk and subsequent magnitude of GLOFs are expected to continue
to rise, posing a major risk to downstream communities.
Preferred adaptation solution
28. There is an urgent need in Nepal to shift away from a reactive, project-based response to GLOFs towards building
sustainable national capacity to respond to an impending GLOF event and implement tangible and cost-effective
GLOF risk reduction measures both up- and downstream. This integrated approach to the reduction of GLOF risk
and the associated impacts on downstream communities — including direct economic loss reduction — should
comprise: i) physical risk reduction measures at the four glacial lakes in Nepal most at risk of breaching, namely the
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes, through the field-tested method of lake lowering; ii)
downstream, watershed-level interventions such as reforestation and forest cover maintenance as well as flood
defence infrastructure reinforced by bioengineering technologies to complement the physical risk reduction
interventions (lake lowering) and reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF event on vulnerable downstream
communities; iii) interventions to strengthen technical and institutional capacity at the national level to integrate
climate risk and hazard information into planning, policy and response strategies; iv) a GLOF early warning system
(GLOF EWS) to generate and disseminate improved GLOF- and climate change-related information to national and
local decision-makers; and v) community-level GLOF awareness and early warnings to promote appropriate
response strategies and develop long-term adaptive capacity. To ensure the sustainability and scalability of
interventions, the project should facilitate strong public-private partnerships, particularly with the energy and tourism
sectors which stand to benefit directly from GLOF risk reduction and have the potential to contribute to the
operations, maintenance, and scaling of interventions. This integrated approach was co-designed with national

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
stakeholders — including government institutions, local authorities, civil society34 and technical experts — through
a combination of extensive consultations and technical studies. Details on the stakeholder engagements process
are outlined in Section D.5 below, with described in full under Annex 7a – Stakeholder Engagement Report, while
further details of the technical studies are included in Annex 2 – Feasibility Study.
Barriers to the preferred solution
Several technical, institutional and financial barriers to the preferred adaptation solution have been identified for Nepal.
In order for the preferred solution above to be successfully implemented, these barriers need to be overcome. The
barriers are summarised below.
29. Barrier 1 –– Limited technical knowledge and institutional capacity, including watershed-level approaches to GLOF
risk reduction: The GoN has: i) insufficient data and expertise related to GLOF risk reduction and management; ii)
limited internal institutional guidelines and standards for GLOF risk reduction planning and response; iii) unclear
institutional arrangements for GLOF risk reduction; and iii) inadequate mechanisms to ensure the coordination of
efforts between national and sub-national governments, including the local level governments and key stakeholders.
These insufficient institutional arrangements for GLOF risk reduction can be attributed to Nepal’s reliance on
external support for GLOF monitoring and risk reduction measures, with the highlighted capacity constraints
hindering the establishment of a sufficient knowledge base for GLOF risk reduction in the country.
30. Adequate GLOF risk reduction in Nepal is further inhibited by the combination of knowledge gaps and limited
capacity to develop and effectively implement watershed-level management plans for GLOF risk reduction. At
present, the legal and policy frameworks on climate change adaptation in Nepal focus on across-the-board
approaches to GLOF risk reduction. This gap for watershed-level approaches to GLOF management has been
further exacerbated by limited collaboration and coordination between different GoN agencies. Moreover, there is
limited GLOF monitoring, glacial lake mapping, risk reduction and EWS in Nepal, and to date, most studies on high
mountain regions and GLOF risk in Nepal have been project-based, resulting in insufficient data to effectively
support watershed-level approaches for climate risk reduction.
31. Barrier 2 –– Limited access to current, reliable and timely climate risk information and early warnings technology:
There are gaps in Nepal’s hydrometeorological monitoring network, which constrain the implementation of integrated
watershed-level approaches for catchment management, risk reduction and the dissemination of early warnings to
communities. This is particularly evident in the lack of vulnerability maps, technical field surveys, hazard and risk
information and comprehensive climate information in Nepal. Additionally, research and monitoring in remote areas
of the Himalayan region are constrained, resulting in gaps in coverage of the existing hydrometeorological system.
This also affect private sector actors in the area, who are vulnerable to the impacts of GLOF and monsoon rainfall,
but do not have adequate access to reliable climate risk information and early warnings. Consequently, the potential
contributions from these sectors to the development and maintenance of such systems are being leveraged to their
full potential.
32. Barrier 3 — Limited investment in, and investment planning for, long-term climate risk reduction to address GLOF
and flood risk: There is a general lack of investment in long-term climate risk reduction in Nepal. Given the high cost
of GLOF risk reduction interventions, the country has limited financial mechanisms to sustain risk reduction
approaches or to support the mainstreaming of public investment initiatives or public-private partnerships (PPPs)
for downstream flood management. Moreover, investment in risk reduction measures is hindered by limited
opportunities to generate income or recoup the high costs associated with implementing these measures, which
constrains the GoN’s ability to attract and secure the necessary investments for GLOF risk reduction, particularly
from the private sector. This challenge is compounded by the GoN’s limited capacity to systematically identify, plan
for and programme financial requirements for risk reduction measures.
33. Barrier 4 –– Limited community awareness and skills for GLOF disaster reduction actions: Knowledge of climate
change and its impacts –– including GLOFs and rain-induced flooding –– is limited among the different groups living
in areas exposed to GLOFs and other extreme climate events throughout Nepal. Linked to this is the limited adaptive
capacity of these groups to manage the impacts of extreme flooding events. This limited adaptive capacity is further
exacerbated by inadequate investment in DRR interventions in the exposed areas, which increases the risk of
damage to infrastructure, disruption of livelihoods –– including agriculture and tourism –– as well as potential injury
and loss of life in these areas. The youth, women and marginalised Indigenous groups are the most vulnerable to
these impacts.
34 Including indigenous people, women’s organisations and other marginalised groups.

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
Project Approach
Goal Statement
34. IF the levels of the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 glacial lakes are reduced and nature-based
flood mitigation measures and early warning systems are introduced in downstream catchments, THEN the
resilience, disaster preparedness and adaptive capacity of downstream communities will be enhanced, BECAUSE
the likelihood of catastrophic breaches and intensity of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) will be reduced and
communities will be better prepared to avoid and recover from residual flood risks.
Theory of Change
35. The proposed project seeks to enhance Nepal’s resilience to climate-induced hazards, specifically glacial lake
outburst floods (GLOFs) and flash floods. This will be achieved by strengthening institutional capacity to integrate
climate risk into planning and development, implementing disaster risk reduction measures, and improving early
warning systems and community preparedness. By addressing the root causes of vulnerability and reducing
exposure to these extreme events, the project aims to safeguard lives, livelihoods, and critical infrastructure while
promoting sustainable, climate-resilient development.
36. A key outcome of the project is ensuring that local and national-level institutions adopt an integrated approach to
planning and development that incorporates climate risk and hazard information. Strengthening institutional and
technical capacity will enable decision-makers to incorporate climate risk considerations into policies, strategies,
and investment plans, ensuring proactive and informed decision-making (Output 1). The project will facilitate
collaboration among key government agencies, the private sector, and local communities to institutionalize climate
risk management, creating a foundation for long-term resilience.
37.
38. At the community level, the second project outcome will be the reduced exposure of vulnerable communities to
GLOFs and flash floods while increasing preparedness to respond to residual flood risks. This will be achieved
through improved hazard monitoring, the generation and dissemination of early warnings (Output 1), and the
implementation of targeted risk reduction measures (Output 3). Communities will benefit from a strengthened early
warning system that provides timely and actionable information, allowing for effective preparedness and response.
Furthermore, physical interventions, such as lake-lowering activities at high-risk glacial lakes and hybrid Eco-
disaster Risk Reduction (EcoDRR) strategies, will mitigate the probability and intensity of GLOFs, reducing
downstream flood impacts.
39. To achieve these outcomes, the project will undertake a range of activities. Institutional capacity will be strengthened
through training programs, policy development, and the integration of climate risk considerations into planning
processes. Hazard monitoring systems will be enhanced by expanding hydrometeorological observation networks,
improving data collection and analysis, and developing user-friendly climate information products. Early warning
systems will be upgraded to ensure that communities receive timely and comprehensible alerts, supported by
community-based preparedness initiatives, such as drills, awareness campaigns, and response planning. Risk
reduction measures will include engineering interventions to lower water levels in high-risk lakes and nature-based
solutions to manage residual flood risks, ensuring a comprehensive approach to disaster risk management.
40.
41. The project also addresses critical barriers that have hindered Nepal’s ability to implement effective adaptation
measures. Weak early warning systems will be strengthened through an expanded observational network and
enhanced coordination among relevant institutions. The lack of tangible risk reduction measures will be addressed
by implementing lake-lowering activities and downstream interventions that mitigate flood risks. The project will also
catalyse the development of policy and financial mechanisms for GLOF risk reduction, engaging private sector
actors such as the hydropower and tourism industries to support long-term sustainability. Additionally, community
ownership will be fostered through participatory approaches, ensuring that local populations are actively involved in
planning, monitoring, and responding to climate hazards.
42. The success of the project is contingent on several assumptions. It assumes that government agencies and
stakeholders will remain engaged throughout the implementation period, ensuring effective coordination and
collaboration. The project is also based on the assumption that lowering glacial lakes will reduce the likelihood and
intensity of outburst floods and that early warnings will provide sufficient lead time for communities to take protective
action. Additionally, it assumes that communities will understand and adhere to the warnings and response
measures designed for their specific locations. Potential risks include financial or institutional constraints that could

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
delay implementation, technological challenges in monitoring systems, and socio-economic barriers that may affect
community participation. Downstream flood mitigation measures must also be designed to withstand potential
extreme flood events following lake-lowering interventions.
43. By overcoming these barriers and reinforcing key assumptions, the project will contribute to a transformative shift in
how Nepal manages climate risks. The integration of climate risk considerations into institutional decision-making,
the enhancement of early warning systems, and the implementation of proactive risk reduction measures will reduce
disaster impacts and build long-term resilience. Through these interventions, Nepal will move from a reactive
disaster response approach to a proactive, climate-resilient development pathway, safeguarding communities and
key economic sectors from the growing risks posed by GLOFs and extreme flooding events.
44. These interventions are described in Section B.3. Project/programme description below, with their transformative
impact expanded on in Section D.2. Paradigm shift potential. The Theory of Change for the project is presented in
Figure 7 below.
Figure 4. Theory of Change diagram.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Output
Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number
generation transport cities, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Output 1
☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
Output 2 ☐
☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐

--- Table 1 on Page 18 ---
delay implementation, technological challenges in monitoring systems, and socio-economic barriers that may affect
community participation. Downstream flood mitigation measures must also be designed to withstand potential
extreme flood events following lake-lowering interventions.
43. By overcoming these barriers and reinforcing key assumptions, the project will contribute to a transformative shift in
how Nepal manages climate risks. The integration of climate risk considerations into institutional decision-making,
the enhancement of early warning systems, and the implementation of proactive risk reduction measures will reduce
disaster impacts and build long-term resilience. Through these interventions, Nepal will move from a reactive
disaster response approach to a proactive, climate-resilient development pathway, safeguarding communities and
key economic sectors from the growing risks posed by GLOFs and extreme flooding events.
44. These interventions are described in Section B.3. Project/programme description below, with their transformative
impact expanded on in Section D.2. Paradigm shift potential. The Theory of Change for the project is presented in
Figure 7 below.
Figure 4. Theory of Change diagram. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4 | 
 | Output |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Energy | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- | Infrastructure | Ecosystems | 
 | number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | generation | transport | cities, | land use | vulnerable | being, food | and built | and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and access |  | industries, |  | people and | and water | environment | ecosystem | 
 |  |  |  | appliances |  | communities | security |  | services | 
 | Output 1 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | 
 | Output 2 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | 

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
Output 3 ☐ ☒ ☒
☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐
Co-benefit
Co-benefit
number Environmenta
Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
l
Co-benefit 1: Carbon ☐
Sequestration ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒
Co-benefit 2: Soil ☐
Stabilisation ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)
Project objective
45. The objective of the proposed project is to safeguard the lives and livelihoods of people and their assets by reducing
the risk of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and related hazards in Nepal. This shift will be achieved by
implementing a transformative approach to the way in which the Government of Nepal (GoN) addresses GLOFs
and flooding. Specifically, direct investments from the GCF combined with co-financing from DHM, DoFSC,
MoEWRI, MOFE, NDRRMA , DNPWC, NTB and IPPAN will be used to: i) reduce the impacts of a GLOF and its
residual impacts on vulnerable communities; ii) promote the adoption of GLOF early warning system (EWS)
measures among national- and local-level decision-makers to enhance rapid response to an impending GLOF; and
iii) strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of the GoN and local communities to implement GLOF risk
reduction measures through targeted training and awareness raising. The combined effect of project interventions
will result in the adoption and implementation of a climate-resilient, integrated approach to GLOF risk reduction and
flood management that can be readily scaled up and replicated nationally and across South Asia. The proposed
project will contribute to the GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased climate-resilient sustainable development.
Proposed project outputs and activities are described in detail below.
46. The project will directly benefit 385,956 people of Nepal (55% women and 45% men, 1.3% of the total population of
Nepal) by reducing their exposure to GLOFs through glacial lake lowering and EcoDRR. These direct beneficiaries
have been selected based on the dam breach modelling results that identify the direct impact area of a potential
GLOF event, mapped against the population resident in those areas. The delineation of the direct impact area
involved dividing the basins into two categories: i) the main river basin area where flood mitigation and degraded
physical environment restoration measures will be implemented; and ii) the downstream area of the main river
channel where Early Warning System (EWS) are proposed. Based on these delineations, the estimated direct
impact area of Arun and Dudhkosi basin is 5,115km2, and 4,063km2, respectively, with an additional 856km2 and
1,917km2, respectively, accounted for in the downstream direct impact area. The direct impact area of Thualagi is
estimated to be 1,917km2. There are 29 rural/urban municipalities in the direct impact area of Arun Basin while this
is 16 and 19 in Dudhkosi and Marshyangdi basins, respectively. In addition to these direct beneficiaries, 1,912,347
people living in the municipality wards surrounding the direct impact area will indirectly benefit by enabling the
population to prepare for and respond to these extreme events accordingly.
Output 1. Institutional and technical capacity strengthened to develop and integrate climate risk and hazard information
into planning and development.
47. Output 1 will improve DHM’s technical and institutional capacity to develop and disseminate tailored climate risk
information and establishing public-private sector partnerships to encourage investment into GLOF risk reduction in
Nepal. The strengthened regulatory frameworks, combined with capacity building and skills development in the
disaster risk reduction sector, will create an enabling environment for the upscaling and replication of project
interventions across the country. This upscaling potential will be achieved by: i) improving DHM’s capacity for hazard
mapping and prioritizing GLOF risk reduction strategies; ii) leveraging investment from the private sector into GLOF
risk reduction beyond the conventional project-based approach; and iii) training the relevant staff from DHM on
monitoring GLOFs, operating and maintaining existing risk databases and disseminating tailored, user-friendly
climate risk information to major productive sectors in Nepal, including the hydropower and tourism sectors. The
combined impact of these interventions will create a foundation for ongoing, sustainable glacial monitoring in Nepal,
enabling adaptive management of GLOF risk reduction measures — not only at the target lakes, but across all
PDGLs in the country. These systems will not only assess the condition of the lakes themselves, but will include
broader consideration of glacial health and future risk; enabling preventative measures to be adopted as potential
risks are identified.
48. The project activities that will be implemented under Output 1 are described below, with further details on these
activities (including on the associated sub-activities and deliverables) presented in Section E.6 of this Funding

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
 | Output 3 | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ | ☒ | ☐ |  | ☒ |  | ☒ | 
 | Co-benefit
number |  | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Environmenta |  |  | Social |  | Economic |  | Gender |  | Adaptation |  | Mitigation |  | 
 |  |  |  | l |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Co-benefit 1: Carbon
Sequestration |  | ☐ |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  | 
 | Co-benefit 2: Soil
Stabilisation |  | ☒ |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project objective
45. The objective of the proposed project is to safeguard the lives and livelihoods of people and their assets by reducing
the risk of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and related hazards in Nepal. This shift will be achieved by
implementing a transformative approach to the way in which the Government of Nepal (GoN) addresses GLOFs
and flooding. Specifically, direct investments from the GCF combined with co-financing from DHM, DoFSC,
MoEWRI, MOFE, NDRRMA , DNPWC, NTB and IPPAN will be used to: i) reduce the impacts of a GLOF and its
residual impacts on vulnerable communities; ii) promote the adoption of GLOF early warning system (EWS)
measures among national- and local-level decision-makers to enhance rapid response to an impending GLOF; and
iii) strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of the GoN and local communities to implement GLOF risk
reduction measures through targeted training and awareness raising. The combined effect of project interventions
will result in the adoption and implementation of a climate-resilient, integrated approach to GLOF risk reduction and
flood management that can be readily scaled up and replicated nationally and across South Asia. The proposed
project will contribute to the GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased climate-resilient sustainable development.
Proposed project outputs and activities are described in detail below.
46. The project will directly benefit 385,956 people of Nepal (55% women and 45% men, 1.3% of the total population of
Nepal) by reducing their exposure to GLOFs through glacial lake lowering and EcoDRR. These direct beneficiaries
have been selected based on the dam breach modelling results that identify the direct impact area of a potential
GLOF event, mapped against the population resident in those areas. The delineation of the direct impact area
involved dividing the basins into two categories: i) the main river basin area where flood mitigation and degraded
physical environment restoration measures will be implemented; and ii) the downstream area of the main river
channel where Early Warning System (EWS) are proposed. Based on these delineations, the estimated direct
impact area of Arun and Dudhkosi basin is 5,115km2, and 4,063km2, respectively, with an additional 856km2 and
1,917km2, respectively, accounted for in the downstream direct impact area. The direct impact area of Thualagi is
estimated to be 1,917km2. There are 29 rural/urban municipalities in the direct impact area of Arun Basin while this
is 16 and 19 in Dudhkosi and Marshyangdi basins, respectively. In addition to these direct beneficiaries, 1,912,347
people living in the municipality wards surrounding the direct impact area will indirectly benefit by enabling the
population to prepare for and respond to these extreme events accordingly.
Output 1. Institutional and technical capacity strengthened to develop and integrate climate risk and hazard information
into planning and development.
47. Output 1 will improve DHM’s technical and institutional capacity to develop and disseminate tailored climate risk
information and establishing public-private sector partnerships to encourage investment into GLOF risk reduction in
Nepal. The strengthened regulatory frameworks, combined with capacity building and skills development in the
disaster risk reduction sector, will create an enabling environment for the upscaling and replication of project
interventions across the country. This upscaling potential will be achieved by: i) improving DHM’s capacity for hazard
mapping and prioritizing GLOF risk reduction strategies; ii) leveraging investment from the private sector into GLOF
risk reduction beyond the conventional project-based approach; and iii) training the relevant staff from DHM on
monitoring GLOFs, operating and maintaining existing risk databases and disseminating tailored, user-friendly
climate risk information to major productive sectors in Nepal, including the hydropower and tourism sectors. The
combined impact of these interventions will create a foundation for ongoing, sustainable glacial monitoring in Nepal,
enabling adaptive management of GLOF risk reduction measures — not only at the target lakes, but across all
PDGLs in the country. These systems will not only assess the condition of the lakes themselves, but will include
broader consideration of glacial health and future risk; enabling preventative measures to be adopted as potential
risks are identified.
48. The project activities that will be implemented under Output 1 are described below, with further details on these
activities (including on the associated sub-activities and deliverables) presented in Section E.6 of this Funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 19 ---
Co-benefit
number

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
Proposal. DHM will support the implementation of this Output through the DHM Field Office, which will assist in the
implementation of project activities (Sub-activities 1.1.1, 1.1.2 and 1.2.2).
49. The budget for Output 1 is USD 4,323,878, including a combination of USD 3,206,993 GCF finance and USD
1,116,885 co-finance from DHM and UNDP. GCF finance will be used to cover the additional costs of strengthening
DHM’s capacity for hazard mapping and prioritizing/designing GLOF risk reduction strategies. This funding will
complement DHM's in-kind co-finance, which will cover the equipment and staff costs, ensuring that project
interventions are mainstreamed into the day-to-day processes of DHM. Moreover, GCF funds will be used to engage
the private sector and foster public-private partnerships (PPPs) with DHM that will catalyze sustainable finance for
the maintenance of GLOF and flood risk information services.
Activity 1.1. Strengthen the knowledge base and technical capacities for improved climate research and risk reduction
strategies.
50. There is an urgent need within DHM for the development of an in-house monitoring database for glaciers and glacial
lakes. While DHM has the hardware and software capabilities, formal Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and
training are required to catalyse the development and management of this database. To address this need, Activity
1.1 will strengthen DHM’s institutional and technical capacity for implementing sustainable GLOF risk reduction
strategies in Nepal. This capacity development will enable DHM to regularly monitor and update risk status for each
glacier beyond the project period.
51. First, methods and SOPs for the inventory and development of a spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial
lakes will be developed and institutionalised in DHM. The development of this GIS database is the first and most
important step in the identification and quantification of risks through desk studies and remote sensing analysis. The
SOPs for the GIS database should focus on:
• data acquisition and frequency of data collection;
• database management;
• methodologies/standard procedures for analysis and quality control, incorporating hydrodynamic models that
account for the cascading hazards (including no only climate hazards, but other natural hazards such as
landslides and earthquakes) that impact GLOF risk;
• reporting and publication formats; and
• online geoportal management for the dissemination of reports.
52. The establishment of the GIS database will be supported by geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and
bathymetric surveys. SOPs for the investigation and surveys should focus on:
• pre-field planning of logistics, including equipment checks and survey layouts;
• human resources management;
• stepwise procedures for conducting field work;
• Monitoring and Evaluation protocols; and
• report generation and publication formats for bathymetric, DGPS, GPR, ERT and other surveys.
53. The risk status of the identified glaciers and glacial lakes using the GIS database, geophysical investigation and
surveys will be updated by DHM every five years to account for changes in climate and geophysical conditions. The
selection of this time period was informed by international best practice; in India, the usual practice is to update the
status annually, while a recent study through ICIMOD reported that updating the status every five years is sufficient.
Second, methods and tools will be introduced into DHM’s operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritisation and
mapping other extreme events – particularly heavy rainfall and flooding. This hazard prioritisation will use the
established GIS database, remote-sensing and satellite data, as well as ground-truthing and socio-economic
vulnerability assessments. Methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable
watersheds will be developed, informed by the GIS database and hazard mapping that will also be undertaken under
this activity. Moreover, the methodologies and SOPs will include clear processes to integrating an investment
strategy into the prioritisation process. This strategy will outline the steps needed to replicate risk reduction activities
in priority lakes, including the sequencing, roles and responsibilities of lead agencies, resource requirements and
finance strategy for prioritised lakes. The relevant staff35 in DHM’s Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and
Glacier Lake Departments will be trained on regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritisation, as well as how to
use the risk information generated to plan for and design GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal’s high-risk areas.
Established methods and tools will be robust and replicable on a national scale for operational monitoring and DHM
is committed to continuing to provide training to its staff in the Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and
35 9 technical staff from DHM

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
Glacier Lake Departments on the methods and tools established under this project activity beyond the project
lifetime, as well as include training as priority work in its annual programme. Overall, this project activity will
contribute to DHM’s efficient and effective implementation of Nepal’s Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic
Plan of Action 2018–203036, and the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act, 2074 and Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Rules, 2076 (2019)37. These are the main guiding policy documents for disaster
response in the country.
Sub-activities:
1.1.1. Develop methods and SOPs for inventory and development of spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and
glacial lakes (including geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric surveys).
1.1.2. Introduce methods and tools for ongoing GLOF hazard prioritization within DHM, and mapping other extreme
flood, landslide, mudflow and soil erosion hazards and risks, using a combination of remote-sensing and satellite
data, as well as ground-truthing and socio-economic vulnerability assessments.
1.1.3. Introduce methodology and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for integrated GLOF risk reduction
implementation planning in vulnerable watersheds.
1.1.4. Train technical staff in DHM’s Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and Glacier Lake Departments on
regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritisation, as well as how to use the risk information generated.
Activity 1.2. Develop public-private partnerships for sustainable investment in GLOF and flood risk information services.
54. This project activity will contribute to improving GLOF and flood risk reduction in Nepal by: i) improving DHM’s
capacity to develop and disseminate climate risk information to major economic sectors, such as tourism and
hydropower; and ii) enhancing public-private sector partnerships to encourage future investment into GLOF risk
reduction strategies in Nepal. At present, weather- and climate change-related risk information is accessible by the
public through the DHM website, phone messaging, radio, television and tailored bulletins. Such platforms are also
viable means to disseminate sector-specific information. However, this tailored information is currently limited to
specific focus areas and disseminated only when a potential extreme climate event has been identified. While DHM
produces sector-specific, user-friendly climate risk information to the aviation, agriculture and tourism sectors, there
is a need to expand the provision of tailored climate risk information to the hydropower and tourism sectors which
will be done under Activity 1.2. The process of tailoring this information will be supported by training DHM staff on
the generation, recording, and maintenance of hydrometeorological databases to disseminate the most updated
climate hazard exposure and vulnerability information to key economic sectors, including agriculture, hydropower
and tourism which are particularly vulnerable to GLOFs. The use of this information by the targeted sectors will be
recorded by registering user statistics on DHM’s website and evaluating mobile applications and online databases.
Other opportunities to ensure use of the information have been identified, including sharing sector-specific data to
appropriate responsible agencies38 and developing customised telephone applications.
55. The sustainability of GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal will be supported by the establishment of public-private
sector partnerships (PPPs) to formalize and institutionalise long-term agreements focused on the sustainable uptake
of GLOF risk reduction strategies, particularly with regard to the scaling and maintenance of down-stream EcoDRR
measures, as well as the maintenance of EWS systems. Private sector actors in the hydropower, tourism and
insurance sectors recognize the potential impact of climate-related hazard on their industries and indicated during
consultations their commitment as partners, including Independent Power Producers’ Association, Nepal (IPPAN),
Trekking Agencies' Association of Nepal (TAAN) and other tourism-sector entities — confirmed by co-finance
contributions outlined in Section C. The initial co-finance investments from IPPAN and NTB will include the provision
of land for hydrometeorological stations, as well as the provision of security services and training support on EWS
and climate hazard safety events for trekkers, travel agencies, porters, hoteliers and local businesses. Ongoing
engagements with private sector partners have also indicated that the reduced risk resulting from project
interventions — including the physical lake lowering and Eco-DRR measures, as well as the improved climate
information services — will further incentivize continued private investment in the target landscapes. This will likely
include direct investment in EcoDRR measures upstream of hydropower dams, which serve to not only reduce flood
risk, but also provide co-benefits in terms of regulating hydrological flow, creating a win-win situation when the more
severe risk from an catastrophic GLOF is reduced through lake lowering.
36 GoN. 2018. Disaster Risk Reduction St rategic Plan of Action. Available at:
https://app.adpc.net/sites/default/files/public/publications/attachments/DRR%20National%20Plan%20of%20Action%20%28Nepal%29.pdf.
37 GoN. 2019. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act, 2074 and Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Rules, 2076. Available
at: https://bipad.gov.np/uploads/publication_pdf/DRRM_Act_and_Regulation_english.pdf.
38 NDRRMA and NEOC at the centre and at province level, Provincial EOCs and at local level, LDMCs have been established in the
municipality level — chaired by the mayor/chairperson

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
56. The development of PPPs during the project’s implementation will build on these initial engagements in a longer,
broader process to establish long-lasting agreements, including, inter alia, annual engagement workshops for the
review and expansion of PPPs. This engagement during implementation will be used to identify entry-points for
long-term PPPs, which will then be followed by direct engagements to agree on appropriate partnerships. In addition
to supporting the uptake of GLOF risk reduction interventions, the project will identify opportunities for PPPs to
leverage future investment into similar impactful lake-lowering and downstream interventions. This process will
include sensitising private partners to the financial and economic benefits of GLOF risk reduction, as well as linking
in engagements with various regional entities working in the GLOF risk reduction space to manage potential
geopolitical risks linked to private investment. It is anticipated that these partnerships will have the potential catalyse
significant additional investments in DRR strategies downstream of the project, particularly as the understanding of
the risks faced and the benefits of adaptation interventions are demonstrated (see Output 3). Through the proposed
engagement process, the proposed project will identify suitable modalities for engaging in PPPs for similar risk
reduction projects in the future. It should be noted that no land acquisition or displacement of local communities will
be considered in the establishment of PPPs and their associated interventions under this activity.
57. The production of customized and targeted risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early warnings
will identify potential risks and provide strong incentives for private sector investment in future disaster risk reduction
initiatives where necessary, with the PPPs mobilising resources39 to address climate change threats, including
heavy rainfall and flood risks, as well as GLOF risk. Risk analysis and requirements relating to climate change —
as stipulated in national policies and plans — will be integrated into the established PPPs. In particular,
arrangements for cost recovery from the private sector through fee-based climate risk information services tailored
for the hydropower sector will be made as part of PPP, as well as engaging the private sector in the operation and
maintenance of the observational network for EWSs40. Several private and government agencies have been
identified as potential target for these partnerships, including: i) the Ministry of Energy, Water, Resources and
Irrigation: The Department of Electricity Development; ii) Nepal Electricity Authority; iii) the Department of Water
Resources and Irrigation; and iv) Private Hydropower Developers. Under this project activity, policy provisions will
be made and extensive stakeholder consultations will be held with representatives from the target sectors — in
particular the independent power producers and tourism industries that are highly vulnerable to flooding impacts
including GLOFS — to formalise and institutionalise long-term agreements to support the sustainable uptake of
GLOF risk reduction in Nepal. Risk information for adaptation planning and early warnings is considered critical for
investors in downstream areas. While this information is broadly accessible to the public, customised information
targeted at investment partners could serve as an incentive for cost sharing on monitoring systems. Moreover, the
use of data generated by the system to develop marketable, targeted information products could incentivise
additional investment/contributions to the long-term operation and maintenance of the investments. Consultations
during the establishment of PPPs will identify the specific information products required by different members of the
private sector. For example, specific long-term forecasts that include avalanche, landslide and flood risks will be
developed for members of the tourism and/or trekking industries. Other incentives include providing evacuation
plans, adaptation planning and knowledge dissemination workshops for decision-makers.
Sub-activities:
1.2.1 Develop climate-induced hazard event recording and management database systems.
1.2.2 Develop climate risk information products and tailor them for use by productive sectors (tourism and
hydropower).
1.2.3 Establish public-private sector partnerships to generate long-term buy-in and economic benefits for investment
in GLOF risk reduction.
Output 2. Improved hazard monitoring and the generation of early warnings, including the dissemination of early
warnings to local communities and important economic sectors leading to reduced economic loss and loss of human
lives from GLOF events.
58. Project interventions under Output 2 strengthen Nepal’s GLOF early warning system (EWS) as well as the capacity
of Nepal’s Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) to facilitate rapid information sharing and early action
preceding a GLOF. At present, DHM has limited technical and institutional capacity to detect, monitor and respond
to GLOFs and other extreme climate events. Current EWS coverage in the Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun
Sub-basins does not extend far enough to reach all downstream communities that will be affected should the
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes breach. This places these — mostly Indigenous —
39 Economic analyses have demonstrated the cost-effectiveness of EcoDRR measures in relation to the potential losses resulting from the
risk, indicating a strong financial case for such investment.
40 Co-finance investments from IPPAN and NTB demonstrate the buy-in from private sector to this concept.

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
communities at increased risk of being impacted by a GLOF and the residual flooding. To address these constraints,
a study was recently commissioned by UNDP for the “Identification of required optimum number of Hydrological and
Meteorological Stations for the proposed GCF-funded project”. This study identified gaps in the existing EWS
network — in terms of number of stations required — to detect and monitor hydrological and meteorological changes
that contribute to GLOFs. In addition, the study identified limitations in the generation and dissemination of early
warnings to downstream communities to enable them to respond timeously to impending GLOFs.
59. Output 2 of the project will fill these gaps in two ways. First, hydrological and meteorological stations will be installed
across the prioritised GLOF watersheds to improve monitoring capacity and coverage in higher altitude areas. This
will be complemented by training workshops targeting DHM staff to strengthen their capacity to: i) collect, process
and manage climate data from the new and existing stations; and ii) use the generated data to develop early warning
information products, including easily interpretable infographics for local communities. This will enable DHM to
reliably and timeously forecast GLOFs and other extreme climate events using data from the country’s new and
existing hydrological and meteorological stations. The data from these stations will be housed on DHM’s existing
servers. Second, the adaptive capacity and response among vulnerable communities in the target districts of
Manang, Sankhuwasabha and Solukhumbu to GLOFs will be enhanced through a combination of capacity-building
and awareness-raising interventions. Specific details on the project activities that will be implemented under Output
2 are presented below. Further details on these activities, including the associated sub-activities and deliverables,
are presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal. The sustainability of interventions under Output 1 will be
ensured through their alignment with key government priorities laid out in the GoN’s ‘Fifteenth Plan’ (2019/2020 –
2023/24)41, which includes specific focus on improved hydrometeorological services.
60. Support for the implementation of this Output will be provided by: i) DHM, through the PIU and DHM Field Office,
assisting in the implementation of the project activities (Sub-activity 2.1.1) and supporting Operation and
Maintenance (O&M); ii) IPPAN by providing land for the installation of weather stations (Sub-activity 2.2.1); iii) UNDP
through the provision of communication, data processing and EWS software to strengthen the technical capacity of
early warning systems (Sub-activity 2.2.1); iv) Nepal Tourism Board (NTB) by assisting capacity development (Sub-
activity 2.2.1); and v) NDRRMA by assisting with disaster preparedness and response training (Sub-activity 2.24)
and supporting O&M.
61. The budget for Output 2 is USD 10,386,991 including a combination of USD 8,532,609 GCF finance and USD
1,854,382 co-finance from NDRRMA, DHM, NTB, IPPAN and UNDP. GCF finance will be used to cover the
additional costs of extending the hydro-met observation network to increase the reliability of early warnings, and to
strengthen the technical capacity of DHM staff to produce and disseminate early warnings, as well as
institutionalizing GLOF EWS into local DRR processes, including through the development of local response plans.
DHM co-finance will cover staff costs and provide the necessary processing equipment for the EWS. The NDRRMA
will provide logistical support for disaster preparedness and response as well as staff costs for processing household
data for effective disaster preparedness. Finally, private sector co-finance from IPPAN and NTB will cover the cost
of land as well as O&M for hydro-met equipment, with further O&M support from NDRRMA.
Activity 2.1. Improve observation network density in GLOF watersheds to strengthen the technical capacity of DHM for
the monitoring of climate hazard and risk.
62. Under this activity, hydrological and meteorological stations will be installed across high-risk GLOF watersheds to
fill gaps in the current observational network. These gaps include inoperative monitoring stations, poor coverage in
higher altitude areas and low-resolution temporal and spatial coverage. In response to the existing gaps in Nepal’s
observational network, the following interventions will be implemented under Activity 2.142:
• 6 base stations at Pangboche, Jayaram Ghat – Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani and Muglin
(2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin) to perform intensive
monitoring that will produce high quality hydrology, sediment and water quality data.
• 24 automatic weather stations (AWS) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi Basin, 5 in
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun Sub-basin) to collect temperature, atmospheric pressure, humidity,
horizontal wind and snow depth data.
41 https://npc.gov.np/images/category/15t h_plan_English_Version.pdf
42 Proposed locations for each of the types of monitoring stations in the following list can be accessed here:
https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1O9atidsKvf5EqmaMJ05pidNW8Q2Arth3&ll=27.765268424180118%2C84.81280566406248
&z=7

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
• 9 precipitation gauges (PCP) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to measure precipitation in the form of snow and rain.
• 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 8 in
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin).
63. The real-time data acquired from this critical infrastructure will be used by DHM to: i) observe and monitor GLOF
risk; ii) support EWS; and iii) assist with glacier modelling. Additionally, the real-time data acquisition system will
integrate data from new and existing hydrology stations. Increasing the density of the observation network is critical
to enable effective EWS in the target areas under increasing GLOF threat because of climate change driven
accelerated warming and glacier retreat. EWS coverage, and the dissemination of warnings, will be expanded
throughout Nepal to support real-time contact with communities vulnerable to GLOFs, through the use of mobile
phones, as well as to supplement insufficient coverage of vulnerable communities (although coverage will be
nationwide, warmings will only be distributed to targeted groups who are located in likely affected areas).. To achieve
this, all new meteorological and hydrological equipment installed under the project will be integrated into the existing
EWS network and will use GPRS/GSM technologies provided by service providers under Nepal Telecom Authority43.
Furthermore, the observation of basic meteorological variables by the AWS will enable these stations to be included
in the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON). The EWS system will be made more robust with the installation of
a central low-cost tower using a ‘free to air’ satellite mode system, accompanied by the installation of 9 siren towers
across the target GLOF watersheds (4 towers in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the
Arun Sub-basin). The cost, operation and maintenance of the EWS equipment will be the responsibility of DHM as
part of their co-finance contribution to ensuring the sustainability of the system (see Annex 21 for further details).
This Activity contributes to Strategy 2 (to transform the hydrological and meteorological stations into modern
automated stations with the latest technology and expand them as needed) of the Hydrology and Meteorology
Sectoral priorities of the Fifteenth Plan. The technical design and location of the hydrometeorological monitoring
equipment under this project will consider the work done under the ‘Developing Climate Resilient Livelihoods in the
Vulnerable Watershed in Nepal’ GEF project, ensuring that there is no overlap and that stations are optimally
positioned to maximise coverage over the target areas.
Sub-activities:
2.1.1. Install 6 Base Stations at Pangboche, Jayaram Ghat – Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani
and Muglin (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin).
2.1.2. Install 24 automatic weather stations (AWS) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi
Basin, 5 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun Sub-basin).
2.1.3. Install 9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
2.1.4. Integrate new and existing hydrology stations into a real-time data acquisition system.
2.1.5. Install 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS) at key locations in GLOF watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi
Basin, 8 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin).
2.1.6. Install a low-cost tower with a free air satellite mode system and 9 accompanying siren towers at Rabuwa,
Jayaram and other locations in GLOF watersheds to be determined through site validations (4 towers in the
Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the Arun Sub-basin).
Activity 2.2. Develop and implement early warning systems planning to strengthen adaptive capacity and response to
GLOFs and other climate hazards in vulnerable sectors and communities.
64. Activity 2.2 will improve Nepal’s EWS to strengthen adaptive capacity and response among vulnerable communities
in the target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha and Solukhumbu to GLOFs, rain-induced floods and other climate
hazards. First, the technical and institutional capacity of DHM will be strengthened to enhance the rapid
dissemination of early warnings to: i) critical national and local entities involved in disaster response (including the
National Emergency Operation Centre (NEOC), District Emergency Operation Centre (DEOC), Municipal
Emergency Operation Centre (MEOC), national stakeholders, district and local stakeholders, Local Emergency
Operation Centre (LEOC), Community Disaster Management Committee (CDMC)/Task Force, and local
communities); ii) key actors in productive sector networks; and iii) vulnerable communities in the target districts and
throughout Nepal. This will be achieved by training relevant technical staff at DHM in efficient and effective ways to
generate and disseminate early warnings to improve community response to GLOFs. To ensure that the observation
network remains operational, training will also be provided to the relevant staff on operating and maintaining the
existing and newly installed hydrological and meteorological stations in the target basins. In so doing, DHM will have
the required capacity to generate and disseminate accurate forecasts and early warnings of impending GLOFs.
43 A list of appropriate service providers th at use GCM technologies is available at: https://www.nta.gov.np/en/.

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
65. To ensure sufficient understanding among target communities of how to access and respond to early warnings,
community-based disaster response plans will be developed for selected municipalities of 11 districts in the target
watersheds, namely Bhojpur, Dhankuta, Khotang, Okhaldhunga, Sankhuwasabha, Manang, Lamjung, Sindhuli,
Solukhumbu, Sunsari and Udayapur. These plans will be developed in a participatory way with communities and
ward leaders44 in the target districts and provide step-by-step guidance on how to access early warning and what
actions to take once an early warning is received, in line with CDMC protocols. The co-development of these plans
will be conducted in a gender responsive manner, in line with actions identified in the Gender Action Plan (Annex
8b). Training will then be delivered by representatives from NEOC, LEOC and CDMC on how to implement the
actions contained in the response plans and response drills will be organised by these entities to practice what
actions to take in the event of a GLOF, flood or another climate hazard. NDRRMA will support the delivery of the
training under this activity, assist with logistics arrangements and the mobilisation of youth networks and volunteer
corps, and ensuring that the capacity building interventions reach Indigenous Peoples groups and are gender
responsive.
66. GLOF EWS will be fully institutionalised by developing multi-hazard-based risk assessments — which integrate
community knowledge and science-based assessments — and holding annual training workshop for communities
on disaster risk management (DRM), first aid and search and rescue. This process will start with a comprehensive
stocktaking exercise to include existing methods and tools for understanding climate risks and prepare
corresponding specific measures at the local level. NDRRMA will lead this institutionalisation process, supported by
local government actors. Engagement workshops with inter alia the mayor, chairperson, technical officers on GLOF
EWS, updates to the observational network, safety, operation and maintenance will also be conducted to ensure
the establishment and uptake of knowledge and early warning processes at the national, local and community levels.
67. Effective collaboration between Local Emergency Operation Centres and DHM will be ensured through engagement
workshops and meetings that will strengthen vertical and horizontal linkages between these entities, strengthening
existing ICT systems to facilitate effective sharing and dissemination of information. This collaboration will facilitate
integration of DHM’s dissemination mechanism into the LEOC, with specialist(s) contracted to import household
data to the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and CAP — cleaning; processing; importing; and verifying. This
will also allow for localising and rolling out of the digital DIMS/BIPAD Portal, supported by awareness raising that
targets local government and communities, for effective disaster preparedness.
68. To ensure that target districts are able to access and respond to early warnings effectively, knowledge and
awareness will be improved with training workshops and materials for vulnerable communities in the four target
glacial basins. This process will be supported by the establishment and mobilising of youth groups as well as
volunteer’s corps, increasing community involvement in the early warning processes — including through the
capture, validation and application of traditional knowledge in local monitoring and response plans.
69. Climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Preparedness and Response Plans will be developed with effective
collaboration at the municipal level through engagement workshops for the preparation and completion of these
plans. Local-level Climate-resilient Action Plans will also be developed through this method, with validation
workshops held and action plans developed for the implementation of these plans, ensuring local-level stakeholder
participation, as well as ownership and uptake by the target communities and local government. The proposed
project will establish the appropriate structures to ensure the Plans are implemented and followed beyond project
completion by acknowledging linkages between Local Emergency Operation Centres and DHM, developing these
Plans in close collaboration with local municipalities and raising awareness on early warning response and access.
Sub-activities:
2.2.1. Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of DHM to produce early warnings and disseminate them to
government agencies and productive sectors.
2.2.2. Co-develop community-based response plans for 10 districts, namely Bhojpur, Dhankuta, Khotang,
Okhaldhunga, Sankhuwasabha, Saptari, Sindhuli, Solukhumbu, Sunsari and Udayapur.
2.2.3. Institutionalise GLOF EWS by developing multi-hazard-based risk assessments (integrating community
knowledge and science-based assessments), and train communities on disaster risk management, first aid and
search and rescue.
44 A ward is the smallest unit of local gove rnment in Nepal.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
2.2.4. Strengthen vertical and horizontal linkages between Local Emergency Operation Centres and DHM to integrate
DHM’s dissemination mechanism, import household data45 to the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and
CAP (cleaning; processing; import; verification), and localise and roll out the DIMS/BIPAD Portal for effective
disaster preparedness.
2.2.5. Improve the knowledge and awareness of target districts of how to access and respond to early warnings,
including by establishing and mobilising youth groups and volunteer’s corps.
2.2.6. Develop climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Preparedness and Response Plans, as well as Local-level
Climate-resilient Action Plans.
Output 3. Reduced probability of GLOF events and flash floods, through disaster risk reduction measures implemented
in priority glacial lake watersheds.
70. Output 3 will reduce the risk of GLOFs in the Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins. A joint
assessment was undertaken by UNDP and ICIMOD in 202046 of the glacial lakes in the Himalayas to identify
Potentially Dangerous Glacial Lakes (PDGLs)47. From this, the glacial lakes were ranked based on their respective
hazard levels, determined by the characteristics of the lakes and their dams, the activity of the source glacier and
morphology of the surroundings. The critical lakes were classed under Rank 1, and these warrant the immediate
implementation of potential measures for GLOF mitigation. Lakes classed under Ranks 2 and 3 require regular
monitoring. Several Rank 1 glacial lakes were identified within Nepal, and while all pose a serious risk, 4 of the lakes
at the highest risk of breaching have been selected for interventions under the proposed project to reduce the risk
they pose to the population of Nepal. These are the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes
(Figure 8). Further details on the selection of these lakes for urgent intervention are provided in Section 4 of Annex
2: Feasibility Study.
45 Data on demography – family details – age group, whether need special support with their contact numbers for quick rescue and relief-
and will be linked with https://bipadportal.gov.np/
46 Bajracharya, SR., Maharjan, SB., Shrestha, F., Sherpa, TC., Wagle, N. and Shrestha, AB. 2020. International Centre for Integrated
Mountain Development (ICIMOD); United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Available at: https://lib.icimod.org/record/34905.
47 ICIMOD. 2020. Research Report. Available at: Available at:
https://www.np.undp.org/content/nepal/en/home/library/crisis_prevention_and_recovery/glacial_lake_inventory_2020.html

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
Figure 5. Locations of each of the target glacial lakes, relative to one another and their respective districts.
71. Following the selection of the target lakes, an options analysis based on primary modelling, as well as international
literature and proven successful lake lowering interventions (as described in Section B.1), was undertaken to
determine the specific interventions required to sufficiently reduce the risk of GLOFs impacting nearby vulnerable
communities. As a result of this analysis, an approach combining physical lake lowering and downstream adaptation
interventions was selected for the proposed project. To reduce the primary risk of a GLOF, the water levels will be
lowered at the four priority lakes (Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2). Lowering the water level of
the lakes will reduce the potential of triggering a GLOF, as well as reducing the magnitude of a GLOF when one is
triggered. In so doing, lake lowering will avoid US$67.4–109.2 million in potential damages and losses to vulnerable
communities that are located within the potential flood-affected area. Furthermore, Eco-Disaster Risk Reduction
(Eco-DRR) measures that adopt a hybrid approach of nature-based and grey infrastructure will be implemented
downstream of the lakes to reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF after lake lowering. These downstream
interventions will include a combination of conservation ponds and flood walls to divert GLOF and flash flood flow
and nature-based eco-engineering solutions for riverbank stabilization and flood mitigation. Implementing these
downstream interventions will reduce the damages to agricultural land and other infrastructure, which was shown
by the UNDP commissioned Residual Risk and Vulnerability assessment (Annex 23), which included modelling for
four different scenarios of GLOF impacts at the Lower Barun, Hongu 2 and Lumding Tsho Glacial Lakes. The models
accounted for the GLOF impacts on the entire river basin downstream of each Glacial Lake, with the Lower Barun
Glacial Lake affecting the Arun River Sub-basin and impacts in the Dudhkoshi River Sub-basin being divided into
subsets with the Hongu 2 Glacial Lake affecting the Hongu-Dudhkoshi River Basin subset and the Lumding Tsho
Glacial Lake affecting the Lumding-Dudhkoshi subset. The four modelled scenarios were: i) Scenario 1 (S1) —
GLOF at the Glacial Lake without any interventions with a complete breach; ii) Scenario 2 (S2) — GLOF at the
Glacial Lake after lowering the recommended depth with complete breach of moraine dam; ii) Scenario 3 (S3) GLOF

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
at the Glacial Lake with a partial breach48 after lowering by the prescribed amount of 3 m for Lower Barun and
Lumding Tsho and by 1 m for Hongu 2; and iii) Scenario 4 (S4) — GLOF at the Glacial Lake with a partial breach49
after lowering by the prescribed amount and with downstream adaptation interventions. The GLOF impacts on
agricultural land and infrastructure were calculated for all four scenarios and are summarised in Table 5. While there
is a reduction in impacts between S1 and S2 — which shows the effectiveness of lowering the Glacial Lakes by the
prescribed amount to reduce damages and losses — it should be noted that the primary benefit of lake lowering is
the reduced risk of a total breach, with partial breach becoming the more likely scenario after lake lowering. The
benefit of this is demonstrated by the significant decrease observed for S3 and S4. Moreover, further reductions in
the impacts are shown between S3 and S4 which indicates the importance of downstream adaptation measures to
further offset the impacts of a partial GLOF at any of the three Glacial Lakes. These results show that Eco-DRR is
the most effective solution with the greatest reduction of losses by supplementing lake lowering benefits with hybrid
grey and green infrastructure interventions downstream. The project activities that will be implemented under Output
3 are described below, with further details on these activities (including on the associated sub-activities and
deliverables) presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal. Support for the implementation of this output will
be provided by: DHM through the DHM PIU and Field Office, assisting in the implementation of project activities,
the provision of programme M&E costs and the construction of access trails to project sites (Sub-activities 3.1.1 and
3.1.2); ii) DoFSC through the provision staff time, the use of machinery and the implementation of construction works
— relating to the planting of trees (Sub-activity 3.3.1); and iii) DNPWC through the DNPWC PIU and Field Office to
assist in the implementation of project activities (Sub-activity 3.3.10).
Table 2. Modelled impacts of GLOF events at the Hongu 2, Lower Barun and Lumding Tsho Glacial Lakes under different
intervention scenarios.
River Basin Expected direct damage
Agricultural land (ha) Household (No.) Road (km)
S1 S2 S3 S4 S1 S2 S3 S4 S1 S2 S3 S4
Arun 1, 271 674 236 20 272 267 173 10 7 7 7 1.9
Hongu- 256 256 115 5 124 123 83 4 6 6 6 1.6
Dudhkoshi
Lumding- 104 104 71 7 99 97 65 2 6 6 6 1.6
Dudhkoshi
River Basin Expected direct damage
Trail bridge (No.) Motorable bridge (No.) Trail (km)
S1 S2 S3 S4 S1 S2 S3 S4 S1 S2 S3 S4
Arun 32 32 26 4 2 2 1 1 9 9 9 2.8
Hongu- 17 17 13 1 3 3 2 1 2 2 2 1.5
Dudhkoshi
Lumding- 21 21 13 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1.5
Dudhkoshi
72. The budget for Output 3 is USD 31,736,872 including a combination of USD 22,697,118 GCF finance and USD
9,039,754 co-finance from DHM, DoFSC, DNPWC and UNDP. For lake lowering interventions, GCF finance will be
used to cover the technical design and construction costs, while DHM will provide co-finance towards staff costs for
lake lowering designs, as well as for the construction of an access trail to all project sites. For downstream
interventions, GCF finance will be used to fund the construction of flood walls, revetments and conservation ponds,
as well as the implementation of EcoDRR measures to reduce the potential impact of residual GLOF flood waters,
with DoFSC providing co-finance for supporting equipment and staff costs. DNPWC will co-finance staff costs for
the development and implementation of integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national park
management plans. Finally, UNDP co-finance will be used to cover the costs of necessary support staff for the
implementation of downstream measures, including technical advisors, as well as GESI, M&E and safeguards
experts.
Activity 3.1. Lower the levels of four of the highest risk glacial lakes.
48Partial breach depth - 5 m for Hongu 2 a nd Lower Barun, and 3 m for Lumding Tsho.
Note: there is no valid research on the likely GL breaching depth, so local knowledge was considered. Local people reported that the most
likely depth as they have noticed in the past.
49Partial breach depth - 5 m for Hongu 2 and Lower Barun, and 3 m for Lumding Tsho.

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
River Basin |  | Expected direct damage |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Agricultural land (ha) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Household (No.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Road (km) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 |  |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 |  |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 | 
Arun | 1, 271 |  |  | 674 |  |  | 236 |  |  | 20 |  |  | 272 |  |  | 267 |  |  | 173 |  |  | 10 |  |  | 7 |  |  | 7 |  |  | 7 |  |  | 1.9 |  | 
Hongu-
Dudhkoshi | 256 |  |  | 256 |  |  | 115 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 124 |  |  | 123 |  |  | 83 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 1.6 |  | 
Lumding-
Dudhkoshi | 104 |  |  | 104 |  |  | 71 |  |  | 7 |  |  | 99 |  |  | 97 |  |  | 65 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 6 |  |  | 1.6 |  | 
River Basin |  | Expected direct damage |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Trail bridge (No.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Motorable bridge (No.) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Trail (km) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 |  |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 |  |  | S1 |  |  | S2 |  |  | S3 |  |  | S4 | 
Arun | 32 |  |  | 32 |  |  | 26 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 9 |  |  | 9 |  |  | 9 |  |  | 2.8 |  | 
Hongu-
Dudhkoshi | 17 |  |  | 17 |  |  | 13 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1.5 |  | 
Lumding-
Dudhkoshi | 21 |  |  | 21 |  |  | 13 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1.5 |  | 

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B
73. Under this activity, the levels of the four highest-priority lakes will be physically lowered to reduce the volume of the
lakes. This will involve several steps. First, detailed site-specific engineering designs will be undertaken for the
lowering of the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes. These designs will be informed by several
on-the-ground assessments and validated by engineers and the AE before construction starts. The required
assessments include:
• topographical surveys of the site and the moraine dam to inform detailed analysis and precise design;
• a bathymetric investigation to determine the most recent lake volume, depth and topography, extension, and
end moraines change;
• hydrometeorology assessments to determine the current discharge of the glacier outlet; and
• geophysical investigations using a GPR survey, and electric resistivity tomography assessments of the sites to
determine the stability of the moraine dam and the intensity of the geophysical environment.
74. Once the designs have been validated, construction will commence in Year 2 of project implementation to lower the
Thulagi, Lower Barun and Lumding Tsho by 3 m and the Hongu 2 Lake by 1 m. The optimal level of lake lowering
for each site was determined during the initial lake assessments and options analysis, considering the physical
aspects of the lakes and the cost-benefit ratio of the risk reduction potential (Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering
Design report). The conceptual design for lowering the water levels of the four target lakes are summarised below.
Technical concept designs of the lake lowering interventions and further details on the engineering required to lower
the four lakes are presented in Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering Design report. DHM will be responsible for the
implementation of this activity and will determine whether to mobilise its own expert resources or outsource
consultancy services. This activity will support institutional capacity for systematic lake lowering in the future as it is
embedded within and will develop the capacity of DHM. DHM will also address the ongoing, in-house Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) of the structures built under this activity (detailed below). For further details regarding O&M,
see Annex 21: Operations and Maintenence Manual.
75. The lowering of the Thulagi, Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun Lakes will be undertaken through a 4-step process.
First, the outlet channel will be blocked by a cofferdam. Second, a diversion channel will be constructed to divert
flow while the construction for the permanent lake lowering is undertaken. The effluent from this diversion channel
will be discharged at 165 m, 70 m, and 55 m for Thulagi, Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun Lakes, respectively,
downstream of the proposed structure. Third, once the flow is diverted, a sluice gate will be constructed at an optimal
location to be determined based on the studies above, with a trapezoidal shaped channel downstream of the original
outlet channel where the temporary cofferdam is in place. Fourth, once the channel and sluice gate are in place, the
cofferdam will be removed and the discharge channel reopened, reinforced with boulder impact gabion walls to
protect it against bank erosion when the water is released after removing the cofferdam. After the completion of the
main channel, the cofferdam (which is blocking the flow of water to the main channel) will be removed. The diversion
channel (which is at higher elevation from the main channel) will be left as it is and water will flow from the main
channel. It will act as the alternative channel only at the time of high discharge maintaining the smooth flow in the
main channel. An example of this process is presented below in the extracts of concept drawing for lowering the
Thulagi Lake (Figure 9, Figure 10, Figure 11, and Figure 12). Full, detailed concept drawings for the lowering of all
four lakes are presented in Section 12 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study and Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering Design
report.
76. For Hongu 2, only the main channel is proposed. Since there is no outlet discharge of the lake, the end moraine
itself will act as a sluice gate and no diversion canals are required. Once the main channels are built, the end
moraine will be excavated to lower the glacial lake.
77. Considering lessons learn from previous lake lowering exercises, all interventions targeting the the glacial lakes will
take special consideration of cultural connections between local people and the lakes. This will include respecting
local customs and worship practices, as well as organizing forgiveness worship with local groups prior to
commencing structural work. All waste generated during the lake lowering activities will also be carried back to
Kathmandu. In addition, considering remoteness of the locations and access restrictions, detail planning will be
done on workers’ health and safety. During implementation/construction phase, the project will follow strict OHS
standards, including ensuring use of safety gears, provision for first aid facilities, emergency response protocols –
including evacuation procedures in case of serious injury – and overnight stay facilities in temporary housing made
on onsite for this purpose.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
Figure 6. Schematic design of Thulagi Glacial Lake, adapted after full illustration in Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering Design
report.
Figure 7. Schematic design of Thulagi vertical sluice gate, adapted after full illustration available in Annex 26: Technical Lake
Lowering Design report. Measurements to scale have been provided in metres (m).

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
Figure 8. Schematic design of Thulagi main channel cross section, adapted after full illustration available in Annex 26: Technical
Lake Lowering Design report. Measurements to scale have been provided in metres (m).
Figure 9. Schematic design of Thulagi main channel profile with gated structure, adapted after full illustration available in Annex 26:
Technical Lake Lowering Design report.
Sub-activities:
3.1.1. Undertake detailed site-specific engineering designs for lake lowering.
3.1.2. Lower the levels of the four lakes (Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2).
Activity 3.2. Construction of structural and non-structural measures (Civil and NbS/ Bioengineering) for the risk reduction
of GLOF and flash flood.
78. After lake lowering, while the risk of GLOFs triggering will be significantly reduced, there will still be potential for
GLOFs to occur, but with a lower magnitude. Under this activity, check dams and other protective infrastructure will
be established at strategic locations in the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to address the residual flood risk after
lake lowering. The purpose of this infrastructure will be to attenuate and divert the intense flow of water caused by
GLOFs and flash floods from the Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 glacial lakes50. The specific
infrastructure that will be constructed under Activity 3.2 is described below. For each sub-activity, detailed site-
specific engineering designs will be developed and validated prior to construction.
• 3,102 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments will be built along stretches of riverbank where a high possibility of
bank undercutting and inundation was identified. Suitable locations were identified using flood models, accounting
for the velocity of river flow along with the embankment material, topographical, morphological, and geological
conditions of the riverbank and river flow direction. The height of revetments was set considering the ‘Design
Flood Level’ (see Annex 23a for more detail on the site selection and design considerations).
• 67 conservation ponds will be established (38 in the Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to
reduce concentrated surface flow following a GLOF or during a monsoon or other extreme rainfall event and
consequently prevent the formation of gullies and the triggering of shallow landslides.
79. The infrastructure installed under this activity will provide immediate benefits to complement the long-term Eco-
disaster Risk Reduction and nature-based solutions implemented under Activity 3.3. Initial concept drawings and
50 Downstream interventions at Thulagi a re being implemented under an IUCN project and are therefore not included in the design of this
project.

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
costing information for the downstream interventions are presented in Annex 23b: Concept drawings and bill of
quantities for downstream interventions.
80. Department of Forests and Soil Conservation (DoFSC) is responsible for the operation and maintenance of check
dams and other infrastructure for the diversion of residual GLOF and flash floods. DoFSC will provide the required
budget and human resources for the O&M and deploy the workforce as required. The institutional and financial
sustainability of this and future investments will be ensured by embedding activities within the existing structure of
DoFSC, For further details see Annex 21: Operations Manual.
Sub-activities:
3.2.1. Install 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments.
3.2.2. Construct 67 conservation ponds (38 in the Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
Activity 3.3. Implement Eco-disaster Risk Reduction solutions to reduce the impact of GLOFs and flash floods.
81. Under Activity 3.3., Eco-disaster Risk Reduction (Eco-DRR) solutions will be implemented at strategic locations in
the mountain ecosystems of Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to reduce the impacts of residual flooding from GLOFs
on vulnerable communities in the basins, while simultaneously contributing to the restoration and rehabilitation of
degraded ecosystems in floodplain areas. The interventions that will be implemented under this project activity were
identified using a modelling approach that assessed residual flood risk after lake lowering (Annex 23a). Potential
flood risk areas were identified over a stretch of 100 km along downstream of the target lakes in the target river
basins to identify the most vulnerable locations. The flood model (depth and velocity) was overlaid with data on
physical assets such as settlements, households, agricultural land, and transport infrastructure to assess potential
impact and damages. A flood depth-damage model was then used to identify priority areas for intervention under
various flood scenarios. These areas were given a priority ranking on a three-point scale, and interventions were
considered for all Priority One (P1) areas. Interventions were considered along three categories, namely green, grey
and hybrid solutions, and the potential benefits of each was considered. The results of the study showed that hybrid
interventions that fit under the Eco-DRR umbrella would be most effective in reducing the impacts of residual flood.
Specific interventions were then identified for each site (Arun River Basin: 108 sites; Dudhkois River Basin: 124
Sites; shown in detail in Annex 23b), which include: i) planting trees along 460 ha of vulnerable riverbanks51, sub-
watershed areas and floodplains of four river systems; ii) constructing 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls; iii)
building 978,436 m of live check dams; iv) constructing 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments; v) installing
7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs; vi) installing 29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check dams and 15,010 m3 of
vegetative dry stone check dams; vii) establishing 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap; viii) undertaking 45,188 m
of brush layering; and ix) planting 29.8 ha of grass seedlings. This activity will be implemented by DoFSC which will
also oversee the operations and maintenance and associated costs in partnership with local governments and
community forest user groups (FUGs). To this end, the project will engage organisations such as the Federation of
Community Forestry Users Nepal (FECOFUN)52, which work with communities on natural resource management
and use rights. This engagement will promote community ownership of ecological infrastructure and support the
long-term sustainability of interventions. Such approaches where communities are adequately engaged and given
control over the maintenance of natural resources that benefit them have yielded positive results in Nepal.
82. The specific species chosen for tree planting and vegetative hybrid infrastructure will follow local guidelines
developed by Ministry of Forests and Environment, and will be conducted on government owned land. Such
protocols are based on best practices through past projects and are currently being used on extensive government
planting programmes across the country. The project will complement these initiatives, building on existing
operational mechanisms under DoFSC while specifically targeting flood vulnerable areas. The lessons learned from
the project, specifically around the theme of Eco-DRR, will be captured through the watershed management plans
and the climate-resilient agricultural management and information system. The involvement of DoFSC in the
implementation of the project will ensure that the capacity developed through this activity translate across the country
to facilitate the scaling of Eco-DRR interventions. Design examples for these interventions are shown in Figure 13,
Figure 14, Figure 15 and Figure 16 below. These Eco-DRR and nature-based solutions will reduce soil erosion and
increase the infiltration capacity of the soil in floodplain areas. This, in turn, will decrease surface runoff and reduce
the sedimentation of tributaries caused by flooding in the project areas. Concept drawings and cost information for
the interventions proposed under this activity are presented in Annex 23b: Concept drawings and bill of quantities
for downstream interventions.
51 1x1m planting density creating a green belt of 20m along the riverbank.
52 FECOFUN represents 8.5 million forest users across Nepal

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
83. It is anticipated that the direct involvement of local governments will leverage additional investment in local
adaptation measures downstream of the project, extending their contribution beyond the initial commitments made
through co-finance to the proposed project. This potential to leverage additional finance, bolstered by the capacity
development of local institutions, contributes to the upscaling potential and sustainability of project interventions.
Furthermore, the engagement of key private stakeholders who stand to benefit from risk reduction measures,
including the Nepal Tourism Board (NTB) and the Independent Power Producers’ Association of Nepal (IPPAN),
provides additional potential for leveraging finance for the scaling of interventions downstream of the project. Both
organisations have already indicated their support for the project through co-finance commitments. While the values
of these commitments are modest, they demonstrate the willingness of the organisations to engage in risk-reduction
and a recognition of the potential value/benefits of the project. The potential for leveraging additional finance is
particularly strong for IPPAN, which has recognised the important role of watershed management for sustainable
power production and risk reduction – bolstered by the information services provided through Output 1.
84. Physical adaptation interventions under this activity will be supported by developing Integrated Watershed
Management and National Park Management plans to create the regulatory framework for sustainable land
management and climate change adaptation. Training and capacity building interventions targeting community
members, community-based organisations (CBOs), non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and local government
officials will ensure the effective implementation of these plans. The capacity development of these groups will be
delivered under thematic training modules, including: i) capacity development of community members and local
government on climate change induced hazards and disasters, and adaptation measures; ii) curriculum for climate
change related education and trainings for secondary level school teachers and students; and iii) capacity
development of trainings for CBOs, including mothers groups, women-lead cooperatives, Indigenous Peoples
organisations and local eco- and youth-clubs. Training participants will be identified according to the Gender Equality
and Social Inclusion (GESI) Action Plan ( Annex 8), including Indigenous Peoples, Dalits, and women
representatives.
85. The training modules will be designed to engage government officials in the implementation of Multi-Hazard Risk
Reduction Measures (MHRRM). The training will enhance their capacity with tools and techniques used in the MHRA
and implementation techniques in Climate Change Adaptation (CCA), Ecosystem-based Disaster Risks Reduction
(Eco-DRR), and the use of Agriculture Management Information Systems (AMIS). Capacity development of the
relevant stakeholders and local and regional levels will support the development of multi-hazard assessment, and
integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national park management plans in the Arun and
Dudhkoshi Sub-basins, as well as on the effective integration of these measures into federal and municipal level
budgets.
Sub-activities:
3.3.1. Plant 153.3 ha of trees along vulnerable riverbanks, sub-watershed areas and flood plains of 4 river systems (81.6
ha in the Arun Sub-basin and 71.6 ha in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
3.3.2. Establish 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls (10,796 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 6,948 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin).
3.3.3. Install 978,436 m of live check dams (955,396 m in the Arun Sub-basin and 23,040 m in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin).
3.3.4. Install 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments (3,447.5 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 11,851.44 m3 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
3.3.5. Install 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs (4,608 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin).
3.3.6. Install a total of 29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check dams (21,960 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 in
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) and a total of 15,009.8 m3 of vegetative dry stone check dams (9,371.25 m3 in the
Arun Sub-basin and 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
3.3.7. Install a total of 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap (1,582.5 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and 1,611.5 m2 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
3.3.8. Implement a total of 45,188 m of brush layering (36,750 m in the Arun Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin).
3.3.9. Plant a total of 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings (155,419 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and 142,743 m2 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
3.3.10. Develop and implement integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national park management
plans, including the integration of these plans into local and national level budgets.
3.3.11. Develop and implement a climate-resilient agricultural management and information system.

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
3.3.12. Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of community members, government officials and CBOs to
understand and implement multi-hazard risk assessments, use climate-resilient agricultural management and
information system, implement climate-resilient GLOF and flood risk reduction strategies, and integrate Eco-DRR
into government budgets.
Figure 10. Design example for the vegetative gabions that will be Figure 11. Design example for the gabion spurs that will be
constructed. constructed.
Figure 12. Design example for the gabion revetments Figure 13. Design example for the tree plantations along the
that will be constructed. riverbanks
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
86. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s support to National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to
the Standard Basic Framework Agreement (SBFA) between UNDP and the Government of Nepal (GoN) signed on
23 Feb 1984, the Country Programme Document 2023-2027 (CPD), and as per policies and procedures outlined in
the UNDP - POPP - Chapter.
87. The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology is
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies, and procedures (POPP),
including the NIM Guidelines (POPP NIM). These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement,
environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards. The (national) Implementing Partner for

--- Table 1 on Page 34 ---
3.3.12. Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of community members, government officials and CBOs to
understand and implement multi-hazard risk assessments, use climate-resilient agricultural management and
information system, implement climate-resilient GLOF and flood risk reduction strategies, and integrate Eco-DRR
into government budgets.
Figure 10. Design example for the vegetative gabions that will be Figure 11. Design example for the gabion spurs that will be
constructed. constructed.
Figure 12. Design example for the gabion revetments Figure 13. Design example for the tree plantations along the
that will be constructed. riverbanks
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
86. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s support to National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to
the Standard Basic Framework Agreement (SBFA) between UNDP and the Government of Nepal (GoN) signed on
23 Feb 1984, the Country Programme Document 2023-2027 (CPD), and as per policies and procedures outlined in
the UNDP - POPP - Chapter.
87. The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology is
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies, and procedures (POPP),
including the NIM Guidelines (POPP NIM). These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement,
environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards. The (national) Implementing Partner for

--- Table 2 on Page 34 ---
 | 
 | 

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
this project is the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) under Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and
Irrigation (MoEWRI) of Nepal.
88. Executing entity (Implementing partner (IP) per UNDP terminology) is accountable to UNDP for managing the
project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions achieving project outcomes and for the
effective use of UNDP resources. A subsidiary agreement (project document) will be established between UNDP
and MoEWRI/DHM as per Article 3 of the SBAA. All references in the SBAA to “Executing Agency” shall be deemed
to refer to “Implementing Partner”.
Executing Entity (IP per UNDP terminology)
89. The National Executing Entity for this project is the Government of Nepal, represented by two entities:
• The Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) under Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
(MoEWRI) of Nepal - which will be responsible for implementation and serve as UNDP's Implementing Partner
(IP)
• The Ministry of Finance - which will play an intermediary role in distributing the funds to the IP and Responsible
Partiess through the appropriate channels/systems.
As the IP, MoEWRI/DHM will be accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and
evaluation of project interventions achieving project outcomes and for the effective use of GCF resources. The
MoEWRI/DHM will designate a National Project Coordinator, responsible for the overall direction, strategic guidance
and timely delivery of the Project. UNDP will also provide oversight through UNDP Country Office in Nepal, the
Bangkok Regional Hub and Headquarters in New York.
90. In addition, the Government of Nepal has requested UNDP to provide direct project services for this project. UNDP,
in agreement with GoN, will provide implementation support (support to NIM) as agreed in the letter of agreement
(LOA) signed between MoEWRI/DHM (on behalf of GoN) and UNDP. Such support will be predominantly
administrative, particularly related to the recruitment of specialists and other complex procurement actions. UNDP
and GoN acknowledge and agree that those services are not mandatory, and will be provided only upon Government
request and specified in the Letter of Agreement (LoA). When requested, as is the case for this project, the direct
project services follow UNDP policies on the recovery of direct project costs relating to GCF funded projects.
91. Notwithstanding the provision of these administrative support services by UNDP and as stated above, it is noted
that the full accountability for the execution of the project remains solely with the EE, under the strategic guidance
of the project board. UNDP will not exercise any discretion or decision-making with respect to day-to-day
management and execution of the project.
Accredited Entity
92. UNDP provides a three-tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at
regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Steering Committee by carrying
out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project
management milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance must be independent of the Project
Management function; the Project Steering Committee cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities
to the Project Manager. The project assurance role is covered by the Accredited Entity fee provided by the GCF. As
an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services
including; (i) day-to-day oversight supervision, (ii) oversight of the project completion, (iii) oversight of project
reporting.
93. The justification to engage UNDP support services responds to the capacity constraints identified based on partner
capacity assessments and the results of HACT micro-assessment of the MoEWRI/DHM and the Responsible Parties
(RPs). UNDP will be the best entity to engage various partners from both public and private sector, either following
competitive procurement process or other partnership arrangement. Such support services and the cost involved,
shall be detailed in a Letter of Agreement (LoA) for UNDP support services. As the support services will be provided
by UNDP, usual UNDP regulations, rules and procedures apply.
Responsible Parties
94. Responsible parties will be overseen by and report to the MoEWRI/DHM in its role as Executing Entity. As such
they will enter upon written agreements with the MoEWRI/DHM specifying their role in project implementation
including deliverables, budgets and workplan. These legal agreements will reflect the requirements for the flow of
GCF funds in accordance with the provisions made in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and the project’s

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). Responsible parties will report on the usage of project funds and delivery of the
workplan to the MoEWRI/DHM.
95. The following parties will enter into agreements with MoEWRI/DHM to assist in successfully delivering project
outcomes and are directly accountable to MoEWRI/DHM and will serve as the ‘Responsible Parties (RP)’ for the
execution of the outputs and activities in the targeted project areas as outlined in the terms of their agreement:
• The Department of Forests and Soil Conservation (DoFSC) of Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE),
• The Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC) of Ministry of Forests and Environment
(MoFE),
• The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority of Nepal (NDRRMA), Ministry of Home Affairs.
• UNDP Nepal Country Office.
96. The specific roles that the Executing Entity and RPs will be responsible for during implementation of the Activities
are as set out in Table 6 below. In addition to these lead organisation, opportunities will be sought during project
inception for engaging with the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) to support the
knowledge generation and management components of the project. Overall, the role of ICIMOD is primarily advisory
and will be implemented through ongoing relationships with the government of Nepal, as well as existing MoU
between ICIMOD and UNDP in region which seeks to explore opportunities for future partnerships. UNDP has an
existing MoU for such collaboration with ICIMOD which will be used as the foundation for such engagement. Beyond
their technical advisories, ICIMOD may be engaged as service providers for specific activities in line with their
expertise. In such instances, standard procurement processes would be followed. UNDP also has the foundation in
place to work directly with ICIMOD through the signing of Letter of Agreement should this be required.
Table 3. Activity-level distribution of implementation responsibilities
Executing Implementing
Output Activity
Entity Partner/Responsible
Parties
Output 1: Institutional and 1.1. Strengthen the knowledge base and
technical capacity technical capacities for improved climate
strengthened to develop and research and risk reduction strategies. DHM, DOFSC
integrate climate risk and UNDP
1.2. Develop policy and financial
hazard information into
mechanisms for sustainable GLOF and
planning and development.
flood risk information services.
2.1. Improve observation network density
Output 2: Improved hazard
in GLOF watersheds to strengthen the
monitoring and the
technical capacity of DHM for the DHM,
generation and dissemination
monitoring of climate hazard and risk. NDRRMA
of early warnings to local
2.2. Improve early warning systems to MoEWRI/DHM UNDP
communities and important
strengthen adaptive capacity and response
economic sectors.
to GLOFs and other climate hazards.
3.1. Lower the levels of four of the highest
risk glacial lakes.
Output 3: GLOF and flash 3.2. Construction of structural and non-
DHM,
flood risk and impact structural measures (Civil and Nbs/
DoFSC
reduction measures Bioe ngineering) for the risk reduction of
NDRRMA, DNPWC
implemented in priority glacial GLOF and flash flood.
UNDP
lake watersheds. 3.3. Implement eco-disaster risk reduction
solutions to reduce the impact of GLOFs
and flash floods.

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
Output | Activity |  | Executing |  |  | Implementing | 
 |  |  | Entity |  |  | Partner/Responsible | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Parties | 
Output 1: Institutional and
technical capacity
strengthened to develop and
integrate climate risk and
hazard information into
planning and development. | 1.1. Strengthen the knowledge base and
technical capacities for improved climate
research and risk reduction strategies. | MoEWRI/DHM |  |  | DHM, DOFSC
UNDP |  | 
 | 1.2. Develop policy and financial
mechanisms for sustainable GLOF and
flood risk information services. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2: Improved hazard
monitoring and the
generation and dissemination
of early warnings to local
communities and important
economic sectors. | 2.1. Improve observation network density
in GLOF watersheds to strengthen the
technical capacity of DHM for the
monitoring of climate hazard and risk. |  |  |  | DHM,
NDRRMA
UNDP |  | 
 | 2.2. Improve early warning systems to
strengthen adaptive capacity and response
to GLOFs and other climate hazards. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 3: GLOF and flash
flood risk and impact
reduction measures
implemented in priority glacial
lake watersheds. | 3.1. Lower the levels of four of the highest
risk glacial lakes. |  |  |  | DHM,
DoFSC
NDRRMA, DNPWC
UNDP |  | 
 | 3.2. Construction of structural and non-
structural measures (Civil and Nbs/
Bioe ngineering) for the risk reduction of
GLOF and flash flood. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3.3. Implement eco-disaster risk reduction
solutions to reduce the impact of GLOFs
and flash floods. |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
.
Project Steering Committee
97. The project will be governed by the Project Board (PB) which will be set up by the MoEWRI/DHM, the project
Executing Entity, and chaired by the Secretary of MoEWRI responsible for Water Resources and Irrigation. The PB
will also be co-chaired by UNDP Resident Representative. Other members of the PB will include Joint-Secretary
level representatives from relevant federal and provincial ministries including National Planning Commission, UNDP,
representatives of community organizations, indigenous people organization, academia, development partners and
private sector as necessary. The PB will be the senior, dedicated body for coordination and strategic guidance. The
PB will meet at least twice a year.
98. The PB will ensure that activities of the project comply with the strategies, principles and overall approach outlined
in this proposal. The PB will be responsible for making decisions by consensus. Its responsibilities including
recommendation for UNDP and Executing Entity approval of project plans, substantive revisions and acceptance of
the project progress reports. In order to ensure UNDP’s ultimate accountability, PB decisions should be made in
accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, the best value for money,
fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In the case where a consensus cannot be
reached, the final decision shall rest with UNDP. Project reviews by the PB will take place at least twice a year, or
as necessary when raised by the Project Coordination Officer (PCO) or one of the committee members. The PB
must be consulted by the PCO for decisions where there are substantial changes required to the Annual Workplan
as per deviation tolerances set by a donor or UNDP, whichever is lower.
99. The PB members will have the following functions:
• An Executive (role represented by the executing entity/implementing partner) that holds the project ownership
and chairs the PB. The Executive will be National Project Director, DHM, which will play the overall coordination
functions and collaboration with the responsible parties and UNDP.
• The Development Partner represents the interests of the parties concerned that provide funding and/or technical
expertise to the project. This role will be fulfilled by UNDP.
• Beneficiary Representatives from the MoEWRI, MoFE, MoHA, as well as provincial, local governments, CSOs
and private sector partners who ensure the realization of project benefits from the perspective of project
beneficiaries..

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
• Project Assurance: UNDP performs the quality assurance role and supports the PB and Project Management
Unit by carrying out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures
appropriate project management milestones are managed and completed. The PB cannot delegate any of its
quality assurance responsibilities to the CO. UNDP provides a three – tier oversight services involving the UNDP
Country Offices and UNDP at regional and headquarters levels. Project assurance is totally independent of the
Project Management function.
Implementation and Operational Arrangements
100. UNDP in consultation with the Chair of the PB will set up a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) chaired by a senior
government official, who is not involved in project management and oversight. The CTA of the project selected by
UNDP and senior technical specialists and experts of MoEWRI, DNPWC, DSCWM and NDRRMA will be the
members of the TAG. Other members of TAG will include technical experts working in other government agencies,
research institutions, development partner organizations and national and international organizations, with relevant
experience in various thematic areas of the project, as decided by UNDP in consultation with the Chair of the PB.
The main function of the TAG will be to provide technical advice and inputs to the Executing Entity and RPs based
on international best practice, regards to thematic assessments and technical studies conducted by the project.
Including the Chair, the number of TAG members will be limited to a maximum of eleven. Meetings of the TAG will
be organized up to twice a year, though it can meet on ad hoc basis as and when required.
101. The Executing Entity will establish and manage a Project Management Unit (PMU) that will operate under the
overall guidance of the National Project Director and recruit its staff. Additional administrative and logistical support
staff for processing of human resources, procurement and logistic aspects of the implementation of the project may
be assigned by UNDP.
102. The PMU is responsible for overall planning and budgeting, collaborating with other ministries, sectors and
government entities to implement the project performance management system; bidding for the provision of project
consultancy services; coordination with the responsible parties in terms of bidding of goods and services;
disbursement and implementation of project audits, operation of accounts, monitoring and preparation of overall
project reports (annual), and safeguards policy monitoring reports.
103. The PMU will be headed by the Project Coordination Officer (PCO), who will have day-to-day management and
supervisory responsibilities of the project team and will be supported by thematic specialists as well as operational
assistants. The PCO is responsible for the delivery of results specified in the project document, to the required
standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The multi-year work plan and annual work
plan are prepared and updated by the PCO, with support from other PMU members, and reviewed and approved
by the PB. The PCO is also responsible for maintaining and updating the procurement plan, project risk log, and
stakeholder engagement plan. With technical support from the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Expert, the
Environment and Social Safeguard (ESS) Officer, and the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) Expert. The
PCO also take the overall responsibility of adhering the project activities to the ESMF, IPPF, and GAAP and make
periodic reports to the PB. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in each output and activity and oversight for gender
mainstreaming will be provided by a project-financed gender specialist.
104. The “project assurance” function of UNDP is to support the PB by carrying out objective and independent project
oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed
and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the PCO; therefore, the PB cannot delegate any of its
assurance responsibilities to the PCO. The project assurance role will be assumed by UNDP Deputy Resident
Representative, who will represent UNDP in the Board, together with UNDP’s Portfolio Manager for Environment
and Resilience, Programme Analyst – RBM and Programme Associate on behalf of UNDP.
Fund Flow
105. Upon approval of the project by the GCF Board, a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) will be signed between the
GCF and UNDP. Following FAA signing, UNDP and Government of Nepal will sign project document, which is a
legal document that outlines fund flow from Accredited Agency to the IP and RPs through the Ministry of Finance
and upon meeting the conditions precedents to first disbursement therein, the GCF proceed (grant) will be disbursed
to UNDP. UNDP will transfer the GCF funds to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) of Nepal, from where the funds will be
disbursed to the MoEWRI and Responsible Parties (RPs) through appropriate mechanism against approved annual
work plan and budget. UNDP will retain necessary funds in line with the approved budget in the funding proposal to
provide technical and operational support services to the IPs and RPs for implementation of project. Following the
decision of the PB the funds will be transferred on quarterly basis from MoF to the Executing Entity (DHM) and the
RPs (DoFSC, DNPWC and NDRRMA) through respective line ministries.

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
106. For the flow co-finance, formal commitment letters have been provided (Annex 13), creating the basis for
managing co-finance commitments between UNDP and co-financiers. Co-finance will not flow into the project
accounts, but will rather be managed directly by the co-financing entities as per the details of their individual
commitments, with inputs being regularly monitored and reported through the APR process. Additionally, UNDP
Prodoc, which is officially signed between EE and UNDP, provides the legal basis to realize co-financing for
government entities, which will flow through the government finance systems (LMBIS, PLMBIS and SUTRA) which
will be recorded, monitored and audited.
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
107. Nepal is one of the 20 most disaster-prone countries in the world, with multiple climate change- and non-climate
change-related hazards affecting the country. Examples of climate change-related hazards include: i) floods; ii)
droughts; iii) landslides; iv) windstorms; v) hailstorms; vi) forest fires; vii) Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs);
and viii) avalanches. Nepal is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change-induced disasters,
ranking within the top 10 countries most affected by climate change on the long-term global Climate Risk Index from
2009 to 201953. For example, recurrent extreme rainfall events have caused extensive flooding across Nepal.
Floods in 2001 and 2008 collectively killed 1,673 people, while extreme rainfall in August 2017 caused widespread
floods across 35 of the country’s 77 districts, inundating 80% of the land in the Terai region. More than 190,000
houses were destroyed or partially damaged, displacing tens of thousands of people and rendering many homeless.
These impacts also resulted in shortages of food and water, as well as other essential items in the affected areas.54
108. The capacity of the Government of Nepal (GoN) to respond to climate hazards is additionally constrained by the
urgent recovery needs from recent disasters. For example, following the series of devastations and especially after
the two earthquakes in April and May 201555 that caused extensive damage to property and physical infrastructure
and resulted in the loss of 8,790 lives, the Government of Nepal (GoN) established and prioritised a five-year
Reconstruction Strategy to expedite the reconstruction of damaged infrastructure and to shape the course of the
country’s long-term development through the promotion of sustainable livelihoods56. The 2017 extreme rainfall event
53 Ministry of Home Affairs. (2018). Nepal Disaster Report, 2017: The Road to Sendai, Kathmandu: Government of Nepal.
54 National Planning Commission 2017. Nepal Flood 2017: Post Flood Recovery Needs Assessment
55 The magnitudes of these earthquakes were 7.9 and 7.3 respectively
56 NRA. (2016). Nepal Earthquake 2015: Post-Disaster Recovery Framework, 2016-2020. Kathmandu: National Reconstruction Authority

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
106. For the flow co-finance, formal commitment letters have been provided (Annex 13), creating the basis for
managing co-finance commitments between UNDP and co-financiers. Co-finance will not flow into the project
accounts, but will rather be managed directly by the co-financing entities as per the details of their individual
commitments, with inputs being regularly monitored and reported through the APR process. Additionally, UNDP
Prodoc, which is officially signed between EE and UNDP, provides the legal basis to realize co-financing for
government entities, which will flow through the government finance systems (LMBIS, PLMBIS and SUTRA) which
will be recorded, monitored and audited.
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
107. Nepal is one of the 20 most disaster-prone countries in the world, with multiple climate change- and non-climate
change-related hazards affecting the country. Examples of climate change-related hazards include: i) floods; ii)
droughts; iii) landslides; iv) windstorms; v) hailstorms; vi) forest fires; vii) Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs);
and viii) avalanches. Nepal is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change-induced disasters,
ranking within the top 10 countries most affected by climate change on the long-term global Climate Risk Index from
2009 to 201953. For example, recurrent extreme rainfall events have caused extensive flooding across Nepal.
Floods in 2001 and 2008 collectively killed 1,673 people, while extreme rainfall in August 2017 caused widespread
floods across 35 of the country’s 77 districts, inundating 80% of the land in the Terai region. More than 190,000
houses were destroyed or partially damaged, displacing tens of thousands of people and rendering many homeless.
These impacts also resulted in shortages of food and water, as well as other essential items in the affected areas.54
108. The capacity of the Government of Nepal (GoN) to respond to climate hazards is additionally constrained by the
urgent recovery needs from recent disasters. For example, following the series of devastations and especially after
the two earthquakes in April and May 201555 that caused extensive damage to property and physical infrastructure
and resulted in the loss of 8,790 lives, the Government of Nepal (GoN) established and prioritised a five-year
Reconstruction Strategy to expedite the reconstruction of damaged infrastructure and to shape the course of the
country’s long-term development through the promotion of sustainable livelihoods56. The 2017 extreme rainfall event

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
resulted in severe flooding, which affected 1.7 million people and damaged 126,000 ha of rice paddies57. The
combined impact of these major events on Nepal resulted in US$ 6 billion in economic losses and required the
establishment of a period of rebuilding58,59,60. Following the 2015 earthquakes, the rebuilding activities in Nepal are
now 93% complete, which translates to the reconstruction of 753,00 private houses out of 811,000. Moreover, the
reconstruction of government and school buildings, health facilities, historical monuments and security forces
buildings are all still ongoing61. The current state of the reconstruction efforts emphasises: i) the extended amount
of time currently required to rebuild after extreme events; ii) that the Nepalese infrastructure are inadequate to deal
with these extreme events; and iii) how vulnerable Nepalese communities are to extreme events. The recovery
efforts for such events have also placed considerable strain on Nepal’s economy, impacting the country’s fiscal
capacity to fund adaptation.
109. In the 2021/2022 UNDP Human Development Report, Nepal is ranked 144 out of 191 countries on the Human
Development Index (HDI), with a value of 0.602 — indicating low levels of development62. The country’s Gross
National Income (GNI) per capita is US$ 970, while its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) amounts to US$ 29.17 billion.
In 2018, the country’s annual GDP growth rate was 6.7%. Despite this growth, the country’s public debt increased
from 26% of GDP in 2016–2017 to 30% in 2018–2019 — and is projected to further increase into the future63. This
debt burden is likely to be exacerbated by increased extreme climate events and their related impacts, with public
funding required to support recovery efforts and thereby reducing economic growth and the ability of the GoN to
repay public debt.
110. Imports of goods and services accounted for 46% of Nepal’s total GDP of US$ 29 billion in 2018. These imports
were significantly disrupted in September 2015, for a period of four months, during a period where Nepal was
engaged in relief and rebuilding efforts in the wake of the earthquakes earlier in the year64. This impact on trade
exacerbated already-existing unequal social and economic opportunities, which are prevalent in the hierarchical
social structure of the country, and which have resulted in Nepal’s rating of 32.8 in the 2013 Gini coefficient65. The
combination of the 2015 earthquakes and their impacts on trade resulted in a decrease in Nepal’s GDP growth rate
to 3% for 2014–2015 and subsequently to 0% for 2015–2016. While this rate had recovered to 6.7% by 2018, the
recurrence of these extreme events will have significant impacts on Nepal’s population — 80% of whom lived in
rural areas and 25% lived below the national poverty line as of 201166,67. Furthermore, the impacts of these events
on Nepal’s economy have resulted in the GoN having to prioritise national rebuilding efforts, with little funding
available for the implementation of climate change adaptation efforts or projects.
111. Nepal’s economic growth model is aimed at achieving middle-income country status by 2030, by shifting from
consumption to investments — with a focus on the development of physical and social infrastructure. The country’s
current growth model is, however, strongly reliant on employment abroad — particularly in the Gulf Cooperation
Council countries, India and Malaysia — which accounted for 25% of the GDP in 2018–1968. This overseas
employment, combined with the country’s reliance on imports and the recent Covid-19 pandemic, is likely to have a
substantive impact on the GoN’s ability to invest in climate-resilience building activities and projects. The Nepali
economy is in liquidity crisis despite the measures undertaken by the Nepal’s Rastra / Central Bank. There is
significant cash deficit for various financial and economic activities as the liquidity crunch persist. GCF support, in
the form of grant financing, is therefore necessary to overcome the financial barriers to addressing the impacts of
extreme climate events by improving the resilience and preparedness of Nepal and lay the foundation for the private
sector engagement and investment in climate risk reduction in the future.
57 National Planning Commission. (2017) . Nepal Flood 2017: Post Flood Recovery Needs Assessment. Government of Nepal.
58 NRA. (2016). Nepal Earthquake 2015: Post-Disaster Recovery Framework, 2016-2020. Kathmandu: National Reconstruction Authority
59 NRA. (2017b). Rebuilding Nepal. NRA Newsletter. Kathmandu: Nepal Reconstruction Authority, Government of Nepal.
60 Ministry of Home Affairs. (2018). Nepal Disaster Report, 2017: The Road to Sendai, Kathmandu: Government of Nepal
61 National Reconstruction Authority (2021). NRA Press Release on Sixth Anniversry of Earthquake.
62 UNDP. (2021/2022 Human Development Report, Uncertain Times, Unsettled Lives: Shaping our Future in a Transforming World.
Available online at https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/global-report-document/hdr2021-22pdf_1.pdf
63 International Monetary Fund. (2020). 2020 Article IV Consultation — Press Release; Staff Report; And Statement by The Executive
Director for Nepal (Issue 20)
64https://databank.worldbank.org/views/reports/reportwidget.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tbar=y&dd=y&inf=n&zm=n&
country=NPL
65 The Gini coefficient is a measure of the deviation of the distribution of income among individuals or households within a country from a
perfectly equal distribution. A value of 0 represents absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality.
66 The national poverty line in 2011 was NRs 19,621 per capita per year. This was US$ 274.7 in 2011 and US$ 167.75 in 2021.
67 Asian Development Bank. (2017). Country Poverty Analysis (Detailed): Nepal, 2013–2017.
68 International Monetary Fund. (2020). 2020 Article IV Consultation — Press Release; Staff Report; And Statement by The Executive
Director for Nepal (Issue 20)

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
112. To address the risks of floods, particularly GLOFs, Nepal should adopt a comprehensive and integrated climate
risk management approach centred around the reduction and prevention of, as well as the preparedness for these
hazards. The project proposes to address the primary risk of GLOFs through the process of lowering the level of
the target glacial lakes, a practise that has been effectively implemented in the country previously. For example,
Imja Lake in the Solukhumbu District was identified as being at risk from GLOFs and, accordingly, the Community
Based Flood and Glacial Lake Outburst Risk Reduction Project was established in 2015 to lower its water level by
3 m through the construction of an open channel, to help mitigate the GLOF hazard potential. The cost estimate for
the lowering of the four target lakes is US$2.6 million each, with further investment required to bring about the
paradigm shift in the management approach of GLOF related risks and impacts — detailed calculations for the lake
lowering cost estimates can be found in Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering Design report. At present, the country
has limited capacity to finance these climate change adaptation interventions through domestic sources of funding
— including both private and public sector finance — as it prioritises funds for the abovementioned rebuilding efforts.
The GoN is therefore seeking US$36.1 million in GCF grant financing to build the climate resilience of communities
in Nepal, to adapt to the impacts of GLOFs and other climate-driven extreme events. Co-finance of US$13.785
million for this project will be provided by DHM, DoFSC, MoEWRI, NDRRMA, DNPWC, MoFE, UNDP, NTB and
IPPAN (please see Section C.1 for a breakdown of co-finance contributions).
113. Without GCF support and with the financial impact of the recent Covid-19 pandemic, the public and private
sectors in Nepal will continue to operate under the existing reactive approach to extreme climate events and natural
disasters, limiting national and local-level decision-makers’ capacity to plan for and respond to the increasing
impacts of climate change. Moreover, as climate change increases the frequency of extreme climate events such
as GLOFs, the vulnerability of communities in Nepal will continue to rise — with ongoing rebuilding events being
interrupted by these future extreme events. GCF support is therefore required to implement interventions that reduce
the vulnerability of these communities, to ensure that government-led reconstruction and development activities can
proceed without interruption.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Sustainable disaster risk reduction in Nepal
114. The principles of sustainability underpin all three project outputs, with the highest direct adaptation impact
potential being realised through Outputs 2 and 3. Interventions under Output 2 will ensure that vulnerable
communities are timeously informed of GLOFs and other extreme events, while the interventions under Output 3
will simultaneously ensure that these communities are protected from the physical risks posed by these events. The
introduction of long-term monitoring systems coupled with improved dissemination systems and methods under
Output 2 will enable vulnerable communities to prepare for GLOFs and other extreme events appropriately and
adequately in the future.
115. The integration of physical risk reduction measures, introduced under Output 3, with improved early warning
systems (EWS), introduced under Output 2, will enable vulnerable communities to respond to extreme events —
such as GLOFs — more effectively. Furthermore, the physical risk reduction measures introduced under Output 3
are designed to deliver long-term adaptation benefits to the target communities, through a combined grey and green
infrastructure approach. The combination of grey and green infrastructure will ensure the long-term sustainability of
Output 3 as the green infrastructure interventions will contribute to the restoration and rehabilitation of degraded
ecosystems in the target areas — these ecosystems will provide additional protective services once restored —
while the grey infrastructure will provide immediate protection to both vulnerable communities and the green
infrastructure, which will take longer to provide the expected benefits. Involvement and training of community
members in the construction of the lake lowering systems will ensure that technical skills and knowledge are retained
within the communities, allowing them to take responsibility for the implementation and management of similar
interventions in the future. The integration of Outputs 2 and 3 will also lead to strengthened adaptive capacity in
these communities, by enabling long term climate-resilient planning that is not contingent on extensive periods of
recovery from extreme events.
Public-private partnerships to promote GLOF risk reduction
116. Investment in long-term capacity building under Output 1 will be complemented by the establishment of public-
private partnerships to formalise and institutionalise long-term agreements focused on the sustainable uptake of
GLOF risk reduction in Nepal to complement the investment in long-term capacity building under Output 1. In
particular, partnerships will be developed between entities such as NTB, IPPAN, TAAN and the Ministry of Energy,
Water, Resources and Irrigation: The Department of Electricity Development, Nepal Electricity Authority,
Department of Water Resources and Irrigation, and Private Hydropower Developers. The production of customised
and targeted risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early warnings will provide strong incentives

--- Table 1 on Page 41 ---
112. To address the risks of floods, particularly GLOFs, Nepal should adopt a comprehensive and integrated climate
risk management approach centred around the reduction and prevention of, as well as the preparedness for these
hazards. The project proposes to address the primary risk of GLOFs through the process of lowering the level of
the target glacial lakes, a practise that has been effectively implemented in the country previously. For example,
Imja Lake in the Solukhumbu District was identified as being at risk from GLOFs and, accordingly, the Community
Based Flood and Glacial Lake Outburst Risk Reduction Project was established in 2015 to lower its water level by
3 m through the construction of an open channel, to help mitigate the GLOF hazard potential. The cost estimate for
the lowering of the four target lakes is US$2.6 million each, with further investment required to bring about the
paradigm shift in the management approach of GLOF related risks and impacts — detailed calculations for the lake
lowering cost estimates can be found in Annex 26: Technical Lake Lowering Design report. At present, the country
has limited capacity to finance these climate change adaptation interventions through domestic sources of funding
— including both private and public sector finance — as it prioritises funds for the abovementioned rebuilding efforts.
The GoN is therefore seeking US$36.1 million in GCF grant financing to build the climate resilience of communities
in Nepal, to adapt to the impacts of GLOFs and other climate-driven extreme events. Co-finance of US$13.785
million for this project will be provided by DHM, DoFSC, MoEWRI, NDRRMA, DNPWC, MoFE, UNDP, NTB and
IPPAN (please see Section C.1 for a breakdown of co-finance contributions).
113. Without GCF support and with the financial impact of the recent Covid-19 pandemic, the public and private
sectors in Nepal will continue to operate under the existing reactive approach to extreme climate events and natural
disasters, limiting national and local-level decision-makers’ capacity to plan for and respond to the increasing
impacts of climate change. Moreover, as climate change increases the frequency of extreme climate events such
as GLOFs, the vulnerability of communities in Nepal will continue to rise — with ongoing rebuilding events being
interrupted by these future extreme events. GCF support is therefore required to implement interventions that reduce
the vulnerability of these communities, to ensure that government-led reconstruction and development activities can
proceed without interruption.
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Sustainable disaster risk reduction in Nepal
114. The principles of sustainability underpin all three project outputs, with the highest direct adaptation impact
potential being realised through Outputs 2 and 3. Interventions under Output 2 will ensure that vulnerable
communities are timeously informed of GLOFs and other extreme events, while the interventions under Output 3
will simultaneously ensure that these communities are protected from the physical risks posed by these events. The
introduction of long-term monitoring systems coupled with improved dissemination systems and methods under
Output 2 will enable vulnerable communities to prepare for GLOFs and other extreme events appropriately and
adequately in the future.
115. The integration of physical risk reduction measures, introduced under Output 3, with improved early warning
systems (EWS), introduced under Output 2, will enable vulnerable communities to respond to extreme events —
such as GLOFs — more effectively. Furthermore, the physical risk reduction measures introduced under Output 3
are designed to deliver long-term adaptation benefits to the target communities, through a combined grey and green
infrastructure approach. The combination of grey and green infrastructure will ensure the long-term sustainability of
Output 3 as the green infrastructure interventions will contribute to the restoration and rehabilitation of degraded
ecosystems in the target areas — these ecosystems will provide additional protective services once restored —
while the grey infrastructure will provide immediate protection to both vulnerable communities and the green
infrastructure, which will take longer to provide the expected benefits. Involvement and training of community
members in the construction of the lake lowering systems will ensure that technical skills and knowledge are retained
within the communities, allowing them to take responsibility for the implementation and management of similar
interventions in the future. The integration of Outputs 2 and 3 will also lead to strengthened adaptive capacity in
these communities, by enabling long term climate-resilient planning that is not contingent on extensive periods of
recovery from extreme events.
Public-private partnerships to promote GLOF risk reduction
116. Investment in long-term capacity building under Output 1 will be complemented by the establishment of public-
private partnerships to formalise and institutionalise long-term agreements focused on the sustainable uptake of
GLOF risk reduction in Nepal to complement the investment in long-term capacity building under Output 1. In
particular, partnerships will be developed between entities such as NTB, IPPAN, TAAN and the Ministry of Energy,
Water, Resources and Irrigation: The Department of Electricity Development, Nepal Electricity Authority,
Department of Water Resources and Irrigation, and Private Hydropower Developers. The production of customised
and targeted risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early warnings will provide strong incentives

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
for private-sector investment in future disaster risk reduction initiatives. Country-wide uptake of GLOF risk reduction
interventions will be promoted by the establishment of public-private partnerships, and introducing the model to
leverage future investment in similar impactful lake lowering and downstream interventions. Initial co-finance
investments from IPPAN and NTB demonstrate the willingness of the private sector to engage with the project and
a general buy in to the benefits of the proposed approach. It is anticipated that the improved understanding of GLOF
risk and agreements facilitated by the project, combined by on-the-ground interventions, will have potential to
leverage significant additional finance downstream of the project, particularly for eco-DRR interventions that align
with watershed management investments of the hydropower producers.
117. The mechanisms for establishing and expanding these public-private partnerships will be developed under
Activity 1.2 and supported by strengthening DHM’s institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive
planning and development. The public-private partnerships will support the sustainability of GLOF risk reduction
strategies by engaging private sector actors in the hydropower, tourism and insurance sectors to produce
customised and targeted risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early warnings. Opportunities to
engage with the health sector will also be explored, linked to the expected reduction in the spread of water- and
vector-borne diseases after flood events. The production of customised and targeted risk information will incentivise
disaster risk reduction initiatives and adaptation planning in private sectors, with the PPPs enabling long-term
mobilisation of resources to directly address climate change issues. By engaging these partners throughout the
process — from project design and throughout the implementation — the project is instilling a sense of ownership
in the approach, creating a platform for continued, sustainable investment in the long term.
Capacity development and knowledge sharing for climate-responsive planning
118. Outputs 2 and 3 will be supported by strengthening the institutional and technical capacity of DHM under Output
1 to effectively manage the hazard monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warnings introduced
under Output 2. Furthermore, the focus on knowledge management, under Output 1, will enable DHM to monitor
the effectiveness of project interventions and develop an evidence base that can be used to further develop capacity,
as well as inform future disaster risk reduction in Nepal. As a result, DHM will be fully equipped to undertake the
required hazard mapping and design and implement GLOF risk reduction interventions in-house, as opposed to
being dependent on external entities and other nationally-driven initiatives for their disaster preparedness. In
addition to the establishment of public-private partnerships with IPPAN, TAAN and other tourism-sector entities, the
sharing of institutional and technical knowledge generated under the project and stored within existing ministries will
support the long-term sustainability of project interventions by providing a knowledge base for GLOF risk reduction
in Nepal. The provision of this knowledge base will be achieved by developing methods and SOPs for the inventory
and development of a spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes along with methods, tools and
operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritisation, and methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated
GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds.
119. The project will promote knowledge sharing (discussed above) by facilitating collaboration between GoN
agencies, thereby catalysing integrated approaches to GLOF monitoring and knowledge management. The
dissemination of sector-specific weather- and climate change-related risk information by DHM will be expanded to
include the hydropower and tourism sectors via several platforms, including the DHM website, phone messaging,
radio, television and tailored bulletins. In addition, evacuation plans, adaptation planning and knowledge
dissemination workshops for decision-makers will be initiated under Output 1. In particular, mechanisms for
collaboration will be fostered under Activity 1.1, which will involve the strengthening of knowledge bases, and Activity
1.2, which will involve knowledge dissemination workshops, with decision-makers to facilitate knowledge sharing,
networking and risk informed planning. Moreover, the design of the proposed project accounts for mutual learning
and knowledge-sharing opportunities for all involved stakeholders. Establishing public-private partnerships and
facilitating knowledge sharing among stakeholders will ensure that there is a strong sense of country ownership
around project interventions. This sense of ownership will be important in ensuring the long-term sustainability, as
well as the scalability and replicability, of project interventions.
120. The project’s sustainability is further enhanced by its alignment with the priorities laid out in the GoN’s ‘Fifteenth
Plan’ 5-year development plan (2019/2020 – 2023/24)69, which prioritises sustainable use of natural resources
alongside climate adaptation, green economies and improved hydro-meteorological services. Details on the
alignment are presented under Section D.5. This alignment will ensure that the strategies introduced in this project
are effectively mainstreamed into development planning at all levels — from national through to community — with
the resulting knowledge and decision-making procedures fully embedded within national systems. Moreover, this
69 https://npc.gov.np/images/category/15t h_plan_English_Version.pdf

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
country-driven approach will promote a sense of ownership, ensuring that risk reduction measures continue to be
prioritized beyond the scope of the project.
Operation and maintenance beyond the project lifetime
121. Regular Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of the lake lowering interventions, EWS installations and
downstream Eco-DRR measures will be undertaken during and after the project to guarantee the sustainability and
optimal functioning of these interventions. Specific roles and responsibilities for O&M will consider the technical
aspects of the interventions and be held by various stakeholders, including DHM, NDRRMA and DoFSC.
122. DHM will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of lake lowering interventions under Activity 3.1.
The O&M for interventions introduced as part of the lake lowering process will commence in Year 7 — after the
target lakes are lowered in Year 6 — and continue for 15 years. DHM will decide whether to mobilise its own expert
resources or contract any consultancy services. O&M will be enforced by a local enumerator. This local enumerator
will be recruited and trained for a period of time by the DHM or a professional consultant, after which they will perform
their responsibilities to ensure the safety and operation of the structures. These responsibilities will include regular
gate operation, timely inspection of hydromechanical and civil structures and reporting of any faults to DHM.
Maintenance work necessitates minor civil projects, which will be coordinated with the local authorities. DHM will
recruit contractors to perform O&M depending on the scope of work necessary. Minor civil works and maintenance
will be carried out on a regular basis according to specific structures, while major maintenance will be expected
every 8-10 years.
123. In addition to the lake lowering interventions, DHM will also be responsible for O&M of the new hydrological and
meteorology stations installed as part of the EWS interventions. Operations and maintenance of the meteorological
and hydrological stations installed under Output 2 of the project will commence in Year 5 — after the new stations
are installed in Year 4 — and continue for 15 years. The prior experience that DHM has with monitoring stations will
provide guidance on maintaining the hydrological and meteorological stations for efficient operation. The different
types of maintenance required will include, inter alia: i) emptying precipitation gauge buckets regularly, with the
frequency depending on the monsoon precipitations; ii) ensuring the replacement of batteries and solar panels to
prevent missed data; and iii) regular maintenance to remove any encroaching vegetation and upkeep of fences and
cable connections. Over and above the O&M required for the project, DHM has proposed to upgrade existing
stations during the project period as co-financing which will enhance overall monitoring and early warning
capabilities. Moreover, by co-developing climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Preparedness and Response Plans,
and Local-level Climate-resilient Action Plans with vulnerable communities, the project will fully integrate these
systems into local governance structures, ensuring local ownership sustain these systems beyond the scope of the
project. This will be further enhanced by the strengthening of vertical and horizontal linkages between Local
Emergency Operation Centres and DHM, enabling the long-term flow of information for effective disaster
preparedness at local levels.
124. DoFSC will be responsible for the operation and maintenance of all downstream flood risk reduction (EcoDRR)
and watershed and sub-watershed restoration initiatives implemented under Output 3. O&M measures for the
downstream flood reduction interventions will begin after Year 2 of the project, and continue for 15 years. The
different types of maintenance required for these interventions will include: i) routine annual maintenance; ii)
maintenance during high flood season or after monsoons; and iii) special maintenance during extreme weather
events. Proper and regular maintenance will be especially important until the planted species have established
proposely. Maintenance is also required in the case of early damage to structures for which resources are to be
allocated regularly.
125. The long-term sustainability of the downstream measures is set on the foundation of robust government priorities
for reforestation. The Government of Nepal has given high priority to plantation programmes, which are reflected in
several strategic plans and policies. This includes targets of planting at least 5,000 ha of trees per year to counter
deforestation and restore degraded forests; linked to government ambitions toward the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG 15 – Life of Land: protect, restore, and promote sustainable use
of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation
and halt biodiversity loss. Similarly, the fifteenth-development plan of Nepal (2019-2024) aimed to increase annual
plantation area targets from 4,000 ha to 30,000 by end of the plan period, as well as to produce at least 22-30 million
seedlings annually. Moreover, the plan aims to expand private/family forests by 30,000 ha, agroforestry practices
by 100,000 ha, and public-land plantations by 20,000 ha. National priorities for forest restoration are also reflected
in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which emphasizes the enhancement of carbon sequestration and
forest carbon storage for combating climate change impacts by planting trees, while maintaining 45% of the total
area of the country under forest cover by 2030. Given this strong prioritization, the project will work with government

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
to leverage the allocation of public funds to the ongoing implementation of Eco-DRR measures beyond the scope
of the project.
126. A detailed framework for operations and maintenance of the project interventions, including details on the annual
costs, is presented in Annex 21: Operations and Maintenance Manual.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF funding Total amount Currency
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii)
36,158,230 million USD ($)
GCF financial instrumen t Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans
(ii) Subordinated
loans
(iii) Equity
(iv) Guarantees
(v) Reimbursable grants
(vi) Grants 36,158,230
(vii) Results-based payments
(b) Co-financing Total amount Currency
information70 13,785,820 USD ($)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
Grant 4,542,721
Department of Meteorology In kind 1,555,234
USD ($)
and Hydrology (DHM) In-Project
1,033,897
O&M
In kind 2,196,839
Department of Forest and Soil
In-Project USD ($)
Conservation (DoFSC) 607,448
O&M
National Disaster Risk Grant 174,904
Reduction and Management In-Project USD ($)
216,833
Authority (NDRRMA) O&M
Department of National Park
and Wildlife Conservation In kind 407,952 USD ($)
(DNPWC)
Ministry of Forest and
In kind 293,245 USD ($)
Environment (MoFE)
Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources and Irrigation In kind 293,245 USD ($)
(MoEWRI)
UNDP Grant 2,143,869 USD ($)
Nepal Tourism Board (NTB) In kind 58,334 USD ($)
In kind
Independent Power Producers’
261,299 USD ($)
Association, Nepal (IPPAN)
Amount Currency
Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 49,944,050 USD ($)
70 In addition to having signed co-finance l etters, first-level due diligence has been conducted on co-financers, considering several parameters:
annual budget of the entity, co-finance commitments to the project, local presence to manage commitments, level of priority for the project
indicated by the entity, relevance to ongoing workstreams and results of capacity assessments. For all public entities, results suggest high
confidence in the co-finance materializing and being directed towards, with the commitments already integrated into entity work plans. In all
cases, the annual contributions account for manageable percentages of available annual budgets in light of the contribution towards their
priority programmes.

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 36,158,230 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | GCF financial instrumen t |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  | Pricing |  |  |  | 
 |  | (i) Senior loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (ii) Subordinated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (iii) Equity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (iv) Guarantees |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) Reimbursable grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vi) Grants |  |  | 36,158,230 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) Results-based payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (b) Co-financing |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | information70 |  |  | 13,785,820 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Name of institution |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | Tenor &
grace | Pricing |  | Seniority |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Department of Meteorology
and Hydrology (DHM) |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 4,542,721 |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 1,555,234 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | In-Project
O&M |  | 1,033,897 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Department of Forest and Soil
Conservation (DoFSC) |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 2,196,839 |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | In-Project |  | 607,448 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | O&M |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | National Disaster Risk |  |  | Grant |  |  | 174,904 |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Reduction and Management |  |  | In-Project |  | 216,833 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Authority (NDRRMA) |  |  | O&M |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Department of National Park |  | In kind |  |  | 407,952 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and Wildlife Conservation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (DNPWC) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Ministry of Forest and |  | In kind |  |  | 293,245 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Environment (MoFE) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Ministry of Energy, Water |  | In kind |  |  | 293,245 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Resources and Irrigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (MoEWRI) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | UNDP |  |  | Grant |  |  | 2,143,869 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Nepal Tourism Board (NTB) |  |  | In kind |  |  | 58,334 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Independent Power Producers’
Association, Nepal (IPPAN) |  |  |  | In kind |  | 261,299 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 49,944,050 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 45 ---
(a) Requested GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii)

--- Table 3 on Page 45 ---
Department of Forest and Soil
Conservation (DoFSC)

--- Table 4 on Page 45 ---
Independent Power Producers’
Association, Nepal (IPPAN)

--- Table 5 on Page 45 ---
Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
C
The following parallel financing will be provided for the proposed project:
• US$ 3,066,440 from DHM.
• US$ 1,525,424 from DoFSC.
• US$ 816,301 from DNPWC.
(d) Other financing • US$ 962,477 from IPPAN
arrangements and • US$ 24.33 Million from 15 Municipalities in Dudhkoshi Watershed
contributions (max. 250 • US$ 24.8 Million from 15 Municipalities in Arun Watershed
words, approximately 0.5 • US$ 1.05 Million from Nasong Rural Municipality in Thulagi Watershed
page)
An additional US$4,056,019 in long-term finance for O&M will be provided by
DHM, DNPWC and DoFSC, which flow after the project implementation period
and is addition to the O&M finance provided during the seven-year
implementation period.
C.2. Financing by component
Output Activity Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million
Options Instrument Options Instrument Institutions
USD ($)
1. 1.1 Strengthen the
Institutional knowledge base and
and technical technical capacities for
capacity improved climate 1.046855 Grants
strengthened research and risk
to develop reduction strategies. In-kind
DHM
and integrate 4.323878 1.116885 Grants
UNDP
climate risk
1.2. Develop public-
and hazard
private partnerships for
information
sustainable investment 2.160138
into planning Grants
in GLOF and flood risk
and
information services
development.
2.1 Improve
observation network
density in GLOF
2. Improved watersheds to
hazard strengthen the 3.823603 Grants
monitoring technical capacity of
and the DHM for the monitoring
generation of climate hazard and
and risk In-kind DHM
dissemination Grants IPPAN
2.2. Develop and 10.386991 1.854382
of early implement early NTB
warnings to
warning systems UNDP
local
planning to strengthen
communities
adaptive capacity and
and important response to GLOFs 4.709006 Grants
economic
and other climate
sectors
hazards in vulnerable
sectors and
communities
3. GLOF and 3.1. Lower the levels of DHM
flash flood four of the highest risk 11.976515 Grants In-kind
31.736871 UNDP
risk and glacial lakes. 9.039754 Grants
DoFSC
impact 3.2. Construction of 1.102913
reduction structural and non- Grants DNPWC

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
 | (d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page) |  |  | The following parallel financing will be provided for the proposed project: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 3,066,440 from DHM. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 1,525,424 from DoFSC. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 816,301 from DNPWC. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 962,477 from IPPAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 24.33 Million from 15 Municipalities in Dudhkoshi Watershed |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 24.8 Million from 15 Municipalities in Arun Watershed |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | • US$ 1.05 Million from Nasong Rural Municipality in Thulagi Watershed |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | An additional US$4,056,019 in long-term finance for O&M will be provided by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | DHM, DNPWC and DoFSC, which flow after the project implementation period |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | and is addition to the O&M finance provided during the seven-year |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | implementation period. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output |  | Activity |  |  |  | Indicative |  |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | cost |  | Amount
Options | Amount | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  | Amount
Options | Amount | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | million |  |  | Options |  | Instrument |  |  | Options |  |  | Institutions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
1.
Institutional
and technical
capacity
strengthened
to develop
and integrate
climate risk
and hazard
information
into planning
and
development. |  | 1.1 Strengthen the
knowledge base and
technical capacities for
improved climate
research and risk
reduction strategies. |  |  | 4.323878 |  |  | 1.046855 |  | Grants |  |  | 1.116885 |  | In-kind
Grants | DHM
UNDP |  |  | 
 |  | 1.2. Develop public-
private partnerships for
sustainable investment
in GLOF and flood risk
information services |  |  |  |  |  | 2.160138 |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
2. Improved
hazard
monitoring
and the
generation
and
dissemination
of early
warnings to
local
communities
and important
economic
sectors |  | 2.1 Improve
observation network
density in GLOF
watersheds to
strengthen the
technical capacity of
DHM for the monitoring
of climate hazard and
risk |  |  | 10.386991 |  |  | 3.823603 |  | Grants |  |  | 1.854382 |  | In-kind
Grants | DHM
IPPAN
NTB
UNDP |  |  | 
 |  | 2.2. Develop and
implement early
warning systems
planning to strengthen
adaptive capacity and
response to GLOFs
and other climate
hazards in vulnerable
sectors and
communities |  |  |  |  |  | 4.709006 |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3. GLOF and
flash flood
risk and
impact
reduction |  | 3.1. Lower the levels of
four of the highest risk
glacial lakes. |  |  | 31.736871 |  |  | 11.976515 |  | Grants |  |  | 9.039754 |  | In-kind
Grants | DHM
UNDP
DoFSC
DNPWC |  |  | 
 |  | 3.2. Construction of
structural and non- |  |  |  |  |  | 1.102913 |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 46 ---
(d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page)

--- Table 3 on Page 46 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
C
measures structural measures
implemented (Civil and NbS/
in priority Bioengineering) for the
glacial lake risk reduction of
watersheds GLOF and flash flood
3.3. Implement Eco-
disaster Risk
Reduction solutions to
9.617690
reduce the impact of Grants
GLOFs and flash
floods
MoFE
In-Kind
PMC 3.496310 1.721511 Grants 1.774799 MoEWRI
Grants
UNDP
Indicative total cost (USD) 49.944050 36.158230 13.785820
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes No
☒ ☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes No
☒ ☐
Technology transfer
127. Outputs 2 and 3 of the proposed project will facilitate technology transfer by implementing innovative climate
change adaptation interventions to reduce the risk and impacts of GLOFs in Nepal. These interventions include:
i) lowering the levels of four of the highest risk glacial lakes in Nepal; ii) installing check dams and other
infrastructure for the diversion of GLOF and flash flood flow; iii) implementing Eco-Disaster Risk Reduction
solutions to reduce the impact of GLOFs and flash floods; and iv) improving the observation network density in
GLOF watersheds to strengthen the technical capacity of DHM for the monitoring of climate risk and hazard.
The technologies that are to be implemented under the project have been concept proofed in Nepal through
donor-funded and nationally-driven initiatives (described in Section B.1). However, creating conditions and
capacities for technology transfer is novel to this project and will be accomplished by: i) instilling the functions
and protocols across the relevant national institutions; and ii) building the required capacities to enable the use
of lake lowering methods and technologies in addressing GLOF risks. In addition, an integrated approach will
be implemented to reduce the risks and impacts from a GLOF event at one of the four target glacial lakes.
Historically, the GoN has taken a single-hazard approach in addressing GLOFs by lowering lakes that overlook
the broader catchment level and upstream and downstream interlinkages. While the proposed project still aims
to reduce the risks and impacts of a GLOF by lowering the levels of targeted lakes upstream, this single risk
reduction measure will be bolstered by the implementation of complementary measures, such as Eco-DRR
solutions downstream of the same catchment area and strengthening national and local capacity to identify,
plan for and respond to these extreme events. The vertical integration of upstream- and downstream-hazard
risk management and adoption of a multi-hazard risk management approach will ensure the effective monitoring
and management of hazards that trigger GLOFs while retaining GLOF risk reduction as the core focus of the
project. This approach will be supported by complementary systems of GLOF risk monitoring and EWS that are
centrally- and/or locally/community-led.
Capacity-building interventions
128. The technical and institutional capacity of decision-makers at the national and local levels will be
strengthened under Outputs 1 and 2 of the projects by:
• developing methods and SOPs for inventory and development of spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and
glacial lakes (including geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric surveys);
• introducing methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization, and mapping other extreme flood, landslide,
mudflow and soil erosion hazards and risks, using a combination of remote-sensing and satellite data, as well
as ground-truthing and socio-economic vulnerability assessments;
• introducing methodology and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for implementing integrated GLOF risk
reduction in vulnerable watersheds;
• developing climate-induced hazard event recording and management database systems;

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
measures
implemented
in priority
glacial lake
watersheds |  | structural measures
(Civil and NbS/
Bioengineering) for the
risk reduction of
GLOF and flash flood |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 3.3. Implement Eco-
disaster Risk
Reduction solutions to
reduce the impact of
GLOFs and flash
floods |  | 9.617690 | Grants |  |  |  |  | 
PMC |  |  | 3.496310 | 1.721511 | Grants | 1.774799 |  | In-Kind
Grants | MoFE
MoEWRI
UNDP | 
Indicative total cost (USD) |  |  | 49.944050 | 36.158230 |  | 13.785820 |  |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes No
☒ ☐ |  |  | 
Technology transfer
127. Outputs 2 and 3 of the proposed project will facilitate technology transfer by implementing innovative climate
change adaptation interventions to reduce the risk and impacts of GLOFs in Nepal. These interventions include:
i) lowering the levels of four of the highest risk glacial lakes in Nepal; ii) installing check dams and other
infrastructure for the diversion of GLOF and flash flood flow; iii) implementing Eco-Disaster Risk Reduction
solutions to reduce the impact of GLOFs and flash floods; and iv) improving the observation network density in
GLOF watersheds to strengthen the technical capacity of DHM for the monitoring of climate risk and hazard.
The technologies that are to be implemented under the project have been concept proofed in Nepal through
donor-funded and nationally-driven initiatives (described in Section B.1). However, creating conditions and
capacities for technology transfer is novel to this project and will be accomplished by: i) instilling the functions
and protocols across the relevant national institutions; and ii) building the required capacities to enable the use
of lake lowering methods and technologies in addressing GLOF risks. In addition, an integrated approach will
be implemented to reduce the risks and impacts from a GLOF event at one of the four target glacial lakes.
Historically, the GoN has taken a single-hazard approach in addressing GLOFs by lowering lakes that overlook
the broader catchment level and upstream and downstream interlinkages. While the proposed project still aims
to reduce the risks and impacts of a GLOF by lowering the levels of targeted lakes upstream, this single risk
reduction measure will be bolstered by the implementation of complementary measures, such as Eco-DRR
solutions downstream of the same catchment area and strengthening national and local capacity to identify,
plan for and respond to these extreme events. The vertical integration of upstream- and downstream-hazard
risk management and adoption of a multi-hazard risk management approach will ensure the effective monitoring
and management of hazards that trigger GLOFs while retaining GLOF risk reduction as the core focus of the
project. This approach will be supported by complementary systems of GLOF risk monitoring and EWS that are
centrally- and/or locally/community-led.
Capacity-building interventions
128. The technical and institutional capacity of decision-makers at the national and local levels will be
strengthened under Outputs 1 and 2 of the projects by:
• developing methods and SOPs for inventory and development of spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and
glacial lakes (including geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric surveys);
• introducing methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization, and mapping other extreme flood, landslide,
mudflow and soil erosion hazards and risks, using a combination of remote-sensing and satellite data, as well
as ground-truthing and socio-economic vulnerability assessments;
• introducing methodology and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for implementing integrated GLOF risk
reduction in vulnerable watersheds;
• developing climate-induced hazard event recording and management database systems; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
C
• developing climate risk information products and tailor them for use by productive sectors (tourism and
hydropower); and
• establishing public-private sector partnerships to generate long-term buy-in and incentives for investment in
GLOF risk reduction.
129. Under Output 2 of the project, capacity-building activities will focus on increasing the capacity of DHM to
detect and monitor GLOFs and other extreme events, as well as generate and disseminate early warning
information products to the most vulnerable communities in the Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-
basins. To complement the installation of hydrological and meteorological stations, training workshops targeting
DHM staff will be delivered to strengthen their capacity to: i) collect, process and manage climate data from the
new and existing stations; and ii) use the generated data to develop early warning information products, including
easily interpretable infographics for local communities. The adaptive capacity and response among vulnerable
communities in the target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha and Solukhumbu to GLOFs will be enhanced
through a combination of training and awareness-raising interventions.

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
130. The proposed project will contribute to the GCF’s fund-level adaptation objective of increased climate-resilient
sustainable development by protecting highly exposed areas of the Himalayan valleys from GLOFs, shifting the
GLOF and flood risk management paradigm towards an integrated, evidence-based and climate-responsive
approach, and enabling community-level GLOF awareness for the promotion of appropriate response strategies
and development of long-term adaptive capacity. In so doing, the project has been designed to achieve one GCF
fund-level impact and three fund-level outcomes as presented in the GCF Integrated Results Management
Framework.
Fund-level Impacts
131. The proposed project will enhance climate resilience in Nepal’s Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-
basins, contributing to GCF’s first Adaptation Result Area (ARA1) — Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods
of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions, and ARA4 — Ecosystems and ecosystem services.
132. To reduce the primary risk of a GLOF, the water levels will be lowered at the four priority lakes (Thulagi, Lower
Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2). Lowering the water level of the lakes will reduce the potential of triggering a
GLOF, as well as reducing the magnitude of a GLOF when one is triggered. Furthermore, Eco-Disaster Risk
Reduction (Eco-DRR) measures that adopt a hybrid approach of nature-based and grey infrastructure will be
implemented downstream of the lakes to reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF after lake lowering, supported by
gender-responsive watershed and national park management plans. These downstream interventions will include
a combination of conservation ponds and flood walls to divert GLOF and flash flood flow and nature-based eco-
engineering solutions for riverbank stabilization and flood mitigation. The implementation of lake lowering, hard
infrastructure interventions and Eco-DRR will significantly reduce the exposure of vulnerable communities to
climate risks, while increasing the adaptive capacity of those communities. This is expected to directly reduce the
potential economic losses from GLOF events by US$ 45,126,562 – 86,919,219 (see Section D.6 for more detail on
avoided losses).
133. This impact will directly benefit 385,956 people in Nepal (55% women and 45% men, 13% of the total population
of Nepal) through glacial lake lowering, flood risk reduction and ecosystem restoration. Indirect beneficiaries will
include 1,986,980 people in communities adjacent to the direct impact areas (Figure 17). Overall, the project
interventions will increase the climate resilience of 10 districts in the target basins. This increased resilience will
lead to US$ 45,126,562 – 86,919,219 in avoided losses in the event of a GLOF at the four most vulnerable glacial
lakes, as well as an estimated 1,932 fewer lives lost. Further co-benefits will be achieved in terms of climate
mitigation potential, with an estimated -339,480 tCO2-e of carbon sequestration anticipated through the project.
134. Project beneficiaries were assessed based on the areas of the Arun, Dudhkosi and Marsyangdi River Basins,
where communities will benefit from glacial lake lowering and GLOF risk reduction, along with the restoration of
degraded ecosystems in the Arun and Dudkhosi Basins that will trigger benefits for the populations living in the
basins by improving ecosystem health. The estimated direct impact areas of Arun and Dudhkosi Basins are 5,115
km2 and 4,063 km2, respectively. The downstream impact areas of these basins are 856 km2 and 1917 km2,
respectively. The impact area of the Marshyandgi Basin is 1917 km2. There are 29 municipalities in the direct impact
area of the Arun Basin, and 16 and 19 in the Dudkhosi and Thulagi Basins, respectively. The number of
beneficiaries was taken as the population of these impact areas.71
71 See Annex 27a for more detail on the m ethodology for assessing the beneficiary estimates.

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. | 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 130. The proposed project will contribute to the GCF’s fund-level adaptation objective of increased climate-resilient | 
 | sustainable development by protecting highly exposed areas of the Himalayan valleys from GLOFs, shifting the | 
 | GLOF and flood risk management paradigm towards an integrated, evidence-based and climate-responsive | 
 | approach, and enabling community-level GLOF awareness for the promotion of appropriate response strategies | 
 | and development of long-term adaptive capacity. In so doing, the project has been designed to achieve one GCF | 
 | fund-level impact and three fund-level outcomes as presented in the GCF Integrated Results Management | 
 | Framework. | 
 |  | 
 | Fund-level Impacts | 
 | 131. The proposed project will enhance climate resilience in Nepal’s Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub- | 
 | basins, contributing to GCF’s first Adaptation Result Area (ARA1) — Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods | 
 | of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions, and ARA4 — Ecosystems and ecosystem services. | 
 |  | 
 | 132. To reduce the primary risk of a GLOF, the water levels will be lowered at the four priority lakes (Thulagi, Lower | 
 | Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2). Lowering the water level of the lakes will reduce the potential of triggering a | 
 | GLOF, as well as reducing the magnitude of a GLOF when one is triggered. Furthermore, Eco-Disaster Risk | 
 | Reduction (Eco-DRR) measures that adopt a hybrid approach of nature-based and grey infrastructure will be | 
 | implemented downstream of the lakes to reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF after lake lowering, supported by | 
 | gender-responsive watershed and national park management plans. These downstream interventions will include | 
 | a combination of conservation ponds and flood walls to divert GLOF and flash flood flow and nature-based eco- | 
 | engineering solutions for riverbank stabilization and flood mitigation. The implementation of lake lowering, hard | 
 | infrastructure interventions and Eco-DRR will significantly reduce the exposure of vulnerable communities to | 
 | climate risks, while increasing the adaptive capacity of those communities. This is expected to directly reduce the | 
 | potential economic losses from GLOF events by US$ 45,126,562 – 86,919,219 (see Section D.6 for more detail on | 
 | avoided losses). | 
 |  | 
 | 133. This impact will directly benefit 385,956 people in Nepal (55% women and 45% men, 13% of the total population | 
 | of Nepal) through glacial lake lowering, flood risk reduction and ecosystem restoration. Indirect beneficiaries will | 
 | include 1,986,980 people in communities adjacent to the direct impact areas (Figure 17). Overall, the project | 
 | interventions will increase the climate resilience of 10 districts in the target basins. This increased resilience will | 
 | lead to US$ 45,126,562 – 86,919,219 in avoided losses in the event of a GLOF at the four most vulnerable glacial | 
 | lakes, as well as an estimated 1,932 fewer lives lost. Further co-benefits will be achieved in terms of climate | 
 | mitigation potential, with an estimated -339,480 tCO2-e of carbon sequestration anticipated through the project. | 
 |  | 
 | 134. Project beneficiaries were assessed based on the areas of the Arun, Dudhkosi and Marsyangdi River Basins, | 
 | where communities will benefit from glacial lake lowering and GLOF risk reduction, along with the restoration of | 
 | degraded ecosystems in the Arun and Dudkhosi Basins that will trigger benefits for the populations living in the | 
 | basins by improving ecosystem health. The estimated direct impact areas of Arun and Dudhkosi Basins are 5,115 | 
 | km2 and 4,063 km2, respectively. The downstream impact areas of these basins are 856 km2 and 1917 km2, | 
 | respectively. The impact area of the Marshyandgi Basin is 1917 km2. There are 29 municipalities in the direct impact | 
 | area of the Arun Basin, and 16 and 19 in the Dudkhosi and Thulagi Basins, respectively. The number of | 
 | beneficiaries was taken as the population of these impact areas.71 | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
D
Figure 14. Map of the overall project sites and where direct and indirect beneficiary areas are delineated.
Core Indicator 5: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks
for low emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven manner.
135. Output 1 will strengthen the GoN’s institutional and technical capacity to develop and integrate climate risk and
hazard information into planning and development. Strengthening institutional and regulatory systems in Nepal will
be achieved through the implementation of two project activities under Output 1. Under Activity 1.1, the existing
knowledge base and technical capacities for improved climate research and risk reduction strategies will be
strengthened. This will be achieved by developing methods and SOPs for the inventory and development of a
spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes. This GIS database will be supported through geophysical
investigations, as well as topographic and bathymetric surveys. In conjunction with the GIS database and surveys,
methods and tools will be introduced into DHM’s operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritisation, as well as
mapping other extreme events. Furthermore, the GIS database and surveys will inform the development of
methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds, under this
activity. The development and implementation of these methods and SOPs will ensure that DHM’s institutional
capacity for climate-responsive planning and development is strengthened. Under Activity 1.2, policy and financial
mechanisms will be developed to promote the uptake of sustainable GLOF and flood risk information services and
intervention strategies across the country. This will improve the capacity of DHM to develop and disseminate
climate risk information to major economic sectors. By expanding DHM’s ability to provide tailored climate risk
information to the hydropower and tourism sectors, Output 1 will ensure that public-private sector partnerships that
encourage future investment into GLOF risk reduction strategies are enhanced. Furthermore, long-term
agreements to support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal will be formalised and
institutionalised through the development of policy provisions and extensive stakeholder consultations with relevant
representatives from target sectors.
Core Indicator 6: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to technology deployment, dissemination, development
or transfer and innovation
136. The effective use of climate information will be a central component of early action in response to an anticipated
extreme climate event. Output 2 will the use of climate information by facilitating technology transfers to strengthen
Nepal’s GLOF early warning systems (EWS) as well as the capacity of DHM to facilitate rapid information sharing
and early action preceding a GLOF. Under Output 2, Activity 2.1 will contribute to the generation of climate
information through the installation of hydrological and meteorological stations across the prioritised GLOF

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
 |  | 
 | Figure 14. Map of the overall project sites and where direct and indirect beneficiary areas are delineated. | 
 |  | 
 | Core Indicator 5: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks | 
 | for low emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven manner. | 
 | 135. Output 1 will strengthen the GoN’s institutional and technical capacity to develop and integrate climate risk and | 
 | hazard information into planning and development. Strengthening institutional and regulatory systems in Nepal will | 
 | be achieved through the implementation of two project activities under Output 1. Under Activity 1.1, the existing | 
 | knowledge base and technical capacities for improved climate research and risk reduction strategies will be | 
 | strengthened. This will be achieved by developing methods and SOPs for the inventory and development of a | 
 | spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes. This GIS database will be supported through geophysical | 
 | investigations, as well as topographic and bathymetric surveys. In conjunction with the GIS database and surveys, | 
 | methods and tools will be introduced into DHM’s operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritisation, as well as | 
 | mapping other extreme events. Furthermore, the GIS database and surveys will inform the development of | 
 | methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds, under this | 
 | activity. The development and implementation of these methods and SOPs will ensure that DHM’s institutional | 
 | capacity for climate-responsive planning and development is strengthened. Under Activity 1.2, policy and financial | 
 | mechanisms will be developed to promote the uptake of sustainable GLOF and flood risk information services and | 
 | intervention strategies across the country. This will improve the capacity of DHM to develop and disseminate | 
 | climate risk information to major economic sectors. By expanding DHM’s ability to provide tailored climate risk | 
 | information to the hydropower and tourism sectors, Output 1 will ensure that public-private sector partnerships that | 
 | encourage future investment into GLOF risk reduction strategies are enhanced. Furthermore, long-term | 
 | agreements to support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal will be formalised and | 
 | institutionalised through the development of policy provisions and extensive stakeholder consultations with relevant | 
 | representatives from target sectors. | 
 |  | 
 | Core Indicator 6: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to technology deployment, dissemination, development | 
 | or transfer and innovation | 
 | 136. The effective use of climate information will be a central component of early action in response to an anticipated | 
 | extreme climate event. Output 2 will the use of climate information by facilitating technology transfers to strengthen | 
 | Nepal’s GLOF early warning systems (EWS) as well as the capacity of DHM to facilitate rapid information sharing | 
 | and early action preceding a GLOF. Under Output 2, Activity 2.1 will contribute to the generation of climate | 
 | information through the installation of hydrological and meteorological stations across the prioritised GLOF | 

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
D
watersheds. The new stations will improve monitoring capacity and coverage in higher altitude areas, resulting in
an increase in the reach of warning, adaptive capacity of communities and the number of lives safeguarded. The
adaptation benefits of the hydrological and meteorological stations built under Output 2 will be enhanced by the
capacity development initiatives under Outputs 1 and 2 of the project. By training DHM and NDRRMA staff through
training workshops, the project will strengthen their capacity to use climate information for EWS decision making
and developing early warning information products — specifically climate-responsive Municipal Disaster
Preparedness and Response Plans and Local-level Climate-resilient Action Plans.
Core indicator 8: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation and learning
processes, and use of good practices, methodologies and standards
137. The project will produce customised and targeted risk information for adaptation planning and early warnings
that will provide strong incentives for private sector investment in future disaster risk reduction initiatives. This will
include improving DHM’s capacity for hazard mapping and prioritising GLOF risk reduction strategies; and
establishing a GIS database, supported by geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric
surveys. Relevant staff from DHM will also be trained on monitoring GLOFs, operating and maintaining existing risk
databases and disseminating tailored, user-friendly climate risk information to major productive sectors in Nepal,
including hydropower and tourism sectors. These initiatives will provide the knowledge base required to mobilise
resources to address climate change issues through PPPs. These PPPs will integrate project-generated risk
analyses and requirements relating to climate change — as stipulated in national policies and plans.
138. In addition to contributing to the CGF’s impact indicators, the project aligns with and contributes to several
targeted results under the GCF-2 Strategic Plan for 2024-2027. This includes:
• Target 1 – NDCs, NAPs and LTS: Through the proposed project, GCF contributions will contribute directly to
the implementation of Nepal’s NAP, specifically in terms of establishing a GLOF risk reduction and early
warning systems in glaciated river basins, which is identified as a key priority for the country.
• Target 3 – CIEWS: Output 2 of the proposed project will enhance CIEWs in Nepal through improved hazard
monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warnings to local communities and important
economic sectors. This is linked with national targets of Sendai Framework for DRR ( National DRR/ M Strategic
Action Plan 2018-2030), Paris Agreement( NAP, NDC) and also EW4ALL Initiatives.
• Target 6 – Infrastructure: The risk reduction actions under Output 3 will build resilience of infrastructure in Nepal
by reducing GLOF risk through both physical measures and EcoDRR measures.
• Target 9 – locally-led adaptation action: The project’s approach will promote local ownership to adaptation
action, as outlined in section D.5 below.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
139. With the increasing intensity and risk of GLOF events, the Government of Nepal (GoN) has identified the
existing model of reactive response to these extreme events as no longer appropriate and initiated a shift to
proactive risk management measures that reduce GLOF risk before an event occurs. A shift towards this
preventative and prepared model will better equip Nemal to manage and respond to GLOFs and associated flooding
and other extreme events, such as landslides. Initial steps towards GLOF risk reduction involved lowering two
priority lakes: Tsho Rolpa and Imja Glacial Lake. While these initial efforts were effective and had important
demonstrative value, their implementation elucidated the need for further action to catalyse sustainable investment
at scale and instituting GLOF risk reduction practice. The proposed project will propel the paradigm shift by
establishing an enabling environment to catalyse investment into lowering other at-risk glacial lakes across Nepal.
While this approach will facilitate public-private partnerships to promote investment, it will also enable the
advancement in GLOF risk reduction in Nepal through the introduced capacities (tools, methods, technologies and
institutional processes). Specifically, the proposed project will introduce an integrated approach that combines
upstream risk reduction measures with downstream interventions and upgraded early warning systems (EWS) to
address residual flood risks that remain after lake lowering. These proposed actions will be complemented by
establishing an improved policy environment, demonstrating the complementarity between GLOF risk reduction
and private-sector interests and leveraging further private investment. Importantly, this paradigm shift in GLOF risk
reduction will go beyond the status quo of meeting immediate needs through project-based, externally funded
disaster recovery towards comprehensive management that will break the current cycle of reactive, precarious and
often expensive measures.
Potential for scaling up and replication
140. Twenty-one of the 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes (PDGLs) identified in a 2020 report prepared by
ICIMOD and UNDP, in collaboration with the government of Nepal (GoN), are located in Nepal. Of these 21 PDGLs,

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 | watersheds. The new stations will improve monitoring capacity and coverage in higher altitude areas, resulting in | 
 | an increase in the reach of warning, adaptive capacity of communities and the number of lives safeguarded. The | 
 | adaptation benefits of the hydrological and meteorological stations built under Output 2 will be enhanced by the | 
 | capacity development initiatives under Outputs 1 and 2 of the project. By training DHM and NDRRMA staff through | 
 | training workshops, the project will strengthen their capacity to use climate information for EWS decision making | 
 | and developing early warning information products — specifically climate-responsive Municipal Disaster | 
 | Preparedness and Response Plans and Local-level Climate-resilient Action Plans. | 
 |  | 
 | Core indicator 8: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation and learning | 
 | processes, and use of good practices, methodologies and standards | 
 | 137. The project will produce customised and targeted risk information for adaptation planning and early warnings | 
 | that will provide strong incentives for private sector investment in future disaster risk reduction initiatives. This will | 
 | include improving DHM’s capacity for hazard mapping and prioritising GLOF risk reduction strategies; and | 
 | establishing a GIS database, supported by geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric | 
 | surveys. Relevant staff from DHM will also be trained on monitoring GLOFs, operating and maintaining existing risk | 
 | databases and disseminating tailored, user-friendly climate risk information to major productive sectors in Nepal, | 
 | including hydropower and tourism sectors. These initiatives will provide the knowledge base required to mobilise | 
 | resources to address climate change issues through PPPs. These PPPs will integrate project-generated risk | 
 | analyses and requirements relating to climate change — as stipulated in national policies and plans. | 
 |  | 
 | 138. In addition to contributing to the CGF’s impact indicators, the project aligns with and contributes to several | 
 | targeted results under the GCF-2 Strategic Plan for 2024-2027. This includes: | 
 | • Target 1 – NDCs, NAPs and LTS: Through the proposed project, GCF contributions will contribute directly to | 
 | the implementation of Nepal’s NAP, specifically in terms of establishing a GLOF risk reduction and early | 
 | warning systems in glaciated river basins, which is identified as a key priority for the country. | 
 | • Target 3 – CIEWS: Output 2 of the proposed project will enhance CIEWs in Nepal through improved hazard | 
 | monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warnings to local communities and important | 
 | economic sectors. This is linked with national targets of Sendai Framework for DRR ( National DRR/ M Strategic | 
 | Action Plan 2018-2030), Paris Agreement( NAP, NDC) and also EW4ALL Initiatives. | 
 | • Target 6 – Infrastructure: The risk reduction actions under Output 3 will build resilience of infrastructure in Nepal | 
 | by reducing GLOF risk through both physical measures and EcoDRR measures. | 
 | • Target 9 – locally-led adaptation action: The project’s approach will promote local ownership to adaptation | 
 | action, as outlined in section D.5 below. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 139. With the increasing intensity and risk of GLOF events, the Government of Nepal (GoN) has identified the | 
 | existing model of reactive response to these extreme events as no longer appropriate and initiated a shift to | 
 | proactive risk management measures that reduce GLOF risk before an event occurs. A shift towards this | 
 | preventative and prepared model will better equip Nemal to manage and respond to GLOFs and associated flooding | 
 | and other extreme events, such as landslides. Initial steps towards GLOF risk reduction involved lowering two | 
 | priority lakes: Tsho Rolpa and Imja Glacial Lake. While these initial efforts were effective and had important | 
 | demonstrative value, their implementation elucidated the need for further action to catalyse sustainable investment | 
 | at scale and instituting GLOF risk reduction practice. The proposed project will propel the paradigm shift by | 
 | establishing an enabling environment to catalyse investment into lowering other at-risk glacial lakes across Nepal. | 
 | While this approach will facilitate public-private partnerships to promote investment, it will also enable the | 
 | advancement in GLOF risk reduction in Nepal through the introduced capacities (tools, methods, technologies and | 
 | institutional processes). Specifically, the proposed project will introduce an integrated approach that combines | 
 | upstream risk reduction measures with downstream interventions and upgraded early warning systems (EWS) to | 
 | address residual flood risks that remain after lake lowering. These proposed actions will be complemented by | 
 | establishing an improved policy environment, demonstrating the complementarity between GLOF risk reduction | 
 | and private-sector interests and leveraging further private investment. Importantly, this paradigm shift in GLOF risk | 
 | reduction will go beyond the status quo of meeting immediate needs through project-based, externally funded | 
 | disaster recovery towards comprehensive management that will break the current cycle of reactive, precarious and | 
 | often expensive measures. | 
 |  | 
 | Potential for scaling up and replication | 
 | 140. Twenty-one of the 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes (PDGLs) identified in a 2020 report prepared by | 
 | ICIMOD and UNDP, in collaboration with the government of Nepal (GoN), are located in Nepal. Of these 21 PDGLs, | 

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
D
the proposed project focuses on reducing the risk of a GLOF at the 4 most at-risk glacial lakes in Nepal, namely
the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes. Under the project, the water levels of these four
lakes will be lowered (Activity 3.1), supported by the implementation of Eco-DRR interventions involving a
combination of engineering (Activity 3.2) and nature-based solutions (Activity 3.3) to reduce the residual impacts
of a GLOF event on vulnerable downstream communities. Such interventions have already proven to be successful
in Nepal (as evidenced under the GEF-funded project, entitled Community Based Flood and Glacial Lake Outburst
Risk Reduction (2013—2017) and by further demonstrating the tangible benefits from these interventions, the
project will promote their use at the remaining 17 PDGLs in Nepal and across the Himalayan region. While not all
of these lakes have been deemed to need specific, urgent intervention and others are currently not considered
technically or economically feasible, climate change is continually altering the risk level of each lake. The risk
monitoring systems under Output 1 will enable DHM to continually monitor the risk at each lake, and prioritise
interventions as needed, ensuring that risks are identified and mitigated as they develop around each lake. Potential
risk reduction measures identified for each PDGL are categorized as structural measures and non-structural
measures, with varying levels of input required. This will create a national framework for ongoing action, ensuring
that government funds available for GLOF are optimized, and external sources – including private sector
partnerships – are sought to bridge finance gaps as the needs arise. While lake lowering is considered one of the
more extreme measures for those most dangerous lakes, earlier interventions will begin with the scaling of non-
structural measures such as EcoDRR and the expansion of GLOF EWS. The National Planning Commission’s Mid-
term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) already includes direct consideration of hydromet observation networks and
EWS, providing the platform for DHM to expand these networks (for example through the establishment of new
stations or upgrading of manual stations in other basins) as well as to carry out studies in high altitudes using
regular government funding sources. Moreover, through DHM’s close engagements and close relationships with
various regional entities working in the GLOF risk reduction space, the lessons learned from the project
implementation in the four target lakes will be shared broadly, ensuring that regional mechanisms currently under
development consider and learn from the experiences in Nepal. The strong focus on knowledge and learning, as
detailed in “Potential for knowledge management and learning” sub-section below will create the foundation for
attracting and sensitizing potential donors and financial partners to support in scaling of project interventions to
remaining PDGLs.
141. In addition to the interventions implemented under Output 3, the project will improve Nepal’s EWS to strengthen
adaptive capacity and response among vulnerable communities in the target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha
and Solukhumbu. Training included under this activity will strengthen the capacity of DHM and NDRRMA and will
support the upscaling of improved EWS beyond the target districts. In addition, this training will support the
upscaling of multi-hazard assessments and integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national
park management plans beyond the target districts and communities. The contribution of the project to the growing
evidence base demonstrating best practices related to GLOF risk reduction, both within Nepal and internationally,
will further support and enable project interventions to be upscaled and replicated. For example, the production of
customised and targeted risk information will provide strong incentives for private-sector investment in future
disaster risk reduction initiatives – including through public-private partnerships (PPPs) which will facilitate cost-
recovery for climate information services as well as direct support for the expansion and maintenance of
observational networks. This work in developing the foundation for ongoing PPPs will include a strong focus on
demonstrating these benefits, alongside sensitising the private sector to the broader financial and economic
benefits from the avoided loss and damage from GLOF risk reduction – for example the potential ~USD10–23M in
prevented losses in the hydropower sector from the proposed risk reduction measures. The successful
implementation of PPPs will provide a proof of concept to leverage future investment in similar impactful lake
lowering and downstream interventions, while the partnerships created on the international stage through the close
engagements with various regional entities working in the GLOF risk reduction space will help navigate the
geopolitics of private investment in GLOF risk reduction in the region. Although the initial co-finance investments
from IPPAN and NTB are limited, they demonstrate the willingness of the private sector to engage in partnerships
that de-risk their businesses, including early warnings and flood risk mitigation. Both sectors have already indicated
general buy in to the benefits of the proposed approach and interest in continued engagement beyond the project.
It is anticipated that the improved understanding of GLOF risk and agreements facilitated by the project, combined
with on-the-ground interventions, will have potential to leverage significant additional finance downstream of the
project, particularly for eco-DRR interventions that align with watershed management investments of the
hydropower producers.
142. The potential for scaling project interventions is boosted by the strong alignment with Nepal’s 15th Five-year
Development Plan. In particular, the project falls within the ambitions of Nepal’s National Strategy 7 which prioritises
the protection of land, forest and water resources, including a focus on strategies for climate change adaptability
and disaster risk reduction.

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
 | the proposed project focuses on reducing the risk of a GLOF at the 4 most at-risk glacial lakes in Nepal, namely |  |  |  | 
 | the Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes. Under the project, the water levels of these four |  |  |  | 
 | lakes will be lowered (Activity 3.1), supported by the implementation of Eco-DRR interventions involving a |  |  |  | 
 | combination of engineering (Activity 3.2) and nature-based solutions (Activity 3.3) to reduce the residual impacts |  |  |  | 
 | of a GLOF event on vulnerable downstream communities. Such interventions have already proven to be successful |  |  |  | 
 | in Nepal (as evidenced under the GEF-funded project, entitled Community Based Flood and Glacial Lake Outburst |  |  |  | 
 | Risk Reduction (2013—2017) and by further demonstrating the tangible benefits from these interventions, the |  |  |  | 
 | project will promote their use at the remaining 17 PDGLs in Nepal and across the Himalayan region. While not all |  |  |  | 
 | of these lakes have been deemed to need specific, urgent intervention and others are currently not considered |  |  |  | 
 | technically or economically feasible, climate change is continually altering the risk level of each lake. The risk |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring systems under Output 1 will enable DHM to continually monitor the risk at each lake, and prioritise |  |  |  | 
 | interventions as needed, ensuring that risks are identified and mitigated as they develop around each lake. Potential |  |  |  | 
 | risk reduction measures identified for each PDGL are categorized as structural measures and non-structural |  |  |  | 
 | measures, with varying levels of input required. This will create a national framework for ongoing action, ensuring |  |  |  | 
 | that government funds available for GLOF are optimized, and external sources – including private sector |  |  |  | 
 | partnerships – are sought to bridge finance gaps as the needs arise. While lake lowering is considered one of the |  |  |  | 
 | more extreme measures for those most dangerous lakes, earlier interventions will begin with the scaling of non- |  |  |  | 
 | structural measures such as EcoDRR and the expansion of GLOF EWS. The National Planning Commission’s Mid- |  |  |  | 
 | term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) already includes direct consideration of hydromet observation networks and |  |  |  | 
 | EWS, providing the platform for DHM to expand these networks (for example through the establishment of new |  |  |  | 
 | stations or upgrading of manual stations in other basins) as well as to carry out studies in high altitudes using |  |  |  | 
 | regular government funding sources. Moreover, through DHM’s close engagements and close relationships with |  |  |  | 
 | various regional entities working in the GLOF risk reduction space, the lessons learned from the project |  |  |  | 
 | implementation in the four target lakes will be shared broadly, ensuring that regional mechanisms currently under |  |  |  | 
 | development consider and learn from the experiences in Nepal. The strong focus on knowledge and learning, as |  |  |  | 
 | detailed in “Potential for knowledge management and learning” sub-section below will create the foundation for |  |  |  | 
 | attracting and sensitizing potential donors and financial partners to support in scaling of project interventions to |  |  |  | 
 | remaining PDGLs. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 141. In addition to the interventions implemented under Output 3, the project will improve Nepal’s EWS to strengthen |  |  |  | 
 | adaptive capacity and response among vulnerable communities in the target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha |  |  |  | 
 | and Solukhumbu. Training included under this activity will strengthen the capacity of DHM and NDRRMA and will |  |  |  | 
 | support the upscaling of improved EWS beyond the target districts. In addition, this training will support the |  |  |  | 
 | upscaling of multi-hazard assessments and integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national |  |  |  | 
 | park management plans beyond the target districts and communities. The contribution of the project to the growing |  |  |  | 
 | evidence base demonstrating best practices related to GLOF risk reduction, both within Nepal and internationally, |  |  |  | 
 | will further support and enable project interventions to be upscaled and replicated. For example, the production of |  |  |  | 
 | customised and targeted risk information will provide strong incentives for private-sector investment in future |  |  |  | 
 | disaster risk reduction initiatives – including through public-private partnerships (PPPs) which will facilitate cost- |  |  |  | 
 | recovery for climate information services as well as direct support for the expansion and maintenance of |  |  |  | 
 | observational networks. This work in developing the foundation for ongoing PPPs will include a strong focus on |  |  |  | 
 | demonstrating these benefits, alongside sensitising the private sector to the broader financial and economic |  |  |  | 
 | benefits from the avoided loss and damage from GLOF risk reduction – for example the potential ~USD10–23M in |  |  |  | 
 | prevented losses in the hydropower sector from the proposed risk reduction measures. The successful |  |  |  | 
 | implementation of PPPs will provide a proof of concept to leverage future investment in similar impactful lake |  |  |  | 
 | lowering and downstream interventions, while the partnerships created on the international stage through the close |  |  |  | 
 | engagements with various regional entities working in the GLOF risk reduction space will help navigate the |  |  |  | 
 | geopolitics of private investment in GLOF risk reduction in the region. Although the initial co-finance investments |  |  |  | 
 | from IPPAN and NTB are limited, they demonstrate the willingness of the private sector to engage in partnerships |  |  |  | 
 | that de-risk their businesses, including early warnings and flood risk mitigation. Both sectors have already indicated |  |  |  | 
 | general buy in to the benefits of the proposed approach and interest in continued engagement beyond the project. |  |  |  | 
 | It is anticipated that the improved understanding of GLOF risk and agreements facilitated by the project, combined |  |  |  | 
 | with on-the-ground interventions, will have potential to leverage significant additional finance downstream of the |  |  |  | 
 | project, particularly for eco-DRR interventions that align with watershed management investments of the |  |  |  | 
 | hydropower producers. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 142. |  | The potential for scaling project interventions is boosted by the strong alignment with Nepal’s 15th Five-year |  | 
 |  | Development Plan. In particular, the project falls within the ambitions of Nepal’s National Strategy 7 which prioritises |  |  | 
 |  | the protection of land, forest and water resources, including a focus on strategies for climate change adaptability |  |  | 
 |  | and disaster risk reduction. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
D
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
143. To support the uptake of the new adaptation interventions in Nepal, an enabling environment will be created
for enhanced planning for and response to GLOF events. Specifically, regulatory structures for improving
watershed management and incorporating climate risk information into planning and decision-making will be
developed under Activity 1.1. This will be supported by the establishment of mechanisms for private sector
involvement in flood risk information services (Activity 1.2) to enable ongoing partnerships between the private
sector and the DHM, which is mandated to generate and disseminate climate risk information to facilitate rapid
response. DHM’s capacity to fulfil its mandate will be strengthened by expanding the existing hydrometeorological
monitoring network and improving its in-house capacity to undertake hazard mapping, climate research and risk
reduction strategy development (Activity 2.1). These improvements will be complemented by establishing an
enabling environment for early action and community-based disaster risk reduction for end-users of climate risk
information through the development of EWS and community-based GLOF risk reduction activities (Activity 2.2).
The implementation of downstream measures under Activity 3.3 will be supported by capacity development and
training for government stakeholders (such as DHM and NDRRMA), community members, CBOs and NGOs. This
training and capacity building will enable the development and implementation of multi-hazard assessment, and
integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national park management plans. A key aspect of the
a sustainable enabling environment is ensuring local ownership of project interventions. Please see Section B.6 for
detailed discussion on how the project will promote the transfer of ownership to local entities – a concept that has
been embedded throughout the project design.
Potential for knowledge management and learning
144. The project includes numerous activities that will contribute to knowledge management and learning. First, the
project will contribute substantially to the body of knowledge on how to approach and undertake the highly technical
task of lake lowering to reduce the risk of GLOF events occurring. Lake lowering is technically difficult and has only
been done a handful of times in the Himalayas. The involvement of government institutions and the Nepalese army
in implementing the lake lowering interventions for the proposed project will help to ensure that learning is held in
institutional memory to benefit future GLOF risk reduction efforts. Second, Activity 1.1 will strengthen technical
capacity for hazard mapping and creating systems for databasing climate-induced hazard, which will contribute to
the longevity of technical flood risk reduction knowledge by making that information more widely accessible. Third,
the design of the proposed project accounts for mutual learning and knowledge sharing by working with
communities in the implementation, operation and maintenance of lake-lowering, downstream residual risk
reduction interventions and EWS. Additionally, capacity development and training workshops will strengthen
knowledge management and learning among government stakeholders, CBOs, NGOs and vulnerable
communities. During implementation, opportunities for local and indigenous knowledge to be continually
incorporated into DRR strategies will be sought.
145. The knowledge and lessons generated under the project will be properly archived within DHM, GoN, the Nepalese
Army, UNDP as well as the communities in the project areas. Additionally, relevant knowledge products and lessons
will be widely disseminated through national and internal media and communications events. Cross-institutional
ties established under the project will support effective dissemination and utilisation of information for future GLOF
risk reduction interventions beyond the project timeframe. Accordingly, the knowledge and learning gained from
the project, along with the strengthened regulatory and institutional mechanisms, will help maintain an enabling
environment for proactive approaches to GLOF risk management, thereby increasing the sustainability of the
paradigm shift catalysed under the project.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
146. The proposed project will contribute towards achieving 4 of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
These are: SDG 3 — Good health and well-being; SDG 5 — Gender equality; SDG 11 — Sustainable cities and
communities; SDG 13 — Climate action; and SDG 15 — Life on Land. The contribution of the proposed project to
these SDGs aligns with Nepal’s 15th Five-Year Development Plan (2019/20–2023/24)72 by providing the
Necessary Conditions (NCs) to achieve the country’s goals and objectives. First, by contributing to SDGs 11 and
13, the project will assist in the achievement of the goals for multiple sectors outlined in the Development Plan,
including: i) Disaster Risk Reduction and Management — To reduce human, material, economic, social, cultural,
and environmental loss caused by all kinds of natural calamities and non-natural disasters; ii) Climate Change —
To contribute to building a sustainable society by augmenting the capacity to adapt to climate change and
minimizing its adverse effects; and iii) Hydrology and Meteorology — To help in protecting the lives and properties
of citizens and support the development of sustainable infrastructure through reliable hydrological and
meteorological services. Secondly, by supporting SDGs 3 and 5, the project will contribute to the country’s goals in
72 National Planning Commission, Govern ment of Nepal. The Fifteenth Plan (Fiscal Year 2019/20 – 2023/24). Kathmandu. Available at:
https://npc.gov.np/images/category/15th_plan_English_Version.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
 | Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment | 
 | 143. To support the uptake of the new adaptation interventions in Nepal, an enabling environment will be created | 
 | for enhanced planning for and response to GLOF events. Specifically, regulatory structures for improving | 
 | watershed management and incorporating climate risk information into planning and decision-making will be | 
 | developed under Activity 1.1. This will be supported by the establishment of mechanisms for private sector | 
 | involvement in flood risk information services (Activity 1.2) to enable ongoing partnerships between the private | 
 | sector and the DHM, which is mandated to generate and disseminate climate risk information to facilitate rapid | 
 | response. DHM’s capacity to fulfil its mandate will be strengthened by expanding the existing hydrometeorological | 
 | monitoring network and improving its in-house capacity to undertake hazard mapping, climate research and risk | 
 | reduction strategy development (Activity 2.1). These improvements will be complemented by establishing an | 
 | enabling environment for early action and community-based disaster risk reduction for end-users of climate risk | 
 | information through the development of EWS and community-based GLOF risk reduction activities (Activity 2.2). | 
 | The implementation of downstream measures under Activity 3.3 will be supported by capacity development and | 
 | training for government stakeholders (such as DHM and NDRRMA), community members, CBOs and NGOs. This | 
 | training and capacity building will enable the development and implementation of multi-hazard assessment, and | 
 | integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national park management plans. A key aspect of the | 
 | a sustainable enabling environment is ensuring local ownership of project interventions. Please see Section B.6 for | 
 | detailed discussion on how the project will promote the transfer of ownership to local entities – a concept that has | 
 | been embedded throughout the project design. | 
 |  | 
 | Potential for knowledge management and learning | 
 | 144. The project includes numerous activities that will contribute to knowledge management and learning. First, the | 
 | project will contribute substantially to the body of knowledge on how to approach and undertake the highly technical | 
 | task of lake lowering to reduce the risk of GLOF events occurring. Lake lowering is technically difficult and has only | 
 | been done a handful of times in the Himalayas. The involvement of government institutions and the Nepalese army | 
 | in implementing the lake lowering interventions for the proposed project will help to ensure that learning is held in | 
 | institutional memory to benefit future GLOF risk reduction efforts. Second, Activity 1.1 will strengthen technical | 
 | capacity for hazard mapping and creating systems for databasing climate-induced hazard, which will contribute to | 
 | the longevity of technical flood risk reduction knowledge by making that information more widely accessible. Third, | 
 | the design of the proposed project accounts for mutual learning and knowledge sharing by working with | 
 | communities in the implementation, operation and maintenance of lake-lowering, downstream residual risk | 
 | reduction interventions and EWS. Additionally, capacity development and training workshops will strengthen | 
 | knowledge management and learning among government stakeholders, CBOs, NGOs and vulnerable | 
 | communities. During implementation, opportunities for local and indigenous knowledge to be continually | 
 | incorporated into DRR strategies will be sought. | 
 |  | 
 | 145. The knowledge and lessons generated under the project will be properly archived within DHM, GoN, the Nepalese | 
 | Army, UNDP as well as the communities in the project areas. Additionally, relevant knowledge products and lessons | 
 | will be widely disseminated through national and internal media and communications events. Cross-institutional | 
 | ties established under the project will support effective dissemination and utilisation of information for future GLOF | 
 | risk reduction interventions beyond the project timeframe. Accordingly, the knowledge and learning gained from | 
 | the project, along with the strengthened regulatory and institutional mechanisms, will help maintain an enabling | 
 | environment for proactive approaches to GLOF risk management, thereby increasing the sustainability of the | 
 | paradigm shift catalysed under the project. | 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 146. The proposed project will contribute towards achieving 4 of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). | 
 | These are: SDG 3 — Good health and well-being; SDG 5 — Gender equality; SDG 11 — Sustainable cities and | 
 | communities; SDG 13 — Climate action; and SDG 15 — Life on Land. The contribution of the proposed project to | 
 | these SDGs aligns with Nepal’s 15th Five-Year Development Plan (2019/20–2023/24)72 by providing the | 
 | Necessary Conditions (NCs) to achieve the country’s goals and objectives. First, by contributing to SDGs 11 and | 
 | 13, the project will assist in the achievement of the goals for multiple sectors outlined in the Development Plan, | 
 | including: i) Disaster Risk Reduction and Management — To reduce human, material, economic, social, cultural, | 
 | and environmental loss caused by all kinds of natural calamities and non-natural disasters; ii) Climate Change — | 
 | To contribute to building a sustainable society by augmenting the capacity to adapt to climate change and | 
 | minimizing its adverse effects; and iii) Hydrology and Meteorology — To help in protecting the lives and properties | 
 | of citizens and support the development of sustainable infrastructure through reliable hydrological and | 
 | meteorological services. Secondly, by supporting SDGs 3 and 5, the project will contribute to the country’s goals in | 

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
D
the following sectors: i) Gender Equality and Women Empowerment — To achieve substantial gender equality by
ensuring equal and meaningful participation of women; and ii) Inclusion — Inclusive development with the presence
and meaningful participation of all citizens of the state. In addition, numerous environmental, social and economic
co-benefits will be achieved through project interventions as described below.
Environmental co-benefits
147. Reducing the likelihood and impacts of a Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) in Nepal, upgrading and
expanding the country’s existing hydrological and meteorological Early Warning Systems (EWS) and implementing
downstream Eco-DRR solutions will yield several environmental co-benefits. These benefits are outlined below.
• The reforestation of mountain slopes, planting of grass seedlings and revegetation of riparian areas will contribute
to improved soil stability and consequently reduce erosion. This will improve the quality of soils and promote
infiltration of rainwater, which will reduce the impacts of intense rainfall on riverine areas.
• The reforestation interventions will also have a mitigation co-benefit, as the 4.6 million trees and other vegetation
planted will sequester atmospheric carbon (490 ha of tree and vegetation coverage73).
• Preventing soil erosion, sequestering atmospheric carbon and creating environmental buffers, all of which will be
restored and/or maintained through the project will contribute to regulatory environmental services in the target
areas.
• Securing and improving freshwater supply and nutrient supply through reforestation and erosion reduction
interventions will also contribute to environmental provisioning services in Nepal.
• Climate-related information collected by the upgraded EWS will be utilized by the agricultural sector to improve
crop selection and harvest planning.
Social and Economic co-benefits
148. Reducing the risk of a GLOF and rainfall-induced floods occurring and severely impacting vulnerable
communities in Nepal will increase the resilience of these communities and provide several social and economic
co-benefits. These benefits are described below.
• Decreasing the amounts of stagnant water post-flood will reduce the prevalence of water- and vector-borne
diseases. This outcome will alleviate the burden on post-disaster emergency response services and local
healthcare systems.
• Involving community members living near and the target lakes in the construction process of lowering the target
lakes will promote the uptake and ownership of this GLOF risk reduction measure beyond the project period which,
in turn, will contribute to securing their lives and livelihoods under future climate change conditions.
• Improving preparedness of local communities for flood events through upgraded and expanded EWS and climate
information services will reduce personal financial losses of community members. This is because communities will
be better prepared to secure their personal assets in anticipation of a GLOF or rainfall-induced flood.
• Close engagements with Indigenous Peoples throughout the development of local early warning and response
mechanisms will ensure the preservation of indigenous knowledge and promote inclusion of IPs in the decision
making processes.
• The reduction in GLOF risk can be leveraged by the tourism industry to promote ecotourism activities in targeted
watersheds. The anticipated increase in tourism will create employment opportunities for local workers and
entrepreneurs, as well as yielding economic benefits to the communities.
• The interventions will reduce the severity of GLOF impacts on hydropower installations in the target area, benefitting
the energy sector and supporting stable energy supply in the region. Decreasing the risk of severe damage to
hydropower installations posed by flood impacts will not only decrease costs of physical damage (primary project
benefit) but will also prevent long-term power supply loss after an extreme event. This, in turn, will enable relief
efforts, communication networks and local businesses to continue operating as normal during and immediately
after and extreme event.
• Multiple sectors will benefit from avoided and reduced damages, in particular the agriculture and tourism sectors,
where agricultural productivity and infrastructure as well as tourism facilities will be safeguarded from the impacts
of GLOFs. Local businesses and industry in the target areas will benefit as their infrastructure and operations will
be less severely impacted, and these will all be supported by the benefits to the energy sector with reduced energy
supply interruptions. This will also provide social co-benefits of food and income security. The agriculture and
tourism sectors will also be supported through the environmental co-benefits listed above, as agricultural land and
fertile soils will have reduced impacts and natural environments that attract tourists will also be less severely
affected.
73 This value is calculated by adding toge ther the area covered by the grass seedlings (298,162 m2) and the 4.6 millions trees (4,600,000
m2). Figure 16 was used to calculate the area covered by the 4.6 million trees.

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
 | the following sectors: i) Gender Equality and Women Empowerment — To achieve substantial gender equality by | 
 | ensuring equal and meaningful participation of women; and ii) Inclusion — Inclusive development with the presence | 
 | and meaningful participation of all citizens of the state. In addition, numerous environmental, social and economic | 
 | co-benefits will be achieved through project interventions as described below. | 
 |  | 
 | Environmental co-benefits | 
 | 147. Reducing the likelihood and impacts of a Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) in Nepal, upgrading and | 
 | expanding the country’s existing hydrological and meteorological Early Warning Systems (EWS) and implementing | 
 | downstream Eco-DRR solutions will yield several environmental co-benefits. These benefits are outlined below. | 
 |  | 
 | • The reforestation of mountain slopes, planting of grass seedlings and revegetation of riparian areas will contribute | 
 | to improved soil stability and consequently reduce erosion. This will improve the quality of soils and promote | 
 | infiltration of rainwater, which will reduce the impacts of intense rainfall on riverine areas. | 
 | • The reforestation interventions will also have a mitigation co-benefit, as the 4.6 million trees and other vegetation | 
 | planted will sequester atmospheric carbon (490 ha of tree and vegetation coverage73). | 
 | • Preventing soil erosion, sequestering atmospheric carbon and creating environmental buffers, all of which will be | 
 | restored and/or maintained through the project will contribute to regulatory environmental services in the target | 
 | areas. | 
 | • Securing and improving freshwater supply and nutrient supply through reforestation and erosion reduction | 
 | interventions will also contribute to environmental provisioning services in Nepal. | 
 | • Climate-related information collected by the upgraded EWS will be utilized by the agricultural sector to improve | 
 | crop selection and harvest planning. | 
 |  | 
 | Social and Economic co-benefits | 
 | 148. Reducing the risk of a GLOF and rainfall-induced floods occurring and severely impacting vulnerable | 
 | communities in Nepal will increase the resilience of these communities and provide several social and economic | 
 | co-benefits. These benefits are described below. | 
 |  | 
 | • Decreasing the amounts of stagnant water post-flood will reduce the prevalence of water- and vector-borne | 
 | diseases. This outcome will alleviate the burden on post-disaster emergency response services and local | 
 | healthcare systems. | 
 | • Involving community members living near and the target lakes in the construction process of lowering the target | 
 | lakes will promote the uptake and ownership of this GLOF risk reduction measure beyond the project period which, | 
 | in turn, will contribute to securing their lives and livelihoods under future climate change conditions. | 
 | • Improving preparedness of local communities for flood events through upgraded and expanded EWS and climate | 
 | information services will reduce personal financial losses of community members. This is because communities will | 
 | be better prepared to secure their personal assets in anticipation of a GLOF or rainfall-induced flood. | 
 | • Close engagements with Indigenous Peoples throughout the development of local early warning and response | 
 | mechanisms will ensure the preservation of indigenous knowledge and promote inclusion of IPs in the decision | 
 | making processes. | 
 | • The reduction in GLOF risk can be leveraged by the tourism industry to promote ecotourism activities in targeted | 
 | watersheds. The anticipated increase in tourism will create employment opportunities for local workers and | 
 | entrepreneurs, as well as yielding economic benefits to the communities. | 
 | • The interventions will reduce the severity of GLOF impacts on hydropower installations in the target area, benefitting | 
 | the energy sector and supporting stable energy supply in the region. Decreasing the risk of severe damage to | 
 | hydropower installations posed by flood impacts will not only decrease costs of physical damage (primary project | 
 | benefit) but will also prevent long-term power supply loss after an extreme event. This, in turn, will enable relief | 
 | efforts, communication networks and local businesses to continue operating as normal during and immediately | 
 | after and extreme event. | 
 | • Multiple sectors will benefit from avoided and reduced damages, in particular the agriculture and tourism sectors, | 
 | where agricultural productivity and infrastructure as well as tourism facilities will be safeguarded from the impacts | 
 | of GLOFs. Local businesses and industry in the target areas will benefit as their infrastructure and operations will | 
 | be less severely impacted, and these will all be supported by the benefits to the energy sector with reduced energy | 
 | supply interruptions. This will also provide social co-benefits of food and income security. The agriculture and | 
 | tourism sectors will also be supported through the environmental co-benefits listed above, as agricultural land and | 
 | fertile soils will have reduced impacts and natural environments that attract tourists will also be less severely | 
 | affected. | 

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
D
• Reducing damages caused by a GLOF will decrease the time required for economic sectors to become operational
and for communities to recover immediately following GLOF or rainfall-induced flood events.
• Training community members living near and the target lakes on the engineering and civil works required to lower
the target lakes will embed the skills and knowledge of this process within the communities. This will not only
contribute towards securing the sustainability of this adaptation measure, but also substantially improve the
employability — and subsequently livelihoods — of participating community members to undertake similar
construction, engineering and civil works in the future as the demand for such expertise increases under climate
change conditions.
Gender-sensitive development impact
149. The reduction in the likelihood and potential impacts of GLOFs will help to limit the disruptions to critical health,
education and care services following these events. Given the gendered demographics of the employees and users
of these institutions, as well as gendered vulnerability to climate change, the project will facilitate gender-sensitive
development, as described below.
• Reducing disruptions to the functioning of public buildings and the delivery of primary services will enable both
women and men’s economic and household activities to resume without unnecessary delay, following GLOF or
rainfall-induced flood event.
• The project gender action plan (GAP) has outlined actions to promote gender equality in project implementation
that include: i) development of a practical Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) working strategy guideline
for rural municipalities and wards; ii) measures to support and increase women’s and socially excluded groups’
effective and meaningful decision-making on climate change induced disaster iii) integration of GESI into Climate
Change Adaptation (CCA) or Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) or GLOF-related training manuals and organisation
of participatory GESI awareness workshops. There will also be integration of GESI into CCA, DRR and GLOF risk
management training and coaching; iv) Updating EWS knowledge products, training manuals, methods and
approaches to make them responsive to the experiences of women and highly marginalized groups; v) Integration
of GESI in the development of long-term integrated watershed management strategy for managing GLOF risks for
each glacial watershed.
• Women’s groups already play a critical role in Community-Based Flood Early Warning Systems (CBFEWS) in
Nepal. The GAP prioritises collaboration with these groups to improve GESI throughout all stages of the project,
seeking to support and expand these groups through the project activities, including to increase decision making
and leadership opportunities and engagement.
• Through these measures, the project addresses the underlying factors contributing to gender inequality in the
country, thereby contributing to gender-sensitive sustainability beyond the project’s lifetime.
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Vulnerability of the country
150. Nepal is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change-induced disasters, ranking within
the top 10 countries most affected by climate change on the long-term global Climate Risk Index from 2009 to
201974. The country’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) identifies several primary reasons for the
country’s vulnerability, including: i) the country’s fragile topography; ii) climate sensitive livelihoods of the people;
and iii) limited adaptive capacity75.
151. Reports from Nepal’s Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA)76 indicate that over the past 10 years, more than 4,000
people have died from climate change-induced disasters. Moreover, these disasters have resulted in accumulated
economic losses of US$5.34 billion as of 201577. In particular, the frequency of GLOFs has already increased, with
this trend expected to continue under future climate change conditions78. Such events have severe impacts on
Nepal — including loss of lives and livelihoods, and damages to infrastructure and transportation routes — and are
exacerbated by the country’s economic composition. For example, tourism makes up a large portion of the country’s
GDP, accounting for 6.7% in 201979. The aftermath of extreme events significantly reduces tourist activity and
damages vital infrastructure for these industries. This not only affects revenue generation but also leads to
74 Global Climate Risk Index 2021. More information available at:
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202021_1_0.pdf
75 Adaptive capacity relates to the capacity of systems, institutions, humans and other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take
advantage of opportunities, or to respond to consequences.
76 Nepal Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) Nepal Disaster Report, 2019.
77 Nepal Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA). Disaster Preparedness Network, 2018.
78 Further details on observed and projected GLOF events are presented in Section 3.2 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
79 Travel & Tourism Economic Impact 2020. Nepal. 2020. World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC)

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 | • Reducing damages caused by a GLOF will decrease the time required for economic sectors to become operational | 
 | and for communities to recover immediately following GLOF or rainfall-induced flood events. | 
 | • Training community members living near and the target lakes on the engineering and civil works required to lower | 
 | the target lakes will embed the skills and knowledge of this process within the communities. This will not only | 
 | contribute towards securing the sustainability of this adaptation measure, but also substantially improve the | 
 | employability — and subsequently livelihoods — of participating community members to undertake similar | 
 | construction, engineering and civil works in the future as the demand for such expertise increases under climate | 
 | change conditions. | 
 |  | 
 | Gender-sensitive development impact | 
 | 149. The reduction in the likelihood and potential impacts of GLOFs will help to limit the disruptions to critical health, | 
 | education and care services following these events. Given the gendered demographics of the employees and users | 
 | of these institutions, as well as gendered vulnerability to climate change, the project will facilitate gender-sensitive | 
 | development, as described below. | 
 |  | 
 | • Reducing disruptions to the functioning of public buildings and the delivery of primary services will enable both | 
 | women and men’s economic and household activities to resume without unnecessary delay, following GLOF or | 
 | rainfall-induced flood event. | 
 | • The project gender action plan (GAP) has outlined actions to promote gender equality in project implementation | 
 | that include: i) development of a practical Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) working strategy guideline | 
 | for rural municipalities and wards; ii) measures to support and increase women’s and socially excluded groups’ | 
 | effective and meaningful decision-making on climate change induced disaster iii) integration of GESI into Climate | 
 | Change Adaptation (CCA) or Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) or GLOF-related training manuals and organisation | 
 | of participatory GESI awareness workshops. There will also be integration of GESI into CCA, DRR and GLOF risk | 
 | management training and coaching; iv) Updating EWS knowledge products, training manuals, methods and | 
 | approaches to make them responsive to the experiences of women and highly marginalized groups; v) Integration | 
 | of GESI in the development of long-term integrated watershed management strategy for managing GLOF risks for | 
 | each glacial watershed. | 
 | • Women’s groups already play a critical role in Community-Based Flood Early Warning Systems (CBFEWS) in | 
 | Nepal. The GAP prioritises collaboration with these groups to improve GESI throughout all stages of the project, | 
 | seeking to support and expand these groups through the project activities, including to increase decision making | 
 | and leadership opportunities and engagement. | 
 | • Through these measures, the project addresses the underlying factors contributing to gender inequality in the | 
 | country, thereby contributing to gender-sensitive sustainability beyond the project’s lifetime. | 
 |  | 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | Vulnerability of the country | 
 | 150. Nepal is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change-induced disasters, ranking within | 
 | the top 10 countries most affected by climate change on the long-term global Climate Risk Index from 2009 to | 
 | 201974. The country’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) identifies several primary reasons for the | 
 | country’s vulnerability, including: i) the country’s fragile topography; ii) climate sensitive livelihoods of the people; | 
 | and iii) limited adaptive capacity75. | 
 |  | 
 | 151. Reports from Nepal’s Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA)76 indicate that over the past 10 years, more than 4,000 | 
 | people have died from climate change-induced disasters. Moreover, these disasters have resulted in accumulated | 
 | economic losses of US$5.34 billion as of 201577. In particular, the frequency of GLOFs has already increased, with | 
 | this trend expected to continue under future climate change conditions78. Such events have severe impacts on | 
 | Nepal — including loss of lives and livelihoods, and damages to infrastructure and transportation routes — and are | 
 | exacerbated by the country’s economic composition. For example, tourism makes up a large portion of the country’s | 
 | GDP, accounting for 6.7% in 201979. The aftermath of extreme events significantly reduces tourist activity and | 
 | damages vital infrastructure for these industries. This not only affects revenue generation but also leads to | 

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
D
increased unemployment in the tourism sector. The impacts of GLOFs and other extreme climate events — such
as landslides and extreme flooding — also hinder the development of Nepal’s hydropower potential. While
developing this sector would be crucial for the country — which currently ranks 137th out of 147 countries on a
scale of quality of electricity supply80 — current run-of-the-river hydropower plants81 are dependent on rainfall
patterns for continued power supply from water flow. These hydropower plants are therefore extremely vulnerable
to climate change, evidenced by power shortages that are experienced during the dry season when energy demand
rises as water flow decreases. This problem will become increasingly severe under future climate change
conditions, where more variable rainfall patterns and longer dry seasons are expected.
Vulnerability of beneficiary groups
152. While poverty has decreased in Nepal in recent years from 68% of the population in 1996 to 25% in 201182,
this progress is not equally spread across the country. Some social groups and geographical areas remain far
below the national income poverty line of US$1.90/day83. In particular, economic and human development has
been constrained in the country’s mountainous Himalayan region where the proposed project’s target basins —
the Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-basins — are located. This is largely because these areas are inaccessible to the
majority of the population and extremely vulnerable to GLOFs, flooding and other extreme events such as
landslides. These events cause significant damage to important infrastructure, including roads, which provide
access to food supplies, goods and disaster relief services. This results in critical services becoming non-
operational, leading to further reductions in economic productivity and increases the vulnerability of target
communities. Moreover, vulnerable communities in the project areas are impacted by climate change because their
livelihoods (e.g. agriculture and tourism) are concentrated in downstream areas which are exposed to the flooding
and landslides caused by GLOFs. A low capacity to manage or respond to risks to mitigate the negative effects of
climate change impacts further compounds the pressure on these communities.
Socioeconomic status
153. Nepal’s Human Development Index (HDI) value for 2019 was 0.602, which ranks at 142 out of 189 countries
and territories, placing the country in the “medium development” category. While Nepal’s HDI has increased from
0.380 in 1990 and major poverty reduction has been achieved in recent years, Nepal still ranks below most
neighbouring countries’ HDI values. In addition to an increased HDI, the country has also seen an increase in its
Gross National Income (GNI) per capita by 151% from 1990 to 201984. Despite this, recent surveys of national
living standards indicate that 30% of the population live below the national poverty line of US$1.90/day85. Current
costs associated with the impacts of climate change and extreme events are estimated at US$270-360 million per
year, approximately 1.5 to 2% of the country’s 2014 GDP86.
Institutional capacity needs
154. The Government of Nepal (GoN) currently has limited technical capacity and institutional capacity to implement
efficient and effective GLOF and disaster risk reduction measures. This results in national- and local-level decision-
makers becoming locked into a cycle of reacting to GLOFs and other extreme events, as opposed to developing
pre-emptive measures to mitigate the impacts and risks of GLOFs in Nepal. There is therefore an urgent need to:
i) improve the country’s GLOF EWS; and ii) develop comprehensive preparedness plans to facilitate proactive
action and rapid response to impending GLOFs, flooding and other extreme events.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
155. Managing the impacts of GLOFs, climate change-induced flooding and other impacts of extreme climate events
(such as landslides and heatwaves) are high priorities for the GoN. This is evident in the government’s preparation
of several national policies and strategic plans focused on climate change adaptation, with which the project is
strongly aligned. The project’s alignment with these priorities and plans is described below.
156. The GoN’s Climate Change Policy (2019) is being implemented by numerous sectoral ministries and
subnational entities to address the impacts of climate change in the country87. Its objectives are to: i) enhance
climate change adaptation capacity of communities vulnerable to climate change; ii) increase resilience of
80 ADB. 2015. Asian Development Outloo k 2015: Financing Asia’s Future Growth. Manila.
81 Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity is a type of hydroelectric generation plant with no water storage at all or a limited amount of storage.
82 Country Poverty Analysis – Nepal, Asian Development Bank 2017. More information available at:
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/cps-nep-2013-2017-pa-detailed.pdf
83 World Bank, 2019. More information available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/NP
84 Human Development Report 202, UNDP. More information available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-
notes/NPL.pdf
85 World Bank, 2019. More information available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/NP
86 IDS-Nepal, PAC and GCAP. 2014. Economic Impact Assessment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal:
Integrated Development Society (IDS).
87 GoN. 2020. Climate Change Policy, 2076.

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
 | increased unemployment in the tourism sector. The impacts of GLOFs and other extreme climate events — such |  |  |  |  | 
 | as landslides and extreme flooding — also hinder the development of Nepal’s hydropower potential. While |  |  |  |  | 
 | developing this sector would be crucial for the country — which currently ranks 137th out of 147 countries on a |  |  |  |  | 
 | scale of quality of electricity supply80 — current run-of-the-river hydropower plants81 are dependent on rainfall |  |  |  |  | 
 | patterns for continued power supply from water flow. These hydropower plants are therefore extremely vulnerable |  |  |  |  | 
 | to climate change, evidenced by power shortages that are experienced during the dry season when energy demand |  |  |  |  | 
 | rises as water flow decreases. This problem will become increasingly severe under future climate change |  |  |  |  | 
 | conditions, where more variable rainfall patterns and longer dry seasons are expected. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Vulnerability of beneficiary groups |  |  |  |  | 
 | 152. While poverty has decreased in Nepal in recent years from 68% of the population in 1996 to 25% in 201182, |  |  |  |  | 
 | this progress is not equally spread across the country. Some social groups and geographical areas remain far |  |  |  |  | 
 | below the national income poverty line of US$1.90/day83. In particular, economic and human development has |  |  |  |  | 
 | been constrained in the country’s mountainous Himalayan region where the proposed project’s target basins — |  |  |  |  | 
 | the Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-basins — are located. This is largely because these areas are inaccessible to the |  |  |  |  | 
 | majority of the population and extremely vulnerable to GLOFs, flooding and other extreme events such as |  |  |  |  | 
 | landslides. These events cause significant damage to important infrastructure, including roads, which provide |  |  |  |  | 
 | access to food supplies, goods and disaster relief services. This results in critical services becoming non- |  |  |  |  | 
 | operational, leading to further reductions in economic productivity and increases the vulnerability of target |  |  |  |  | 
 | communities. Moreover, vulnerable communities in the project areas are impacted by climate change because their |  |  |  |  | 
 | livelihoods (e.g. agriculture and tourism) are concentrated in downstream areas which are exposed to the flooding |  |  |  |  | 
 | and landslides caused by GLOFs. A low capacity to manage or respond to risks to mitigate the negative effects of |  |  |  |  | 
 | climate change impacts further compounds the pressure on these communities. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Socioeconomic status |  |  |  |  | 
 | 153. Nepal’s Human Development Index (HDI) value for 2019 was 0.602, which ranks at 142 out of 189 countries |  |  |  |  | 
 | and territories, placing the country in the “medium development” category. While Nepal’s HDI has increased from |  |  |  |  | 
 | 0.380 in 1990 and major poverty reduction has been achieved in recent years, Nepal still ranks below most |  |  |  |  | 
 | neighbouring countries’ HDI values. In addition to an increased HDI, the country has also seen an increase in its |  |  |  |  | 
 | Gross National Income (GNI) per capita by 151% from 1990 to 201984. Despite this, recent surveys of national |  |  |  |  | 
 | living standards indicate that 30% of the population live below the national poverty line of US$1.90/day85. Current |  |  |  |  | 
 | costs associated with the impacts of climate change and extreme events are estimated at US$270-360 million per |  |  |  |  | 
 | year, approximately 1.5 to 2% of the country’s 2014 GDP86. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Institutional capacity needs |  |  |  |  | 
 | 154. The Government of Nepal (GoN) currently has limited technical capacity and institutional capacity to implement |  |  |  |  | 
 | efficient and effective GLOF and disaster risk reduction measures. This results in national- and local-level decision- |  |  |  |  | 
 | makers becoming locked into a cycle of reacting to GLOFs and other extreme events, as opposed to developing |  |  |  |  | 
 | pre-emptive measures to mitigate the impacts and risks of GLOFs in Nepal. There is therefore an urgent need to: |  |  |  |  | 
 | i) improve the country’s GLOF EWS; and ii) develop comprehensive preparedness plans to facilitate proactive |  |  |  |  | 
 | action and rapid response to impending GLOFs, flooding and other extreme events. |  |  |  |  | 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 155. |  | Managing the impacts of GLOFs, climate change-induced flooding and other impacts of extreme climate events |  |  | 
 |  | (such as landslides and heatwaves) are high priorities for the GoN. This is evident in the government’s preparation |  |  |  | 
 |  | of several national policies and strategic plans focused on climate change adaptation, with which the project is |  |  |  | 
 |  | strongly aligned. The project’s alignment with these priorities and plans is described below. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 156. The GoN’s |  |  | Climate Change Policy (2019) is being implemented by numerous sectoral ministries and |  | 
 |  | subnational entities to address the impacts of climate change in the country87. Its objectives are to: i) enhance |  |  |  | 
 |  | climate change adaptation capacity of communities vulnerable to climate change; ii) increase resilience of |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
D
vulnerable ecosystems; iii) promote a transition to a green economy; iv) mobilise national and international financial
resources for climate change adaptation and mitigation; v) mainstream climate change issues into national and
subnational policies, strategies and plans; vi) mainstream gender equality and social inclusion into climate change
programs; and vii) increase the use of reliable forecasting in planning for disaster risk reduction88. In alignment with
these objectives, the proposed project will facilitate adaptation to climate change by reducing the exposure and
impacts of GLOFs and flooding on vulnerable communities. In particular, under Output 2 early warning systems
(EWS) will be developed for improved disaster risk reduction (DRR) monitoring, response and information
dissemination to communities vulnerable to GLOFs.
The Country Programme Document for Nepal (2023-2027) outlines UNDP’s contributions to Nepal’s
development in three main areas of work, namely inclusive economic growth, strengthened governance systems
157.and increased climate adaption and environmental resilience. Specifically, the document provides an overview of
the country’s five-year development ambitions led by UNDP based on nation-wide consultations, the SDGs and
Nepal's Fourteenth Development Plan. Key priority areas for the country programme include to: i) promote inclusive
and resilient economic growth founded on decent jobs, an integrated social security and protection system and
sound policies that enhance productivity and investments and reduce multidimensional poverty; ii) improve the
coherence and quality of governance across the three tiers of government to ensure constitutional rights, access
to justice and empower people, especially women and marginalized communities, to exercise agency over their
lives; and iii) advance resilient and sustainable systems for use of natural resources through public policies, strong
institutions and active community participation89. The proposed project is well aligned with the country programme
as vulnerability to climate change-induced GLOFs and flooding will be addressed through a variety of activities,
including lake lowering and diversion infrastructure, eco-DRR, and EWS monitoring improvements. Furthermore,
the project will develop local and national technical capacity for understanding and utilising climate risk and hazard
information (Output 1). This will include strengthening the institutional knowledge-base and developing policy and
fiscal mechanisms for information services focusing specifically on GLOF and flood risk.
158. Nepal’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) (2010) identifies th e GoN’s priority activities
towards climate change adaptation90. These priority profiles, as related to flood risk reduction, include: i) promoting
community-based adaption through integrated management of the agricultural, water, forest and biodiversity
sectors; ii) community-based disaster management for facilitating climate change adaptation; iii) GLOF monitoring
and disaster risk reduction; iv) ecosystem management for climate change adaptation; and v) empowering
vulnerable communities through sustainable management of water resources and clean energy supply91. The
proposed project will contribute towards the NAPA’s goals of addressing GLOF and flooding risk, as well as
adaptation and community upliftment by i) directly lowering GLOF and flooding risk through lake lowering and check
dam installation (Output 3); ii) improving observation networks for increased monitoring and response capacity
(Output 2); iii) supporting institutional knowledge and technical capacity for improved planning and response
(Output 1); and iv) developing mechanisms for strengthened policy and fiscal access for GLOF and flood risk
information services (Output 1).
159. The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) (2021–2050) comprises 64 priority programmes and sets a framework
to reduce vulnerability and build Nepal’s resilience to climate change by integrating adaptation across various
sectors and levels of government92. The process of developing Nepal’s NAP included engagement with a wide
range of stakeholders to establish a sustainable enabling environment through strategic institutional arrangements
across governance levels93. In addition, the NAP aligns with critical international frameworks, including the
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), United Nations Convention
of Biodiversity (CBD), United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction94. Priority sectors relating to flood risk include: i) forest, biodiversity and watershed
conservation; ii) water resources and energy; iii) rural and urban settlements; and iv) disaster risk reduction and
management95. The NAP will be reviewed and updated in 2031 to account for social, economic, political, legal and
climate risk changes. The priorities of Nepal’s NAP comprise programmes in eight thematic and four cross-cutting
sectors, spanning short, medium and long-term time frames. The proposed project is aligned with Nepal’s NAP
88 GoN. 2020. Climate Change Policy, 20 76.
89 UNDP. 2022. Nepal Country Programme 2023-2027.
90 GoN. 2010. National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to Climate Change. Available at: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/sites/default/files/downloads/nepal_napa.pdf
91 GoN. 2010. National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to Climate Change. Available at: https://www.adaptation-
undp.org/sites/default/files/downloads/nepal_napa.pdf
92 GoN. 2021. National Adaptation Plan 2021-2050.
93 MoFE, 2019. Climate change scenarios for Nepal for National Adaptation Plan (NAP). Ministry of Forests and Environment, Kathmandu.
94 GoN. 2021. National Adaptation Plan 2021-2050.
95 GoN. 2021. National Adaptation Plan 2021-2050.

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 |  | vulnerable ecosystems; iii) promote a transition to a green economy; iv) mobilise national and international financial |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | resources for climate change adaptation and mitigation; v) mainstream climate change issues into national and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | subnational policies, strategies and plans; vi) mainstream gender equality and social inclusion into climate change |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | programs; and vii) increase the use of reliable forecasting in planning for disaster risk reduction88. In alignment with |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | these objectives, the proposed project will facilitate adaptation to climate change by reducing the exposure and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | impacts of GLOFs and flooding on vulnerable communities. In particular, under Output 2 early warning systems |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | (EWS) will be developed for improved disaster risk reduction (DRR) monitoring, response and information |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | dissemination to communities vulnerable to GLOFs. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | The Country Programme Document for Nepal (2023-2027) outlines UNDP’s contributions to Nepal’s |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | development in three main areas of work, namely inclusive economic growth, strengthened governance systems |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 157. | and increased climate adaption and environmental resilience. Specifically, the document provides an overview of |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the country’s five-year development ambitions led by UNDP based on nation-wide consultations, the SDGs and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Nepal's Fourteenth Development Plan. Key priority areas for the country programme include to: i) promote inclusive |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and resilient economic growth founded on decent jobs, an integrated social security and protection system and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | sound policies that enhance productivity and investments and reduce multidimensional poverty; ii) improve the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | coherence and quality of governance across the three tiers of government to ensure constitutional rights, access |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | to justice and empower people, especially women and marginalized communities, to exercise agency over their |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | lives; and iii) advance resilient and sustainable systems for use of natural resources through public policies, strong |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | institutions and active community participation89. The proposed project is well aligned with the country programme |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | as vulnerability to climate change-induced GLOFs and flooding will be addressed through a variety of activities, |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | including lake lowering and diversion infrastructure, eco-DRR, and EWS monitoring improvements. Furthermore, |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the project will develop local and national technical capacity for understanding and utilising climate risk and hazard |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | information (Output 1). This will include strengthening the institutional knowledge-base and developing policy and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | fiscal mechanisms for information services focusing specifically on GLOF and flood risk. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 158. Nepal’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) (2010) identifies th e GoN’s priority activities |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | towards climate change adaptation90. These priority profiles, as related to flood risk reduction, include: i) promoting |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | community-based adaption through integrated management of the agricultural, water, forest and biodiversity |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sectors; ii) community-based disaster management for facilitating climate change adaptation; iii) GLOF monitoring |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and disaster risk reduction; iv) ecosystem management for climate change adaptation; and v) empowering |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | vulnerable communities through sustainable management of water resources and clean energy supply91. The |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | proposed project will contribute towards the NAPA’s goals of addressing GLOF and flooding risk, as well as |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | adaptation and community upliftment by i) directly lowering GLOF and flooding risk through lake lowering and check |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | dam installation (Output 3); ii) improving observation networks for increased monitoring and response capacity |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (Output 2); iii) supporting institutional knowledge and technical capacity for improved planning and response |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (Output 1); and iv) developing mechanisms for strengthened policy and fiscal access for GLOF and flood risk |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information services (Output 1). |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 159. |  | The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) (2021–2050) comprises 64 priority programmes and sets a framework |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | to reduce vulnerability and build Nepal’s resilience to climate change by integrating adaptation across various |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | sectors and levels of government92. The process of developing Nepal’s NAP included engagement with a wide |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | range of stakeholders to establish a sustainable enabling environment through strategic institutional arrangements |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | across governance levels93. In addition, the NAP aligns with critical international frameworks, including the |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), United Nations Convention |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | of Biodiversity (CBD), United Nations |  | Convention | to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), and the Sendai Framework |  |  | 
 |  | for Disaster Risk Reduction94. Priority sectors relating to flood risk include: i) forest, biodiversity and watershed |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | conservation; ii) water resources and energy; iii) rural and urban settlements; and iv) disaster risk reduction and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | management95. The NAP will be reviewed and updated in 2031 to account for social, economic, political, legal and |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | climate risk changes. The priorities of Nepal’s NAP comprise programmes in eight thematic and four cross-cutting |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | sectors, spanning short, medium and long-term time frames. The proposed project is aligned with Nepal’s NAP |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
D
priority to establish GLOF risk reduction and early warning systems in glaciated river basins as this will: i) control
climate-induced disasters through lake lowering, GLOF diversion and downstream activities (Output 3); and ii)
strengthen monitoring systems by improving the observation network density and implementing early warning
systems (Output 2).
160. Nepal’s Third National Communication (TNC) to the UNFCCC (2021)96 presents an overview on the
projected climate change impacts for Nepal and identifies the national climate change adaptation and mitigation
priorities which includes an indication of the country’s current greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory. The adaptation
priorities in the TNC focus on the need to adapt to the impacts of increasing annual mean temperature and
increasingly frequent extreme climate events such as GLOFs and monsoon flooding. The project will contribute to
the objectives of the TNC by reducing risk associated with climate change impacts, particularly vulnerability of
downstream communities to glacier retreat and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs), including eco-DRR
reducing measures and lake lowering (Output 3). The TNC includes a GLOF vulnerability ranking of different
districts in Nepal — six as very highly vulnerable, six more as highly vulnerable and seven as moderately vulnerable
— of which the proposed project’s intervention sites are aligned with.
161. In its Second Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) (2020)97, Nepal identifies mitigating GHG
emissions and undertaking studies and actions for adaptation as critical actions to reduce the impacts of climate
change in the country. Nepal’s contributions are conditional on bilateral and multilateral grant support to strengthen
limited national resources and technical capacities for scaling up climate action. While this project will not directly
contribute towards mitigation objectives, it recognises the need for climate change mitigation as global warming is
causing the accelerated rate of glacial melt, increasing GLOF risk. The proposed project is aligned with the NDC,
which acknowledges DRR and management as an adaptation priority to increase climate resilience in the country.
162. Nepal Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action (2018–2030). This action plan was
prepared by the GoN with the endorsement of Nepal’s National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council.
The plan’s objectives are in line with the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act (2017) as well as the
National Strategy on Disaster Risk Management (2009). Accordingly, the plan serves as the policy framework for
DRR planning, guidance and management in Nepal. In particular, the action plan focusses on: i) improving
understanding of disaster risk through multiple assessment types; ii) strengthening multi-level disaster risk
governance; iii) promoting investment in DRR based on comprehensive risk information; and iv) improving disaster
preparedness and integrating “build back better” approaches during recovery from extreme events98. Moreover,
the plan highlights the following as some of the most pronounced types of disasters experienced by the country: i)
road accidents; ii) epidemics; iii) earthquakes; iv) landslides; v) floods; vi) snowstorms and avalanches; and vii)
droughts99.
163. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030)100 — of which the GoN is committed to
implementing — aims to substantially reduce disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health, as well as in
the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of people, businesses, communities and
countries. The framework identifies four priority actions to achieve this goal, namely: i) Priority 1 — Understanding
disaster risk vulnerability, capacity, exposure of people and assets, hazard characteristics and the environment; ii)
Priority 2 — Strengthening disaster risk governance at national, regional and global levels to ensure effective and
efficient management of disaster risk; iii) Priority 3 — Investing in disaster risk prevention and reduction through
structural and non-structural measures to enable appropriate resilience; and iv) Priority 4 — Enhancing disaster
preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
164. The Environmental Protection Act (2019). The Environmental Protection Act aims to amend and consolidate
legislation relating to the natural environment. The act includes, inter alia: i) the required information for approving
the preparation of environmental studies — including strategic environmental analyses and EIAs — while granting
powers to relevant agencies to conduct these studies; ii) necessary legislation to control pollution and hazardous
material disposal and their inspection; iii) provisioning for climate change adaptation and mitigation plans; iv) the
96 Ministry of Forests and Environment. 2 021. Third National Communications to the UNFCCC. Available at:
https://www.mofe.gov.np/downloadfile/Nepal_TNC%20Rep_1627452942.pdf
97 GoN. 2020. Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). Available at:
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Nepal%20Second/Second%20Nationally%20Determined%20Contribution%2
0(NDC)%20-%202020.pdf
98 GoN. 2018. Disaster Risk Reduction Strategic Plan of Action. Available at:
https://app.adpc.net/sites/default/files/public/publications/attachments/DRR%20National%20Plan%20of%20Action%20%28Nepal%29.pdf
99 GoN. 2018. Disaster Risk Reduction Strategic Plan of Action. Available at:
https://app.adpc.net/sites/default/files/public/publications/attachments/DRR%20National%20Plan%20of%20Action%20%28Nepal%29.pdf
100 UN. Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030). Available at:
https://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
 |  | priority to establish GLOF risk reduction and early warning systems in glaciated river basins as this will: i) control |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | climate-induced disasters through lake lowering, GLOF diversion and downstream activities (Output 3); and ii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | strengthen monitoring systems by improving the observation network density and implementing early warning |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | systems (Output 2). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 160. |  | Nepal’s Third National Communication (TNC) to the UNFCCC (2021)96 presents |  |  |  |  |  | an overview on the |  | 
 | projected climate change impacts for Nepal and identifies the national climate change adaptation and mitigation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | priorities which includes an indication of the country’s current greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory. The adaptation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | priorities in the TNC focus on the need to adapt to the impacts of increasing annual mean temperature and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | increasingly frequent extreme climate events such as GLOFs and monsoon flooding. The project will contribute to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the objectives of the TNC by reducing risk associated with climate change impacts, particularly vulnerability of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | downstream communities to glacier retreat and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs), including eco-DRR |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reducing measures and lake lowering (Output 3). The TNC includes a GLOF vulnerability ranking of different |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | districts in Nepal — six as very highly vulnerable, six more as highly vulnerable and seven as moderately vulnerable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | — of which the proposed project’s intervention sites are aligned with. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 161. |  | In its Second Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) (2020)97, Nepal identifies mitigating GHG |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | emissions and undertaking studies and actions for adaptation as critical actions to reduce the impacts of climate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | change in the country. Nepal’s contributions are conditional on |  |  |  |  |  | bilateral and multilateral grant support to strengthen |  |  | 
 | limited national resources and technical capacities for scaling up climate action. While this project will not directly |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | contribute towards mitigation objectives, it recognises the need for climate change mitigation as global warming is |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | causing the accelerated rate of glacial melt, increasing GLOF risk. The proposed project is aligned with the NDC, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | which acknowledges DRR and management as an adaptation priority to increase climate resilience in the country. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 162. |  | Nepal |  |  | Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action (2018–2030). This action plan was |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | prepared by the GoN with the endorsement of Nepal’s National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | The plan’s objectives are in line with the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act (2017) as well as the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | National |  |  | Strategy on Disaster Risk Management (2009). Accordingly, the plan serves as the policy framework for |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | DRR planning, guidance and management in Nepal. In particular, the action plan focusses on: i) improving |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | understanding of disaster risk through multiple assessment types; ii) strengthening multi-level disaster risk |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | governance; iii) promoting investment in DRR based on comprehensive risk information; and iv) improving disaster |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | preparedness and integrating “build back better” approaches during recovery from extreme events98. Moreover, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the plan highlights the following as some of the most pronounced types of disasters experienced by the country: i) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | road accidents; ii) epidemics; iii) earthquakes; iv) landslides; v) floods; vi) snowstorms and avalanches; and vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | droughts99. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 163. |  | The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030)100 — of which the GoN is committed to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | implementing — aims to substantially reduce disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health, as well as in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of people, businesses, communities and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | countries. The framework identifies four priority actions to achieve this goal, namely: i) Priority 1 — Understanding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | disaster risk vulnerability, capacity, exposure of people and assets, hazard characteristics and the environment; ii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Priority 2 — Strengthening disaster risk governance at national, regional and global levels to ensure effective and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | efficient management of disaster risk; iii) Priority 3 — Investing in disaster risk prevention and reduction through |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | structural and non-structural measures to enable appropriate resilience; and iv) Priority 4 — Enhancing disaster |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 164. |  | The Environmental Protection Act (2019). The Environmental Protection Act aims to amend and consolidate |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | legislation relating to the natural environment. The act includes, inter alia: i) the required information for approving |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | the preparation of environmental studies — including strategic environmental analyses and EIAs — while granting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | powers to relevant agencies to conduct these studies; ii) necessary legislation to control pollution and hazardous |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | material disposal and their inspection; iii) provisioning for climate change adaptation and mitigation plans; iv) the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
D
safeguarding of national heritage sites and environmentally protected areas; and v) penalties for environmental
transgressions101. In addition, the act legislates climate change risk management and the production of technical
standards to determine priority areas. Carbon trading for mitigation purposes is also legalised under the act, which
subsequently makes provision for the prescribed legislature to regulate the trade102.
165. The Fifteenth Plan (2019/2020 – 2023/24). The project aligns with the priorities laid out in the GoN’s ‘Fifteenth
Plan’ 5-year development plan. Specifically, the long-term national strategies identified in the Fifteenth Plan include
the conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources and improve resilience. The 5-year plan for the
sustainable use of natural resources targets increasing national forest density by 5% — a target that the project
will directly contribute toward reaching. The project also contributes to several of the Plan’s identified drivers of
transformation, including through its benefits to hydroelectric power and promotion of a green economy and the
development of tourism services. The Fifteenth Plan also directly prioritized climate action, with the goal to
“contribute to building a sustainable society by augmenting the capacity to adapt to climate change and minimizing
its adverse effects”. To this end, the Plan highlights several key strategies that the project will contribute to,
including: i) improving policy and institutional structures at federal, provincial, and local levels for climate change
management; ii) implementing national, provincial, and local adaptation plans to reduce the vulnerability of
communities; and iii) carrying out research and capacity-building activities in the field of climate change. Closely
linked with the climate action ambitions, the Fifteenth Plan prioritizes the development of the hydrometeorological
services, with the goal of “protecting the lives and properties of citizens and support the development of sustainable
infrastructure through reliable hydrological and meteorological services”.
Stakeholder engagement
166. The project was developed in a participatory way in collaboration with stakeholders from relevant Nepalese
government ministries and departments, civil society organisations (CSOs) and private sector entities. The
Nepalese Ministry of Finance (MoF) — the Nationally Designated Authority (NDA) for the project — is responsible
for the overall management of GCF engagement in Nepal and has been engaged throughout the project
development phase. All entities engaged during project development are listed below; further information can be
found in Annex 2.
• The Ministry of Energy Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI): The MoEWRI is the Executive Entity of the
proposed project and is facilitating the internal GoN project advisory council- Project Steering Committee and
providing support for the project. This ministry also houses the DHM, one of the project implementing units
(PIU) for the proposed project.
• The Ministry of Finance (MoF): As NDA for the proposed project, the MoF is involved in project oversight and
internal government coordination.
• The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD): This pan-Himalayan research
intergovernmental organisation (NGO) has provided scientific background information and shared their
expertise on glacial and high-mountain regions to the proposal development team. ICIMOD plans to work
closely with UNDP and the Executing Entity/Implementing Partner (EE/IP) to help perform risk analyses, provide
mapping support, and enable capacity development for DHM and other GoN stakeholders.
• Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN): This organisation, in collaboration with their partners,
will be involved in stakeholder consultations in the field with beneficiaries and IP communities.
• Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC): The DNPWC will be closely consulted for
all GLOF risk areas lying within protected lands.
• Department of Forests and Soil Conservations (DoFSC): The DoFSC, also under the MoFE, will be an
implementation partner along with DHM and has been consulted about linkages with this project and ongoing
basin planning in Nepal.
• Hydropower companies and numerous coordinating organisations have readily participated in stakeholder
workshops and will be consulted separately as part of a market analysis and other market-related efforts.
• The National Trust for Nature Conservation (NTNC) and Alternative Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC): These
are the two GCF Direct Access Entities (DAEs) in Nepal and will be involved in the proposal and project
implementation processes to enable capacity development in the country.
• National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA) will be a responsible party and
coordinate with the Local Disaster Management Committees (LDMCs).
• Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN) undertook consultations with indigenous peoples from
specific villages of the Koshi and Gandaki river basins. These consultations were conducted with indigenous
peoples who are impacted by flooding (both glacial lake outbursts and rainfall-induced) and other climate-
101 GoN. 2019. Environmental Protection Act (2076). Available at: www.lawcommission.gov.np
102 GoN. 2019. Environmental Protection Act (2076). Available at: www.lawcommission.gov.np

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
 |  | safeguarding of national heritage sites and environmentally protected areas; and v) penalties for environmental |  |  |  | 
 |  | transgressions101. In addition, the act legislates climate change risk management and the production of technical |  |  |  | 
 |  | standards to determine priority areas. Carbon trading for mitigation purposes is also legalised under the act, which |  |  |  | 
 |  | subsequently makes provision for the prescribed legislature to regulate the trade102. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 165. |  | The Fifteenth Plan (2019/2020 – 2023/24). The project aligns with the priorities laid out in the GoN’s ‘Fifteenth |  |  | 
 |  | Plan’ 5-year development plan. Specifically, the long-term national strategies identified in the Fifteenth Plan include |  |  |  | 
 |  | the conservation and sustainable utilization of natural resources and improve resilience. The 5-year plan for the |  |  |  | 
 |  | sustainable use of natural resources targets increasing national forest density by 5% — a target that the project |  |  |  | 
 |  | will directly contribute toward reaching. The project also contributes to several of the Plan’s identified drivers of |  |  |  | 
 |  | transformation, including through its benefits to hydroelectric power and promotion of a green economy and the |  |  |  | 
 |  | development of tourism services. The Fifteenth Plan also directly prioritized climate action, with the goal to |  |  |  | 
 |  | “contribute to building a sustainable society by augmenting the capacity to adapt to climate change and minimizing |  |  |  | 
 |  | its adverse effects”. To this end, the Plan highlights several key strategies that the project will contribute to, |  |  |  | 
 |  | including: i) improving policy and institutional structures at federal, provincial, and local levels for climate change |  |  |  | 
 |  | management; ii) implementing national, provincial, and local adaptation plans to reduce the vulnerability of |  |  |  | 
 |  | communities; and iii) carrying out research and capacity-building activities in the field of climate change. Closely |  |  |  | 
 |  | linked with the climate action ambitions, the Fifteenth Plan prioritizes the development of the hydrometeorological |  |  |  | 
 |  | services, with the goal of “protecting the lives and properties of citizens and support the development of sustainable |  |  |  | 
 |  | infrastructure through reliable hydrological and meteorological services”. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Stakeholder engagement |  |  |  |  | 
 | 166. The project was developed in a participatory way in collaboration with stakeholders from relevant Nepalese |  |  |  |  | 
 | government ministries and departments, civil society organisations (CSOs) and private sector entities. The |  |  |  |  | 
 | Nepalese Ministry of Finance (MoF) — the Nationally Designated Authority (NDA) for the project — is responsible |  |  |  |  | 
 | for the overall management of GCF engagement in Nepal and has been engaged throughout the project |  |  |  |  | 
 | development phase. All entities engaged during project development are listed below; further information can be |  |  |  |  | 
 | found in Annex 2. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • The Ministry of Energy Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI): The MoEWRI is the Executive Entity of the |  |  |  |  | 
 | proposed project and is facilitating the internal GoN project advisory council- Project Steering Committee and |  |  |  |  | 
 | providing support for the project. This ministry also houses the DHM, one of the project implementing units |  |  |  |  | 
 | (PIU) for the proposed project. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • The Ministry of Finance (MoF): As NDA for the proposed project, the MoF is involved in project oversight and |  |  |  |  | 
 | internal government coordination. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD): This pan-Himalayan research |  |  |  |  | 
 | intergovernmental organisation (NGO) has provided scientific background information and shared their |  |  |  |  | 
 | expertise on glacial and high-mountain regions to the proposal development team. ICIMOD plans to work |  |  |  |  | 
 | closely with UNDP and the Executing Entity/Implementing Partner (EE/IP) to help perform risk analyses, provide |  |  |  |  | 
 | mapping support, and enable capacity development for DHM and other GoN stakeholders. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN): This organisation, in collaboration with their partners, |  |  |  |  | 
 | will be involved in stakeholder consultations in the field with beneficiaries and IP communities. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC): The DNPWC will be closely consulted for |  |  |  |  | 
 | all GLOF risk areas lying within protected lands. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Department of Forests and Soil Conservations (DoFSC): The DoFSC, also under the MoFE, will be an |  |  |  |  | 
 | implementation partner along with DHM and has been consulted about linkages with this project and ongoing |  |  |  |  | 
 | basin planning in Nepal. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Hydropower companies and numerous coordinating organisations have readily participated in stakeholder |  |  |  |  | 
 | workshops and will be consulted separately as part of a market analysis and other market-related efforts. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • The National Trust for Nature Conservation (NTNC) and Alternative Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC): These |  |  |  |  | 
 | are the two GCF Direct Access Entities (DAEs) in Nepal and will be involved in the proposal and project |  |  |  |  | 
 | implementation processes to enable capacity development in the country. |  |  |  |  | 
 | • National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA) will be a responsible party and |  |  |  |  | 
 | coordinate with the Local Disaster Management Committees (LDMCs). |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN) undertook consultations with indigenous peoples from |  |  |  |  | 
 | specific villages of the Koshi and Gandaki river basins. These consultations were conducted with indigenous |  |  |  |  | 
 | peoples who are impacted by flooding (both glacial lake outbursts and rainfall-induced) and other climate- |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
D
induced disasters. Consultation details can be found in Annex 7: Project Governance and Institutional
Arrangement.
• Regular consultation to engage the Federation of Community Forestry Users Nepal (FECOFUN), their member
networks and Community Forestry User Groups (CFUGs) were carried out during project development. During
the project implementation, FECOFUN or their members will engage at different scales from central level Project
Steering Committee (PSC) to local level project implementation. They may also represent the Local-level
Disaster Management Committee (LDMC).
• Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration (MoFAGA).
• The Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA).
• Department of Water Resources and Irrigation (DoWRI).
• The Water and Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS).
• The National Planning Commission (NPC).
• Kathmandu University (KU).
167. The project was developed following an extensive stakeholder engagement process, beginning with initial
institutional and community consultations held during the first phase of project design. These engagements
included two separate workshops as well as numerous individual consultations that were held in May 2017. The
focus of these engagements was on identifying the broad needs and vulnerabilities within the project’s target areas,
which were incorporated into early project design. In August 2017 in Kathmandu, further stakeholder engagements
were conducted focusing on defining priorities for project formulation. Similar to the initial phase, stakeholders
consulted in these engagements included relevant government ministries and departments, CSOs, and private
sector entities to validate the design of the project and ensure alignment with national priorities. More than 450
representatives were consulted to ensure local ownership of the project and to adequately capture the needs of
communities. In this context, stakeholder engagement was primarily intended to:
• ensure that expectations and concerns of local stakeholders were incorporated into project design and
implementation;
• establish rapport with beneficiary communities to encourage local buy-in for the project;
• identify a range of desired gender-related development impacts of climate change projects in the target sites
and to ensure that such impacts are incorporated into the design framework;
• support responsible parties in preparing gender assessments and action plans; and
• ensure that all stakeholders, especially women, are effectively involved and equally represented throughout the
project design and implementation process.
168. In addition to these consultations, UNDP is working with two national organisations specialising in Indigenous
Peoples (IPs) and rural stakeholder engagement to ensure appropriate consultation occurs at the local level
throughout the project area. This includes a three-day Consultation Workshop with indigenous peoples from
January 16-18, 2018 organized in Pokhara, followed by community visits to conduct key informant interviews and
collect additional information. Detailed consultations were also held as part of the gender assessment process.
These included key informant interviews (KIIs), Focus Group Discussions (FGDs), and observations with key
GLOF/CC/DRR-related personnel/members, partners and community people (government, NGOs,
federations/networks/groups, diverse community people) at federal, district and local community levels. Field level
consultation were carried out with women and men from diverse groups, with efforts to target individuals who were
not included in community groups represented at other community meetings. Further details on these consultations
are provided in the relevant IP and Gender annexes. More recently, several further engagements were held in
August 2023 and again in January 2024 in partnership with the Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities
(NEFIN). During these consultations, support was shown for the general project design, while stressing the need
for urgent action. In addition to validating the design, indigenous communities highlighted some of the specific
actions that should be followed during implementation – including continued engagement and FPIC processes, as
well as guaranteeing the long-term preservation of cultural, religious and tourism sites in project areas. Several
recommendations were made to ensure inclusive involvement of indigenous communities in the project, including
creating employment opportunities for indigenous households.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
169. The economic viability of the proposed programme was assessed by making a cost benefit analysis model that
attempted to analyse the quantified value of the benefits flowing to the affected communities and compared them
to the costs of mounting the interventions under the proposed programme. The economic analysis mainly
considered the following benefits of the programme:
• loss of lives averted;
• damage to buildings / houses averted;
• loss of agricultural produce averted;
• damage to hydropower projects averted; and

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | induced disasters. Consultation details can be found in Annex 7: Project Governance and Institutional | 
 | Arrangement. | 
 | • Regular consultation to engage the Federation of Community Forestry Users Nepal (FECOFUN), their member | 
 | networks and Community Forestry User Groups (CFUGs) were carried out during project development. During | 
 | the project implementation, FECOFUN or their members will engage at different scales from central level Project | 
 | Steering Committee (PSC) to local level project implementation. They may also represent the Local-level | 
 | Disaster Management Committee (LDMC). | 
 | • Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration (MoFAGA). | 
 | • The Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA). | 
 | • Department of Water Resources and Irrigation (DoWRI). | 
 | • The Water and Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS). | 
 | • The National Planning Commission (NPC). | 
 | • Kathmandu University (KU). | 
 |  | 
 | 167. The project was developed following an extensive stakeholder engagement process, beginning with initial | 
 | institutional and community consultations held during the first phase of project design. These engagements | 
 | included two separate workshops as well as numerous individual consultations that were held in May 2017. The | 
 | focus of these engagements was on identifying the broad needs and vulnerabilities within the project’s target areas, | 
 | which were incorporated into early project design. In August 2017 in Kathmandu, further stakeholder engagements | 
 | were conducted focusing on defining priorities for project formulation. Similar to the initial phase, stakeholders | 
 | consulted in these engagements included relevant government ministries and departments, CSOs, and private | 
 | sector entities to validate the design of the project and ensure alignment with national priorities. More than 450 | 
 | representatives were consulted to ensure local ownership of the project and to adequately capture the needs of | 
 | communities. In this context, stakeholder engagement was primarily intended to: | 
 | • ensure that expectations and concerns of local stakeholders were incorporated into project design and | 
 | implementation; | 
 | • establish rapport with beneficiary communities to encourage local buy-in for the project; | 
 | • identify a range of desired gender-related development impacts of climate change projects in the target sites | 
 | and to ensure that such impacts are incorporated into the design framework; | 
 | • support responsible parties in preparing gender assessments and action plans; and | 
 | • ensure that all stakeholders, especially women, are effectively involved and equally represented throughout the | 
 | project design and implementation process. | 
 |  | 
 | 168. In addition to these consultations, UNDP is working with two national organisations specialising in Indigenous | 
 | Peoples (IPs) and rural stakeholder engagement to ensure appropriate consultation occurs at the local level | 
 | throughout the project area. This includes a three-day Consultation Workshop with indigenous peoples from | 
 | January 16-18, 2018 organized in Pokhara, followed by community visits to conduct key informant interviews and | 
 | collect additional information. Detailed consultations were also held as part of the gender assessment process. | 
 | These included key informant interviews (KIIs), Focus Group Discussions (FGDs), and observations with key | 
 | GLOF/CC/DRR-related personnel/members, partners and community people (government, NGOs, | 
 | federations/networks/groups, diverse community people) at federal, district and local community levels. Field level | 
 | consultation were carried out with women and men from diverse groups, with efforts to target individuals who were | 
 | not included in community groups represented at other community meetings. Further details on these consultations | 
 | are provided in the relevant IP and Gender annexes. More recently, several further engagements were held in | 
 | August 2023 and again in January 2024 in partnership with the Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities | 
 | (NEFIN). During these consultations, support was shown for the general project design, while stressing the need | 
 | for urgent action. In addition to validating the design, indigenous communities highlighted some of the specific | 
 | actions that should be followed during implementation – including continued engagement and FPIC processes, as | 
 | well as guaranteeing the long-term preservation of cultural, religious and tourism sites in project areas. Several | 
 | recommendations were made to ensure inclusive involvement of indigenous communities in the project, including | 
 | creating employment opportunities for indigenous households. | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 169. The economic viability of the proposed programme was assessed by making a cost benefit analysis model that | 
 | attempted to analyse the quantified value of the benefits flowing to the affected communities and compared them | 
 | to the costs of mounting the interventions under the proposed programme. The economic analysis mainly | 
 | considered the following benefits of the programme: | 
 | • loss of lives averted; | 
 | • damage to buildings / houses averted; | 
 | • loss of agricultural produce averted; | 
 | • damage to hydropower projects averted; and | 

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
D
• loss of tourism income averted.
170. This decrease in damages was calculated by comparing the expected amount of damage or losses in the no-
intervention scenario, to the expected amount of damage in the post-intervention scenario. The damage numbers
were taken from experts’ report titled: ‘Residual Risk Modelling & Watershed/Sub-watershed Vulnerability
Assessment’.103 To design optimal interventions downstream of the four glacial lakes, experts modelled the
expected peak flood flow from GLOFs on the four lakes, in a number of scenarios. They utilized Hydrologic
Engineering Center’s River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) for the modelling, and reported on the expected damages
sustained in the case of no-intervention on the lakes and a complete breach of the moraine dam; only lake-lowering
done on the lakes to the recommended depth of 1-3 meters and a complete breach of the moraine dam; a partial
breach of the moraine dam after lake lowering has been done; and a partial breach after lake lowering but with
suggested downstream measures in place, to assess the effectiveness of the suggested risk reduction measures.
171. This data on damages in different scenarios was used to work out the expected benefit, in terms of loss avoided,
due to the implementation of the programme. Values also had to be assigned to lives, buildings, agricultural land
and hydropower projects. The value of lives was taken as the Value of a statistical life in the US proportional to the
GDP per capita ratio between the two countries.
172. It isn’t known when a GLOF event would occur with any certainty, therefore the benefit was normalised by
factoring in the probability of a GLOF event occurring at any point in time during the appraisal time horizon of 25
years. Two different methods were used to assign probability to the risk of a GLOF. One of the ways was by
reviewing published papers, and ICIMOD documents for recorded GLOFs that had the potential of causing
damages in 37 years from 1980 to 2017. Assuming that such events could only have occurred from lakes which at
that time would have been classified as ‘Potentially Dangerous Glacial Lakes (PDGLs)’ if an inventory had been
taken at that time, a simple proportion of the number of events that occurred versus the number of lakes in existence
in the number of years was worked out. Considering there are 21 identified PDGLs, and nine recorded GLOFs that
were significant enough to cause some damage occurred in the past 37 years, the annual probability of a GLOF
on any one lake worked out to 1.16%.
173. The probability was also calculated from return period data from a paper published in the journal: ‘Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America’ (PNAS). The researchers have used
statistical methods to infer lake volumes from lake areas known through satellite data and used that in simulated
scenarios to predict the sizes and frequency of future GLOF events in the entire Himalayas. Since the four
intervention lakes are all located in Eastern Himalayas, the return period on flood volumes was matched with the
expected flood volume from the four intervention lakes. The return period was then made into the annual
probability104. This method calculated a separate annual probability for each glacial lake which is listed in Table 7
below.
Table 4. Annual probability of GLOF occurrence at each of the four target glacial lakes.
Glacial Lake Annual Probability
GL21-Lower Barun
0.50%
GL24-Hongu 2
1.33%
GL45-Thulagi
0.91%
GL30-Lumding Tsho
0.56%
174. By multiplying the annual probability with the value of expected losses in case a GLOF event occurs in the
absence of an intervention and comparing that with the expected losses after the intervention, a value was assigned
to the benefits of pursing the interventions under this proposed programme. This was compared with costs and the
103 The GLOF intensity and potential dam ages were based on HEC-RAS modelling, underpinned by assumptions that a breach would reach
all the way to the bottom of the lake, resulting in a large flood flow simulation. This assumption leads to high damage estimates, even in the
post-lake lowering scenario, and consequently, suggests only marginal improvements in reducing damage. While the model’s use of a full
breach scenario was based on available data, it is important to note that a breach all the way to the bottom of the lake is highly unlikely. As
such, the actual risk and potential benefits of lake lowering may be more significant if a partial breach scenario were considered, as experts
have indicated that a breach in the range of 5 to 8 meters is much more plausible. However, due to the unavailability of specific data for partial
breach scenarios, the model has had to rely on the extreme breach assumption, which limits our ability to fully assess the real-world
effectiveness of lake lowering.
104 Note: These probabilities are based off of historical data, and not specific future climate scenarios. There is currently no established
literature directly assessing how different climate change scenarios will impact GLOF probabilities. However, given that climate change is
expected to increase GLOF risk, these probabilities are considered conservative under future climate scenarios.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
• loss of tourism income averted.

170. This decrease in damages was calculated by comparing the expected amount of damage or losses in the no-
intervention scenario, to the expected amount of damage in the post-intervention scenario. The damage numbers
were taken from experts’ report titled: ‘Residual Risk Modelling & Watershed/Sub-watershed Vulnerability
Assessment’.103 To design optimal interventions downstream of the four glacial lakes, experts modelled the
expected peak flood flow from GLOFs on the four lakes, in a number of scenarios. They utilized Hydrologic
Engineering Center’s River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) for the modelling, and reported on the expected damages
sustained in the case of no-intervention on the lakes and a complete breach of the moraine dam; only lake-lowering
done on the lakes to the recommended depth of 1-3 meters and a complete breach of the moraine dam; a partial
breach of the moraine dam after lake lowering has been done; and a partial breach after lake lowering but with
suggested downstream measures in place, to assess the effectiveness of the suggested risk reduction measures.

171. This data on damages in different scenarios was used to work out the expected benefit, in terms of loss avoided,
due to the implementation of the programme. Values also had to be assigned to lives, buildings, agricultural land
and hydropower projects. The value of lives was taken as the Value of a statistical life in the US proportional to the
GDP per capita ratio between the two countries.

172. It isn’t known when a GLOF event would occur with any certainty, therefore the benefit was normalised by
factoring in the probability of a GLOF event occurring at any point in time during the appraisal time horizon of 25
years. Two different methods were used to assign probability to the risk of a GLOF. One of the ways was by
reviewing published papers, and ICIMOD documents for recorded GLOFs that had the potential of causing
damages in 37 years from 1980 to 2017. Assuming that such events could only have occurred from lakes which at
that time would have been classified as ‘Potentially Dangerous Glacial Lakes (PDGLs)’ if an inventory had been
taken at that time, a simple proportion of the number of events that occurred versus the number of lakes in existence
in the number of years was worked out. Considering there are 21 identified PDGLs, and nine recorded GLOFs that
were significant enough to cause some damage occurred in the past 37 years, the annual probability of a GLOF
on any one lake worked out to 1.16%.

173. The probability was also calculated from return period data from a paper published in the journal: ‘Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America’ (PNAS). The researchers have used
statistical methods to infer lake volumes from lake areas known through satellite data and used that in simulated
scenarios to predict the sizes and frequency of future GLOF events in the entire Himalayas. Since the four
intervention lakes are all located in Eastern Himalayas, the return period on flood volumes was matched with the
expected flood volume from the four intervention lakes. The return period was then made into the annual
probability104. This method calculated a separate annual probability for each glacial lake which is listed in Table 7
below.

Table 4. Annual probability of GLOF occurrence at each of the four target glacial lakes.

--- Table 2 on Page 61 ---
Glacial Lake | Annual Probability
GL21-Lower Barun | 0.50%
GL24-Hongu 2 | 1.33%
GL45-Thulagi | 0.91%
GL30-Lumding Tsho | 0.56%

--- Table 3 on Page 61 ---

174. By multiplying the annual probability with the value of expected losses in case a GLOF event occurs in the
absence of an intervention and comparing that with the expected losses after the intervention, a value was assigned
to the benefits of pursing the interventions under this proposed programme. This was compared with costs and the

--- Table 4 on Page 61 ---
104 Note: These probabilities are based off of historical data, and not specific future climate scenarios. There is currently no established
literature directly assessing how different climate change scenarios will impact GLOF probabilities. However, given that climate change is
expected to increase GLOF risk, these probabilities are considered conservative under future climate scenarios.

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
D
time value of money factored in using a discount factor to work out the Net Present Value of the Programme. The
summary of base case results is given below in Table 8.
Table 5. Calculated Net Present Values (NPV) for each of the four target glacial lakes for Scenario I and Scenario II.
NPV
NPV Lake Lowering
Scenario BCR NPV (USD) Downstream
(USD)
(USD)
Scenario I (1.16% Annual
4.90 86,919,219 13,678,594 77,474,084
Probability)
GL21 47,832,223 18,591,035 30,299,553
GL24 10,786,354 -2,423,237 14,267,956
GL45 16,814,961 -3,077,784 20,951,110
GL30 11,485,681 588,581 11,955,465
Scenario II (Return period
3.75 45,126,562 -236,142 49,596,163
based Probability)
GL21 16,666,744 6,344,492 11,380,616
GL24 13,255,431 -2,392,207 16,706,003
GL45 12,090,478 -3,099,537 16,248,380
GL30 3,113,910 -1,088,890 5,261,165
175. Lake lowering alone appears, from the data we have, not to be beneficial because the HEC RAS modelling
showed only a minor improvement in damages between the do-nothing scenario and the post lake lowering
scenario. This could be because the HEC RAS modelling was done for a breach all the way to the bottom of the
lake for the no intervention and post lake lowering scenarios. Both cases modelled a large peak flood flow, and
therefore damages are high. The authors of the report note that ‘these scenarios are not expected to occur’. In the
absence of damages data for a scenario where a GLOF occurs with a breach at this likely depth, a conclusion
cannot be drawn from the negative NPV result about the lack of economic viability of lake lowering as an
intervention.
176. Overall, both the base-case scenarios show a positive overall NPV and high benefit cost ratio. In these two
scenarios, the investment pays off well. The planned programme interventions have the potential in case a GLOF
event happens to save 1932 lives, 420 houses, 1201 hectares of cultivated land and 8180 GWh of electrical
production.
Application of best practices for the proposed project
177. Best practices from several other past and ongoing initiatives were used to inform the design of GLOF risk
reduction interventions to be implemented under the proposed project. Lessons learned from numerous baseline
investments into climate change adaptation in Nepal were also used to guide the design of all project interventions.
Such lessons include appropriate mechanisms for ensuring that project activities are implemented in a participatory,
gender-inclusive and sustainable way. The specific international best practices and lessons learned that were
applied to the design of the proposed project — and that will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of project
interventions — are summarised below. Specific details on all best practices and lessons learned relevant to the
project are presented in Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
International best practices and lessons learned identified for the project include:
• drawing on the technical capacity of the Nepalese Army and DHM to undertake the planning and
implementation of lake lowering activities;
• constructing check and detention dams to manage high volumes of water in high flood risk areas by detaining
the increased volume of water in the dams and gradually releasing it at a controlled rate;
• installing protective transverse and longitudinal structures (including gabion spurs, flood walls, RCC
revetments, conservation ponds and live check dams) to stabilise riverbanks, and direct water away from high-
risk communities, infrastructure and land;
• implementing relevant nature-based solutions such as tree planting along vulnerable riverbanks, vegetative
gabion walls, vegetative gabion revetments, vegetative gabion check dams, vegetative stone rip-rap, bush
layering and planting grass seedlings;
• ensuring effective operations and maintenance (O&M) by establishing SOPs for GLOF risk reducing systems
and equipment, including lakes lowered under the project, observation networks for hazard monitoring,
community-based early warning systems, nature-based solutions and the database for climate-induced
hazards;
• using remote sensing via satellite tracking to trace interannual changes in glacial lakes;

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 | time value of money factored in using a discount factor to work out the Net Present Value of the Programme. The |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | summary of base case results is given below in Table 8. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 5. Calculated Net Present Values (NPV) for each of the four target glacial lakes for Scenario I and Scenario II. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Scenario |  |  | BCR |  |  | NPV (USD) |  |  | NPV Lake Lowering
(USD) |  |  |  | NPV | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Downstream | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (USD) | 
 |  |  | Scenario I (1.16% Annual |  | 4.90 |  |  | 86,919,219 |  |  | 13,678,594 |  |  | 77,474,084 |  | 
 |  |  | Probability) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | GL21 |  |  |  |  |  | 47,832,223 |  |  | 18,591,035 |  |  | 30,299,553 | 
 |  |  | GL24 |  |  |  |  |  | 10,786,354 |  |  | -2,423,237 |  |  | 14,267,956 | 
 |  |  | GL45 |  |  |  |  |  | 16,814,961 |  |  | -3,077,784 |  |  | 20,951,110 | 
 |  |  | GL30 |  |  |  |  |  | 11,485,681 |  |  | 588,581 |  |  | 11,955,465 | 
 |  |  | Scenario II (Return period |  | 3.75 |  |  | 45,126,562 |  |  | -236,142 |  |  | 49,596,163 |  | 
 |  |  | based Probability) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | GL21 |  |  |  |  |  | 16,666,744 |  |  | 6,344,492 |  |  | 11,380,616 | 
 |  |  | GL24 |  |  |  |  |  | 13,255,431 |  |  | -2,392,207 |  |  | 16,706,003 | 
 |  |  | GL45 |  |  |  |  |  | 12,090,478 |  |  | -3,099,537 |  |  | 16,248,380 | 
 |  |  | GL30 |  |  |  |  |  | 3,113,910 |  |  | -1,088,890 |  |  | 5,261,165 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 175. Lake lowering alone appears, from the data we have, not to be beneficial because the HEC RAS modelling |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | showed only a minor improvement in damages between the do-nothing scenario and the post lake lowering |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | scenario. This could be because the HEC RAS modelling was done for a breach all the way to the bottom of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | lake for the no intervention and post lake lowering scenarios. Both cases modelled a large peak flood flow, and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | therefore damages are high. The authors of the report note that ‘these scenarios are not expected to occur’. In the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | absence of damages data for a scenario where a GLOF occurs with a breach at this likely depth, a conclusion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | cannot be drawn from the negative NPV result about the lack of economic viability of lake lowering as an |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | intervention. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 176. Overall, both the base-case scenarios show a positive overall NPV and high benefit cost ratio. In these two |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | scenarios, the investment pays off well. The planned programme interventions have the potential in case a GLOF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | event happens to save 1932 lives, 420 houses, 1201 hectares of cultivated land and 8180 GWh of electrical |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Application of best practices for the proposed project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 177. Best practices from several other past and ongoing initiatives were used to inform the design of GLOF risk |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | reduction interventions to be implemented under the proposed project. Lessons learned from numerous baseline |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | investments into climate change adaptation in Nepal were also used to guide the design of all project interventions. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Such lessons include appropriate mechanisms for ensuring that project activities are implemented in a participatory, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | gender-inclusive and sustainable way. The specific international best practices and lessons learned that were |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | applied to the design of the proposed project — and that will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | interventions — are summarised below. Specific details on all best practices and lessons learned relevant to the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | project are presented in Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | International best practices and lessons learned identified for the project include: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • drawing on the technical capacity of the Nepalese Army and DHM to undertake the planning and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | implementation of lake lowering activities; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • constructing check and detention dams to manage high volumes of water in high flood risk areas by detaining |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the increased volume of water in the dams and gradually releasing it at a controlled rate; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • installing protective transverse and longitudinal structures (including gabion spurs, flood walls, RCC |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | revetments, conservation ponds and live check dams) to stabilise riverbanks, and direct water away from high- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | risk communities, infrastructure and land; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • implementing relevant nature-based solutions such as tree planting along vulnerable riverbanks, vegetative |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | gabion walls, vegetative gabion revetments, vegetative gabion check dams, vegetative stone rip-rap, bush |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | layering and planting grass seedlings; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • ensuring effective operations and maintenance (O&M) by establishing SOPs for GLOF risk reducing systems |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and equipment, including lakes lowered under the project, observation networks for hazard monitoring, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | community-based early warning systems, nature-based solutions and the database for climate-induced |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | hazards; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • using remote sensing via satellite tracking to trace interannual changes in glacial lakes; |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 62 ---
NPV Lake Lowering
(USD)

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
D
• installing climatological stations and high-altitude meteorological stations and integrating existing hydrology
stations into a real-time data acquisition system to expand the reach and usability of monitoring systems;
• developing SOPs and methods for relevant assessments to inform effective project implementation, including
for hazard prioritization and mapping, and geophysical, topographic and bathymetric surveys;
• ensuring Indigenous and local knowledge is included, and community-based response mechanisms are co-
developed to increase the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities;
• enhancing cross-level coordination, operation and maintenance of dissemination mechanisms to deliver EWS
to key stakeholders by establishing multi-hazard early warning systems that include centralised and
community-based mechanisms;
• supporting the development of institutional memory by establishing systems for recording and managing
climate-induced hazards; and
• developing climate risk knowledge products from public and private sector staff to support disaster
management and capacity development.

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
 | • installing climatological stations and high-altitude meteorological stations and integrating existing hydrology | 
 | stations into a real-time data acquisition system to expand the reach and usability of monitoring systems; | 
 | • developing SOPs and methods for relevant assessments to inform effective project implementation, including | 
 | for hazard prioritization and mapping, and geophysical, topographic and bathymetric surveys; | 
 | • ensuring Indigenous and local knowledge is included, and community-based response mechanisms are co- | 
 | developed to increase the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities; | 
 | • enhancing cross-level coordination, operation and maintenance of dissemination mechanisms to deliver EWS | 
 | to key stakeholders by establishing multi-hazard early warning systems that include centralised and | 
 | community-based mechanisms; | 
 | • supporting the development of institutional memory by establishing systems for recording and managing | 
 | climate-induced hazards; and | 
 | • developing climate risk knowledge products from public and private sector staff to support disaster | 
 | management and capacity development. | 

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☐
Increased resilience (adaptation)
☒
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Potential target scenario
Current state (baseline) How the project/programme will contribute (Description)
Assessment (Description)
Dimension
Description Rating
The Government of Nepal has identified The number of people with reduced • Regulatory structures for improving watershed management and
that the existing model of reactive GLOF risk is substantially increased in incorporating climate risk information into planning and decision-
response to GLOFS is no longer the targeted watersheds. An enabling making will be developed, supported by the establishment of
appropriate and initiated a shift to proactive environment exists for private sector mechanisms for private sector involvement in flood risk information
risk management measures that reduce investment in further risk reduction services to enable ongoing partnerships between the private sector
and the DHM.
GLOF risk before an event occurs. Some measures, including the availability of
• DHM’s capacity to fulfil its mandate will be strengthened by expanding
DRR interventions are being implemented customised and targeted risk
Scale in Nepal, but not at the scale required to Low information and the establishment of the existing hydrometeorological monitoring network and improving its
in-house capacity to undertake hazard mapping, climate research and
adequately protect vulnerable public-private partnerships.
risk reduction strategy development.
communities. While these initial efforts
• The implementation of downstream measures will be supported by
were effective, their implementation
capacity development and training for stakeholders to enable the
elucidated the need for further action to
development and implementation of multi-hazard assessments, and
catalyse sustainable investment at scale. integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national
park management plans.
Initial steps towards GLOF risk reduction By reducing the risk of a GLOF at the • Strengthening the capacity of DHM and NDRRMA and will support the
involved lowering two priority lakes: Tsho 4 most at-risk glacial lakes in Nepal – upscaling of improved EWS beyond the target districts
Rolpa and Imja Glacial Lake. While namely the Thulagi, Lower Barun, • Contributing to the growing evidence base demonstrating best
interventions under this initiative were Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes – practices related to GLOF risk reduction, both within Nepal and
considered successful, they did not and addressing downstream residual internationally
catalyse the replication of interventions flood impacts and response strategies, • Production of customised and targeted risk information will provide
strong incentives for private-sector investment in future disaster risk
needed to fully address the scope of risk in the project will further demonstrate the
Replicability Low reduction initiatives, further promoted by the establishment of public-
Nepal. A 2020 report by UNDP and tangible benefits from these
private partnerships, using the project as proof of concept to leverage
ICIMOD identified 21 potentially dangerous interventions, thereby promoting their
future investment in similar impactful lake lowering and downstream
glacial lakes (PDGLs) in Nepal which are use at the remaining 17 PDGLs in
interventions.
suitable for intervention, plus an additional Nepal and across the Himalayan
26 PDGLs in the across the Himalayas. region. This will be supported by the
Initial co-finance investments from IPPAN upscaling of multi-hazard
and NTB demonstrate the willingness of assessments and integrated, climate-

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☐
Increased resilience (adaptation)
☒ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment
Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  |  | Potential target scenario |  | How the project/programme will contribute (Description) | 
 |  |  |  |  | (Description) |  |  | 
 |  | Description | Rating |  |  |  |  | 
Scale |  | The Government of Nepal has identified
that the existing model of reactive
response to GLOFS is no longer
appropriate and initiated a shift to proactive
risk management measures that reduce
GLOF risk before an event occurs. Some
DRR interventions are being implemented
in Nepal, but not at the scale required to
adequately protect vulnerable
communities. While these initial efforts
were effective, their implementation
elucidated the need for further action to
catalyse sustainable investment at scale. | Low | The number of people with reduced
GLOF risk is substantially increased in
the targeted watersheds. An enabling
environment exists for private sector
investment in further risk reduction
measures, including the availability of
customised and targeted risk
information and the establishment of
public-private partnerships. |  |  | • Regulatory structures for improving watershed management and
incorporating climate risk information into planning and decision-
making will be developed, supported by the establishment of
mechanisms for private sector involvement in flood risk information
services to enable ongoing partnerships between the private sector
and the DHM.
• DHM’s capacity to fulfil its mandate will be strengthened by expanding
the existing hydrometeorological monitoring network and improving its
in-house capacity to undertake hazard mapping, climate research and
risk reduction strategy development.
• The implementation of downstream measures will be supported by
capacity development and training for stakeholders to enable the
development and implementation of multi-hazard assessments, and
integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and national
park management plans. | 
Replicability |  | Initial steps towards GLOF risk reduction
involved lowering two priority lakes: Tsho
Rolpa and Imja Glacial Lake. While
interventions under this initiative were
considered successful, they did not
catalyse the replication of interventions
needed to fully address the scope of risk in
Nepal. A 2020 report by UNDP and
ICIMOD identified 21 potentially dangerous
glacial lakes (PDGLs) in Nepal which are
suitable for intervention, plus an additional
26 PDGLs in the across the Himalayas.
Initial co-finance investments from IPPAN
and NTB demonstrate the willingness of | Low | By reducing the risk of a GLOF at the
4 most at-risk glacial lakes in Nepal –
namely the Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 Lakes –
and addressing downstream residual
flood impacts and response strategies,
the project will further demonstrate the
tangible benefits from these
interventions, thereby promoting their
use at the remaining 17 PDGLs in
Nepal and across the Himalayan
region. This will be supported by the
upscaling of multi-hazard
assessments and integrated, climate- |  |  | • Strengthening the capacity of DHM and NDRRMA and will support the
upscaling of improved EWS beyond the target districts
• Contributing to the growing evidence base demonstrating best
practices related to GLOF risk reduction, both within Nepal and
internationally
• Production of customised and targeted risk information will provide
strong incentives for private-sector investment in future disaster risk
reduction initiatives, further promoted by the establishment of public-
private partnerships, using the project as proof of concept to leverage
future investment in similar impactful lake lowering and downstream
interventions. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 64 ---
Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☐
Increased resilience (adaptation)

--- Table 3 on Page 64 ---
Assessment
Dimension

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
E
the private sector to engage with the and gender-responsive watershed and
project and a general buy in to the benefits national park management plans
of the proposed approach. beyond the target districts and
communities.
Some investments have been made into Regularly updated knowledge on lake- The involvement of government institutions and Nepalese army in
GLOF risk reduction measures in Nepal, lowering and other GLOF risk implementing the lake lowering interventions will help to ensure that
but have generally lacked the long-term reduction measures are integrated into learning is held in institutional memory to benefit future GLOF risk
engagement strategies and incentives the decision-making processes of reduction efforts.
needed to catalyse broader investment for national and sub-national institutions.
Beyond the retention of knowledge and experience, the project will
sustainable risk reduction at scale. For Public-private partnerships are
actively invest in improved risk knowledge systems related to GLOFS,
example, there has been a lack of established to formalize and
enabling the prioritisation of risk reduction interventions in Nepal. This
engagement with the private sector to institutionalize long-term agreements
will include institutionalising spatial digital database of glaciers and
mobilize further investment in risk reduction and mobilize investment focused on
glacial lakes within DHM, with processes for regularly updating risk
measures needed to achieve sustainability the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk
status of glacial lakes to ensure decisions are based on the latest data.
of existing and future interventions – not reduction in Nepal to complement the
Creating systems for databasing climate-induced hazard will contribute
only for lake lowering, but also for risk investment in long-term capacity
to the longevity of technical flood risk reduction knowledge by making
monitoring, early warning and downstream Low building. Communities are actively
that information more widely accessible.
flood mitigation. . engaged in down-stream risk
Sustainability
reduction measures and take
Broadening private sector engagement will be facilitated by improving
ownership of long-term operation and
DHM’s capacity to develop and disseminate climate risk information to
maintenance of interventions.
major economic sectors while enhancing public-private sector
partnerships. This will include making policy provisions underpinned by
an extensive stakeholder consultations with the relevant
representatives from key economic sectors to formalise and
institutionalise long-term agreements to support the sustainable uptake
of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal.
Mutual learning and knowledge sharing with communities in the
implementation, operation and maintenance of lake-lowering,
downstream residual risk reduction interventions and EWS will further
enhance the role of knowledge in long-term sustainability.

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 | the private sector to engage with the
project and a general buy in to the benefits
of the proposed approach. |  | and gender-responsive watershed and
national park management plans
beyond the target districts and
communities. | 
Sustainability | Some investments have been made into
GLOF risk reduction measures in Nepal,
but have generally lacked the long-term
engagement strategies and incentives
needed to catalyse broader investment for
sustainable risk reduction at scale. For
example, there has been a lack of
engagement with the private sector to
mobilize further investment in risk reduction
measures needed to achieve sustainability
of existing and future interventions – not
only for lake lowering, but also for risk
monitoring, early warning and downstream
flood mitigation. . | Low | Regularly updated knowledge on lake-
lowering and other GLOF risk
reduction measures are integrated into
the decision-making processes of
national and sub-national institutions.
Public-private partnerships are
established to formalize and
institutionalize long-term agreements
and mobilize investment focused on
the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk
reduction in Nepal to complement the
investment in long-term capacity
building. Communities are actively
engaged in down-stream risk
reduction measures and take
ownership of long-term operation and
maintenance of interventions. | The involvement of government institutions and Nepalese army in
implementing the lake lowering interventions will help to ensure that
learning is held in institutional memory to benefit future GLOF risk
reduction efforts.
Beyond the retention of knowledge and experience, the project will
actively invest in improved risk knowledge systems related to GLOFS,
enabling the prioritisation of risk reduction interventions in Nepal. This
will include institutionalising spatial digital database of glaciers and
glacial lakes within DHM, with processes for regularly updating risk
status of glacial lakes to ensure decisions are based on the latest data.
Creating systems for databasing climate-induced hazard will contribute
to the longevity of technical flood risk reduction knowledge by making
that information more widely accessible.
Broadening private sector engagement will be facilitated by improving
DHM’s capacity to develop and disseminate climate risk information to
major economic sectors while enhancing public-private sector
partnerships. This will include making policy provisions underpinned by
an extensive stakeholder consultations with the relevant
representatives from key economic sectors to formalise and
institutionalise long-term agreements to support the sustainable uptake
of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal.
Mutual learning and knowledge sharing with communities in the
implementation, operation and maintenance of lake-lowering,
downstream residual risk reduction interventions and EWS will further
enhance the role of knowledge in long-term sustainability.

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
E
E .3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Target
IRMF Means of Verification
GCF Result Area Baseline Assumptions / Note
Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final105
1. DHM/MoEWRI No beneficiaries Direct106: 192,978 total Direct: 385,956 total Local communities and major
a. Annual Progress Report prior to project Women: 100,614 Women: 201,228 productive sectors commit to
(Reports - MOEW RI) implementation Men: 92,364 Men: 184,728 adopting climate-resilient
interventions.
2. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC Direct: 0 (Male: 0, Indirect: 1,986,980
Female: 0)
a. Annual Progress Report Women: 1,036,658
(https://www.mofe.gov.np/r e Men: 950,322 Benefits incur for people
sources/progress-reports- Indirect: 0 (Male: reached by early warnings
6128b. Annual Progress 0, Female: 0) and who are protected from
Report (Report | GLOFs and flooding by
Department of National implementing infrastructural
Park and Wildlife and Eco-DRR solutions in the
Conservation) four most vulnerable glacial
3. NDRRMA/MoHA basins in Nepal.
Core 2: Direct and (https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep Indirect benefits incur
Total Adaptation
indirect beneficiaries ort) through increased
Beneficiaries
reached a.Annual Progress Report preparedness for extreme
b. Nepal Disaster Report events.
c. 5 W Dashboard
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w
-dashboard-flood-and-
landslide-september-2024)
4. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report
b. Third party Monitoring
Report
105 The final target means the target at th e end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total
lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.
106 Detailed explanation on beneficiary numbers are provided in Annex 2, Section 13, and summarised in Section D.1 above.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
E .3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result Area | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note
 |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final105 |  | 
Total Adaptation
Beneficiaries | Core 2: Direct and
indirect beneficiaries
reached | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress Report
(Reports - MOEWRI)
2. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC
a. Annual Progress Report
(https://www.mofe.gov.np/re
sources/progress-reports-
6128b. Annual Progress
Report (Report |
Department of National
Park and Wildlife
Conservation)
3. NDRRMA/MoHA
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep
ort)
a.Annual Progress Report
b. Nepal Disaster Report
c. 5 W Dashboard
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w
-dashboard-flood-and-
landslide-september-2024)
4. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report
b. Third party Monitoring
Report | No beneficiaries
prior to project
implementation
Direct: 0 (Male: 0,
Female: 0)
Indirect: 0 (Male:
0, Female: 0) | Direct106: 192,978 total
Women: 100,614
Men: 92,364 |  | Direct: 385,956 total
Women: 201,228
Men: 184,728
Indirect: 1,986,980
Women: 1,036,658
Men: 950,322 |  | Local communities and major
productive sectors commit to
adopting climate-resilient
interventions.
Benefits incur for people
reached by early warnings
and who are protected from
GLOFs and flooding by
implementing infrastructural
and Eco-DRR solutions in the
four most vulnerable glacial
basins in Nepal.
Indirect benefits incur
through increased
preparedness for extreme
events.

--- Table 2 on Page 66 ---
IRMF
Indicator

--- Table 3 on Page 66 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
E
c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
1. DHM/MoEWRI No beneficiaries Direct107: 192,978 total Direct: 385,956 total Local communities and major
a. Annual Progress Report prior to project Women: 100,614 Women: 201,228 productive sectors commit to
(Reports - MOEWRI) implementation Men: 92,364 Men: 184,728 adopting climate-resilient
interventions.
2. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC Direct: 0 (Male: 0, Indirect: 1,986,980 Benefits incur for people
Female: 0)
a. Annual Progress Report Women: 1,036,658 reached by early warnings
(https://www.mofe.gov.np/re Men: 950,322 and who are protected from
sources/progress-reports- Indirect: 0 (Male: GLOFs and flooding by
6128 0, Female: 0) implementing infrastructural
and Eco-DRR solutions in the
c. Annual Progress Report four most vulnerable glacial
(Report | Department of basins in Nepal.
ARA1 Most vulnerable National Park and Wildlife Indirect benefits incur
Core 2: Direct and
people and communities Conservation) through increased
indirect beneficiaries
3. NDRRMA/MoHA preparedness for extreme
reached
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep events.
ort)
a. Annual Progress Report
b. Nepal Disaster Report
c. 5 W Dashboard
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w
-dashboard-flood-and-
landslide-september-2024)
4. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report
107 Detailed explanation on beneficiary nu mbers are provided in Annex 2, Section 13, and summarised in Section D.1 above.

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
 |  | c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report |  |  |  | 
ARA1 Most vulnerable
people and communities | Core 2: Direct and
indirect beneficiaries
reached | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress Report
(Reports - MOEWRI)
2. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC
a. Annual Progress Report
(https://www.mofe.gov.np/re
sources/progress-reports-
6128
c. Annual Progress Report
(Report | Department of
National Park and Wildlife
Conservation)
3. NDRRMA/MoHA
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep
ort)
a. Annual Progress Report
b. Nepal Disaster Report
c. 5 W Dashboard
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w
-dashboard-flood-and-
landslide-september-2024)
4. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report | No beneficiaries
prior to project
implementation
Direct: 0 (Male: 0,
Female: 0)
Indirect: 0 (Male:
0, Female: 0) | Direct107: 192,978 total
Women: 100,614
Men: 92,364 | Direct: 385,956 total
Women: 201,228
Men: 184,728
Indirect: 1,986,980
Women: 1,036,658
Men: 950,322 | Local communities and major
productive sectors commit to
adopting climate-resilient
interventions.
Benefits incur for people
reached by early warnings
and who are protected from
GLOFs and flooding by
implementing infrastructural
and Eco-DRR solutions in the
four most vulnerable glacial
basins in Nepal.
Indirect benefits incur
through increased
preparedness for extreme
events.

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
E
b. Third party Monitoring
Report
c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
1. DHM/MoEWRI Populations living Direct108: 192,978 total Direct: 385,956 total Early warnings are effectively
a. Annual Progress Report downstream of Women: 100,614 Women: 201,228 disseminated through the
(Reports - MOEWRI) glacial lakes are Men: 92,364 Men: 184,728 entities responsible for the
highly exposed to coordination of disaster
GLOF hazards, response, including the
2. NDRRMA/MoHA
with limited NEOC, LEOC, Community
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep
adaptive capacity Disaster Management
ort)
or access to early
Committee (CDMC)/Task
warnings to reduce
Force.
a. Annual Progress Report to the impacts of
b. Nepal Disaster Report extreme climate
events.
Supplementary 2.4: c. 5 W Dashboard
Beneficiaries (https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w Communities the ownership
(female/male) covered -dashboard-flood-and- Direct: 0 (Male: 0, of and adopt Climate-
by new or improved landslide-september-2024) Female: 0) responsive Municipal
early warning systems Disaster Preparedness and
Response Plans as well as
Indirect: 0 (Male:
3. Project Specific 0, Female: 0) Local-level Climate-resilient
a. Quarterly Monitoring Action Plans
Report
b. Third party Monitoring
Report
All people living in targeted
c. Annual Progress Report GLOF risk areas are reached
d. Interim Evaluation Report by the EWS
e. Project Completion
Report
108 Detailed explanation on beneficiary nu mbers are provided in Annex 2, Section 13, and summarised in Section D.1 above.

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
 |  | b. Third party Monitoring
Report
c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report |  |  |  | 
 | Supplementary 2.4:
Beneficiaries
(female/male) covered
by new or improved
early warning systems | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress Report
(Reports - MOEWRI)
2. NDRRMA/MoHA
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/rep
ort)
a. Annual Progress Report
b. Nepal Disaster Report
c. 5 W Dashboard
(https://bipad.gov.np/np/5w
-dashboard-flood-and-
landslide-september-2024)
3. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report
b. Third party Monitoring
Report
c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report | Populations living
downstream of
glacial lakes are
highly exposed to
GLOF hazards,
with limited
adaptive capacity
or access to early
warnings to reduce
to the impacts of
extreme climate
events.
Direct: 0 (Male: 0,
Female: 0)
Indirect: 0 (Male:
0, Female: 0) | Direct108: 192,978 total
Women: 100,614
Men: 92,364 | Direct: 385,956 total
Women: 201,228
Men: 184,728 | Early warnings are effectively
disseminated through the
entities responsible for the
coordination of disaster
response, including the
NEOC, LEOC, Community
Disaster Management
Committee (CDMC)/Task
Force.
Communities the ownership
of and adopt Climate-
responsive Municipal
Disaster Preparedness and
Response Plans as well as
Local-level Climate-resilient
Action Plans
All people living in targeted
GLOF risk areas are reached
by the EWS

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
E
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
Ministry of Home 2,282 potential The expected reduction A decrease of 2,208 Expected loss of life was
Affairs/NDRRMA lives lost in losses of lives can in lives lost because calculated using the number
a. BIPAD Portal- Real only be determined at of a GLOF. of households affected by a
time loss and damage the end of Year 6 once GLOF under different
report all four lakes have been modelled scenarios. Average
(https://bipadportal.gov. lowered. household size was
Supplementary 2.7: np/damage-and-loss/) considered as 4.6 people.
Change in expected b. Post Disaster
losses of lives due to Assessment Report if Potential loss of lives in the
the impact of extreme disaster happens baseline considers a full
climate-related c. Nepal Disaster Report breach without any
disasters in the (NDRRMA) intervention.
geographic area of the
GCF intervention Target scenarios consider
lower lake levels, leading to
only a partial breach, with
down-stream mitigation
measures addressing
residual flood risk.
Ministry of Home The baseline Expected losses Two different methods were
Supplementary 3.1: Affairs/NDRRMA estimated physical The change in reduced by used for the cost-benefit
Change in expected a. BIPAD Portal- Real asset damages109 expected losses (in US$ 45,126,562 – analysis conducted for the
losses of economic time loss and damage that could result US$) can only be 86,919,219 through project, namely a scenario
from GLOFs at the avoided damages.
assets due to the report determined at the end assessing annual probability
ARA3 Intrastructure and four most
built environment
impact of extreme (https://bipadportal.gov.
vulnerable glacial
of Year 6 once all four of a GLOF and another
climate-related np/damage-and-loss/) lakes have been scenario assessing the
lakes to a GLOF
disasters in te b. Post Disaster lowered. return period based
are:
geographic area of the Assessment Report if probability.
disaster happens
GCF intervention
109 The baseline values of losses at the fo ur target glacial lakes are presented as a range of values based on the two different Probability Scenarios of GLOF occurrence ate the glacial lakes, based on Annual
Probability and Return Period based Probability. The lower probability has a lower associated baseline loss amount and thus becomes the minimum value of the range presented, while the higher probability
scenario has higher associated baseline loss and so this value is the upper limit of the range presented. As GLOF occurrence is difficult to predict, these two probabilities are given equal consideration in
estimating losses and benefits. The details of the derivation of these probabilities as well as the models used to calculate losses and benefits are presented in Annex 3: Financial and Economic Appraisal.

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
 |  | f. Terminal Evaluation
Report |  |  |  | 
 | Supplementary 2.7:
Change in expected
losses of lives due to
the impact of extreme
climate-related
disasters in the
geographic area of the
GCF intervention | Ministry of Home
Affairs/NDRRMA
a. BIPAD Portal- Real
time loss and damage
report
(https://bipadportal.gov.
np/damage-and-loss/)
b. Post Disaster
Assessment Report if
disaster happens
c. Nepal Disaster Report
(NDRRMA) | 2,282 potential
lives lost | The expected reduction
in losses of lives can
only be determined at
the end of Year 6 once
all four lakes have been
lowered. | A decrease of 2,208
in lives lost because
of a GLOF. | Expected loss of life was
calculated using the number
of households affected by a
GLOF under different
modelled scenarios. Average
household size was
considered as 4.6 people.
Potential loss of lives in the
baseline considers a full
breach without any
intervention.
Target scenarios consider
lower lake levels, leading to
only a partial breach, with
down-stream mitigation
measures addressing
residual flood risk.
ARA3 Intrastructure and
built environment | Supplementary 3.1:
Change in expected
losses of economic
assets due to the
impact of extreme
climate-related
disasters in te
geographic area of the
GCF intervention | Ministry of Home
Affairs/NDRRMA
a. BIPAD Portal- Real
time loss and damage
report
(https://bipadportal.gov.
np/damage-and-loss/)
b. Post Disaster
Assessment Report if
disaster happens | The baseline
estimated physical
asset damages109
that could result
from GLOFs at the
four most
vulnerable glacial
lakes to a GLOF
are: | The change in
expected losses (in
US$) can only be
determined at the end
of Year 6 once all four
lakes have been
lowered. | Expected losses
reduced by
US$ 45,126,562 –
86,919,219 through
avoided damages. | Two different methods were
used for the cost-benefit
analysis conducted for the
project, namely a scenario
assessing annual probability
of a GLOF and another
scenario assessing the
return period based
probability.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
E
c. Nepal Disaster Report Thulagi:
Scenario I: Annual
(NDRRMA) US$ 12,090,478 –
Probability determined the
16,814,961
annual probability of a GLOF
Lower Barun: at any one lake to be 1.16%.
US$ 16,666,744 –
47,832,223 Scenario II: Return Period
based Probability calculated
Lumding Tsho:
GLOF probability using
US$ 3,113,910 –
return period data from a
11,485,681
published paper titled
Hongu 2: ‘Hazard from Himalayan
US$ 10,786,354 – glacier lake outburst floods’.
13,255,431 This method used statistical
models to infer lake volumes
Total estimated
from lake areas known
damages from a
through satellite data and
GLOF at all four
subsequently simulated
lakes:
US$ 45,126,562 – scenarios to predict the sizes
86,919,219 and frequency of future
GLOF events. The
probability from this study
that was applicable to the
four target lakes was used to
derive return periods as an
annual probability.
The full details of the
probability models and
calculations are presented in
Annex 3: Financial and
Economic Appraisal.
Supplementary 4.1:
1. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC 0 98 ha of improved 200 ha of improved Communities maintain the
terrestrial ecosystems terrestrial ecosystems downstream adaptation
Hectares of terrestrial
ARA4 Ecosystems and a. Annual Progress Report interventions implemented in
forest, terrestrial non-
ecosystem services (https://www.mofe.gov.np/re 51 ha in Arun 109 ha in Arun the Dudhkoshi and Arun
forest, freshwater and sources/progress-reports- 47 ha in Dudkoshi 91 ha in Dudkoshi
Sub-basins.
coastal marine areas 6128
brought under )

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
 |  | c. Nepal Disaster Report
(NDRRMA) | Thulagi:
US$ 12,090,478 –
16,814,961
Lower Barun:
US$ 16,666,744 –
47,832,223
Lumding Tsho:
US$ 3,113,910 –
11,485,681
Hongu 2:
US$ 10,786,354 –
13,255,431
Total estimated
damages from a
GLOF at all four
lakes:
US$ 45,126,562 –
86,919,219 |  |  | Scenario I: Annual
Probability determined the
annual probability of a GLOF
at any one lake to be 1.16%.
Scenario II: Return Period
based Probability calculated
GLOF probability using
return period data from a
published paper titled
‘Hazard from Himalayan
glacier lake outburst floods’.
This method used statistical
models to infer lake volumes
from lake areas known
through satellite data and
subsequently simulated
scenarios to predict the sizes
and frequency of future
GLOF events. The
probability from this study
that was applicable to the
four target lakes was used to
derive return periods as an
annual probability.
The full details of the
probability models and
calculations are presented in
Annex 3: Financial and
Economic Appraisal.
ARA4 Ecosystems and
ecosystem services | Supplementary 4.1:
Hectares of terrestrial
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and
coastal marine areas
brought under | 1. MOFE/DOFSC/DNPWC
a. Annual Progress Report
(https://www.mofe.gov.np/re
sources/progress-reports-
6128
) | 0 | 98 ha of improved
terrestrial ecosystems
51 ha in Arun
47 ha in Dudkoshi | 200 ha of improved
terrestrial ecosystems
109 ha in Arun
91 ha in Dudkoshi | Communities maintain the
downstream adaptation
interventions implemented in
the Dudhkoshi and Arun
Sub-basins.

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
E
resoration and/or c. Annual Progress Report
Interventions listed by
improved ecosystems (Report | Department of
volume or length converted
National Park and Wildlife
to area according to average
Conservation)
values as follows:
2. Project Specific
• Vegetative gabion walls
a. Quarterly Monitoring
with average height of
Report
~2.25m
b. Third party Monitoring • Living check dams with
Report average width of ~2m
c. Annual Progress Report • Vegetative gabion
d. Interim Evaluation Report revetments with average
height of ~3.15m
e. Project Completion
Report • Vegetative gabion spurs
with average height of
f. Terminal Evaluation
~3.5m
Report
• Vegetative gabion or dry-
stone check dams with
average height of ~2.25m
• Brush layering with
average width of ~2m
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Baseline context Rating for current Target scenario
Core Indicator How the project will contribute Coverage
(description) state (baseline) (description)
The strengthened
Climate risk information products
regulatory frameworks,
DHM has a division and a section produced and tailored for use by
combined with capacity
Core Indicator 5: Degree to as an institutional mechanism and productive sectors (hydropower, tourism
building and skills
which GCF investments regulatory system for determining development in the disaster and agriculture).
GLOF risk and hazard Public-private sector partnerships
contribute to strengthening risk reduction sector, will
prioritisation. However, DHM is established with productive sectors
institutional and regulatory create an enabling Multiple sub-national
not equipped to produce tailored medium (hydropower, tourism and agriculture) for
frameworks for low environment for the areas within a country
warnings and strong public- long-term buy-in/incentives for
emission climate-resilient upscaling and replication of
private sector partnerships that investment in GLOF risk reduction and
development pathways in a project interventions across
incentivise/encourage investment climate risk information products
country-driven manner into GLOF risk reduction do not the country. The project will produced and used by the entities in
will contribute to the
currently exist. these partnerships
efficient and effective
implementation of Nepal’s

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 | resoration and/or
improved ecosystems | c. Annual Progress Report
(Report | Department of
National Park and Wildlife
Conservation)
2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly Monitoring
Report
b. Third party Monitoring
Report
c. Annual Progress Report
d. Interim Evaluation Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report |  |  |  | Interventions listed by
volume or length converted
to area according to average
values as follows:
• Vegetative gabion walls
with average height of
~2.25m
• Living check dams with
average width of ~2m
• Vegetative gabion
revetments with average
height of ~3.15m
• Vegetative gabion spurs
with average height of
~3.5m
• Vegetative gabion or dry-
stone check dams with
average height of ~2.25m
• Brush layering with
average width of ~2m

--- Table 2 on Page 71 ---
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) | Rating for current
state (baseline) | Target scenario
(description) | How the project will contribute | Coverage
Core Indicator 5: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to strengthening
institutional and regulatory
frameworks for low
emission climate-resilient
development pathways in a
country-driven manner | DHM has a division and a section
as an institutional mechanism and
regulatory system for determining
GLOF risk and hazard
prioritisation. However, DHM is
not equipped to produce tailored
warnings and strong public-
private sector partnerships that
incentivise/encourage investment
into GLOF risk reduction do not
currently exist. | medium | The strengthened
regulatory frameworks,
combined with capacity
building and skills
development in the disaster
risk reduction sector, will
create an enabling
environment for the
upscaling and replication of
project interventions across
the country. The project will
will contribute to the
efficient and effective
implementation of Nepal’s | Climate risk information products
produced and tailored for use by
productive sectors (hydropower, tourism
and agriculture).
Public-private sector partnerships
established with productive sectors
(hydropower, tourism and agriculture) for
long-term buy-in/incentives for
investment in GLOF risk reduction and
climate risk information products
produced and used by the entities in
these partnerships | Multiple sub-national
areas within a country

--- Table 3 on Page 71 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 4 on Page 71 ---
Rating for current
state (baseline)

--- Table 5 on Page 71 ---
Target scenario
(description)

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
E
Disaster Risk Reduction
National Strategic Plan of
Action 2018–2030 , and the
Disaster Risk Reduction
and Management Act,
2074 and Disaster Risk
Reduction and
Management Rules, 2076
(2019).
At present, DHM has limited
technical capacity to detect, Hydrological and meteorological stations
monitor and respond to GLOFs will be installed across the prioritised
and other extreme climate events. GLOF watersheds to improve monitoring
Current EWS coverage in the capacity and coverage in higher altitude
Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi DHM is equipped to reliably areas. This will be complemented by
Core Indicator 6: Degree to
and Arun Sub-basins does not and timeously forecast training workshops targeting DHM staff
which GCF investments
extend far enough to reach all GLOFs and other extreme to strengthen their capacity to: i) collect,
contribute to technology National level (one
downstream communities that will low climate events using data process and manage climate data from
deployment, dissemination, country)
be affected should the Thulagi, from the country’s new and the new and existing stations; and ii) use
development or transfer
Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and existing hydrological and the generated data to develop early
and innovation
Hongu 2 Lakes breach. Gaps meteorological stations. warning information products, including
exist in the EWS network in terms easily interpretable infographics for local
of number of stations required to communities. The data from these
detect and monitor hydrological stations will be housed on DHM’s
and meteorological changes that existing servers.
contribute to GLOFs.
The production of
The project will contribute to effective
customised and targeted
knowledge generation by:
risk information for pre-
There is an urgent need within • improving DHM’s capacity for hazard
project adaptation planning
Core indicator 8: Degree to DHM for the development of an mapping and prioritising GLOF risk
which GCF investments in-house monitoring database for and early warnings will reduction strategies;
contribute to effective glaciers and glacial lakes. While
provide strong incentives • establishment of the GIS database
for private sector will be supported by geophysical
knowledge generation and DHM has the hardware and National level (one
medium investment in future investigation, as well as topographic
learning processes, and software capabilities, formal country)
disaster risk reduction and bathymetric surveys;
use of good practices, Standard Operating Procedures
initiatives, with the PPPs • training the relevant staff from DHM
methodologies and (SOPs) and training are required
mobilising resources to on monitoring GLOFs, operating
standards to catalyse the development and
address climate change and maintaining existing risk
management of this database.
issues. Risk analysis and databases and disseminating
requirements relating to tailored, user-friendly climate risk
climate change — as information to major productive

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 |  |  | Disaster Risk Reduction
National Strategic Plan of
Action 2018–2030 , and the
Disaster Risk Reduction
and Management Act,
2074 and Disaster Risk
Reduction and
Management Rules, 2076
(2019). |  | 
Core Indicator 6: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to technology
deployment, dissemination,
development or transfer
and innovation | At present, DHM has limited
technical capacity to detect,
monitor and respond to GLOFs
and other extreme climate events.
Current EWS coverage in the
Gandaki Basin, and Dudhkoshi
and Arun Sub-basins does not
extend far enough to reach all
downstream communities that will
be affected should the Thulagi,
Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and
Hongu 2 Lakes breach. Gaps
exist in the EWS network in terms
of number of stations required to
detect and monitor hydrological
and meteorological changes that
contribute to GLOFs. | low | DHM is equipped to reliably
and timeously forecast
GLOFs and other extreme
climate events using data
from the country’s new and
existing hydrological and
meteorological stations. | Hydrological and meteorological stations
will be installed across the prioritised
GLOF watersheds to improve monitoring
capacity and coverage in higher altitude
areas. This will be complemented by
training workshops targeting DHM staff
to strengthen their capacity to: i) collect,
process and manage climate data from
the new and existing stations; and ii) use
the generated data to develop early
warning information products, including
easily interpretable infographics for local
communities. The data from these
stations will be housed on DHM’s
existing servers. | National level (one
country)
Core indicator 8: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to effective
knowledge generation and
learning processes, and
use of good practices,
methodologies and
standards | There is an urgent need within
DHM for the development of an
in-house monitoring database for
glaciers and glacial lakes. While
DHM has the hardware and
software capabilities, formal
Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) and training are required
to catalyse the development and
management of this database. | medium | The production of
customised and targeted
risk information for pre-
project adaptation planning
and early warnings will
provide strong incentives
for private sector
investment in future
disaster risk reduction
initiatives, with the PPPs
mobilising resources to
address climate change
issues. Risk analysis and
requirements relating to
climate change — as | The project will contribute to effective
knowledge generation by:
• improving DHM’s capacity for hazard
mapping and prioritising GLOF risk
reduction strategies;
• establishment of the GIS database
will be supported by geophysical
investigation, as well as topographic
and bathymetric surveys;
• training the relevant staff from DHM
on monitoring GLOFs, operating
and maintaining existing risk
databases and disseminating
tailored, user-friendly climate risk
information to major productive | National level (one
country)

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
E
stipulated in national sectors in Nepal, including the
policies and plans — will tourism, hydropower and tourism
be integrated into the sectors.
established PPPs.
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
Project/programme Target Assumptions / Note
results Project/programme Means of
Baseline
(outcomes/ specific Indicator Verification (MoV) Mid-term Final
outputs)
1.1. Capacity of DHM to 1. Capacity Level 1 Level 2 Level 4 Creating SOPs and building
assess risk, prioritise GLOF Assessment capacity within DHM enables
risk reduction strategies and Scorecard110 them to prioritise glacial lakes
direct investments towards for risk reduction interventions
2. DHM/ MoEWRI without external support.
GLOF risk reduction in Nepal
a. Annual Progress
Output 1: Institutional
Report (Reports -
and technical capacity MOEWRI)
strengthened to
develop and integrate
climate risk and hazard 4. Project Specific
information into a. Quarterly
planning and Monitoring Report
development. b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
110 Capacity Development Scorecard
Level 1: No formal processes, methodologies or SOPs in place for regularly assessing GLOF risk or prioritizing risk reduction measures in Nepal. Prioritisation and investment is undertaken by external entities
(e.g. UNDP/ICIMOD) and not by the government
Level 2: Methodologies and SOPs are in place for regularly assessing GLOF risk and producing updated priority list of glacial lakes for GLOF risk reduction interventions, but DHM staff lack the capacity to
adequately implement the processes. Risk reduction prioritisation and investment still reliant on external entities.
Level 3: Methodologies and SOPs are in place for regularly assessing GLOF risk and DHM staff are trained on the processes and have updated the priority list of glacial lakes for GLOF risk reduction
interventions.
Level 4: Risk knowledge systems related to GLOFS are fully operational and updated priority lists of glacial lakes are being regularly updated using geophysical and geospatial data enabling the prioritisation of
risk reduction interventions in Nepal. Project M&E systems are fully integrated into national entities, under DHM leadership.

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 |  |  | stipulated in national
policies and plans — will
be integrated into the
established PPPs. | sectors in Nepal, including the
tourism, hydropower and tourism
sectors. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 73 ---
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project/programme |  |  |  |  | Means of
Verification (MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note | 
 | results |  |  | Project/programme |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  |  | 
 | (outcomes/ |  |  | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1: Institutional
and technical capacity
strengthened to
develop and integrate
climate risk and hazard
information into
planning and
development. |  |  | 1.1. Capacity of DHM to
assess risk, prioritise GLOF
risk reduction strategies and
direct investments towards
GLOF risk reduction in Nepal | 1.1. Capacity of DHM to |  |  | 1. Capacity |  | Level 1 | Level 2 |  | Level 4 |  | Creating SOPs and building
capacity within DHM enables
them to prioritise glacial lakes
for risk reduction interventions
without external support. |  | 
 |  |  |  | assess risk, prioritise GLOF |  |  | Assessment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | isk reduction strategies and |  |  | Scorecard110 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | direct investments towards |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2. DHM/ MoEWRI |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | GLOF risk reduction in Nepal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | a. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Report (Reports - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | MOEWRI) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4. Project Specific |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | a. Quarterly |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | b. Third party |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | c. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | d. Interim Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 73 ---
Means of
Verification (MoV)

--- Table 4 on Page 73 ---
Creating SOPs and building
capacity within DHM enables
them to prioritise glacial lakes
for risk reduction interventions
without external support.


--- Table 5 on Page 73 ---
Output 1: Institutional
and technical capacity
strengthened to
develop and integrate
climate risk and hazard
nformation into
planning and
development.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
E
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
2.1. Number of stations for 1. DHM/MoEWRI 46 A total of 32 pieces of new A total of 67 pieces of new First responders and national-
Nepal’s EWS to account for meteorological monitoring equipment monitoring equipment and local-level decision-
the four most vulnerable a. Annual Progress stations111 installed, comprising: installed, comprising: makers will be the main users
glacial basins to GLOFs and
Report (Reports -
servicing the of the data.
MOEWRI)
rain-induced flooding in Nepal. areas
2. Project Specific downstream of At least 3 Base Stations 6 Base Stations installed (2 in The private sector will also be
a. Quarterly the Thulagi, installed the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in allowed access to climate
Monitoring Report Lower Barun, the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and data.
2 in the Arun Sub-basin)
b. Third party Lumding Tsho
Output 2: Improved Monitoring Report and Hongu 2 At least 12 automatic 24 automatic weather stations
hazard monitoring and c. Annual Progress Glacial Lakes weather stations installed installed (7 AWS in the
Report
the generation and Marsyangdi Basin, 5 in the
dissemination of early d. Interim Evaluation Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12
Report in the Arun Sub-basin)
warnings to local
e. Project Completion
communities and
Report At least 3 precipitation 9 precipitation gauges (2 in
important economic
f. Terminal Evaluation gauges installed the Marsyangdi Basin and 7
sectors leading to
Report in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin)
reduced economic
loss and loss of At least 13 radar-based 27 radar-based water level
human lives from water level sensors (RLS) sensors (RLS) installed (11 in
GLOF events. installed the Marsyangdi Basin, 8 in
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and
8 in the Arun Sub-basin)
1 low-cost tower with a free 1 low-cost tower with a free
air satellite mode system air satellite mode system and
and 4 accompanying siren 9 accompanying siren towers
towers installed (4 towers in the Marsyangdi
Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin and 3 in the Arun
Sub-basin)
111 specifically climatic and precipitation s tations.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 |  |  | e. Project Completion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | f. Terminal Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2: Improved
hazard monitoring and
the generation and
dissemination of early
warnings to local
communities and
important economic
sectors leading to
reduced economic
loss and loss of
human lives from
GLOF events. | 2.1. Number of stations for
Nepal’s EWS to account for
the four most vulnerable
glacial basins to GLOFs and
rain-induced flooding in Nepal. | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress
Report (Reports -
MOEWRI)
2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report | 1. DHM/MoEWRI |  | 46
meteorological
stations111
servicing the
areas
downstream of
the Thulagi,
Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho
and Hongu 2
Glacial Lakes |  | A total of 32 pieces of new |  |  | A total of 67 pieces of new |  | First responders and national-
and local-level decision-
makers will be the main users
of the data.
The private sector will also be
allowed access to climate
data.
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | monitoring equipment |  |  | monitoring equipment |  | 
 |  |  | a. Annual Progress |  |  |  | installed, comprising: |  |  | installed, comprising: |  | 
 |  |  | Report (Reports - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | MOEWRI) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 2. Project Specific |  |  |  | At least 3 Base Stations |  |  | 6 Base Stations installed (2 in |  | 
 |  |  | a. Quarterly |  |  |  | installed |  |  | the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2 in the Arun Sub-basin) |  | 
 |  |  | b. Third party |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  | At least 12 automatic |  |  | 24 automatic weather stations |  | 
 |  |  | c. Annual Progress |  |  |  | weather stations installed |  |  | installed (7 AWS in the |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  | Marsyangdi Basin, 5 in the |  | 
 |  |  | d. Interim Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the Arun Sub-basin) |  | 
 |  |  | e. Project Completion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  | At least 3 precipitation |  |  | 9 precipitation gauges (2 in |  | 
 |  |  | f. Terminal Evaluation |  |  |  | gauges installed |  |  | the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  | in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | At least 13 radar-based |  |  | 27 radar-based water level |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | water level sensors (RLS) |  |  | sensors (RLS) installed (11 in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | installed |  |  | the Marsyangdi Basin, 8 in |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 8 in the Arun Sub-basin) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1 low-cost tower with a free |  |  | 1 low-cost tower with a free |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | air satellite mode system |  |  | air satellite mode system and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | and 4 accompanying siren |  |  | 9 accompanying siren towers |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | towers installed |  |  | (4 towers in the Marsyangdi |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-basin and 3 in the Arun |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-basin) |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 74 ---
2.1. Number of stations for
Nepal’s EWS to account for
he four most vulnerable
glacial basins to GLOFs and
ain-induced flooding in Nepal.

--- Table 3 on Page 74 ---
46
meteorological
stations111
servicing the
areas
downstream of
the Thulagi,
Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho
and Hongu 2
Glacial Lakes

--- Table 4 on Page 74 ---
First responders and national-
and local-level decision-
makers will be the main users
of the data.

The private sector will also be
allowed access to climate
data.

--- Table 5 on Page 74 ---
Output 2: Improved
hazard monitoring and
the generation and
dissemination of early
warnings to local
communities and
important economic
sectors leading to
reduced economic
loss and loss of
human lives from
GLOF events.

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
E
2.2. Change in lead times for 1. DHM/MoEWRI 0 At least 30 minute lead At least 30 minute lead time Lead times were considered
communities from when an time for four communities for all target communities to be zero in the absence of
early warnings received till a a. Annual Progress in target watersheds an EWS. The targets
Report (Reports -
GLOF hits consider the flood arrival time
MOEWRI)
at the first downstream
community from the point of
triggering a GLOF based off
2. Project Specific
of flood modelling.
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
The approach assumes that
b. Third party there is sufficient demand for
Monitoring Report community level uptake and
c. Annual Progress the use of early warning
Report information products among
d. Interim Evaluation national-level decision-
Report makers, the private sector
e. Project Completion and the entities responsible
Report for the coordination of
f. Terminal Evaluation disaster response, including
Report the NEOC, LEOC,
Community Disaster
Management Committee
(CDMC)/Task Force, and
local communities.
3.1. Change in the water level 1. DHM/MoEWRI The baseline All pre-construction actions 3 m reduction in water level in No external factors inhibit the
of the four most high-risk water levels for required in the four the Thulagi, Lower Barun and lowering of the four target
Output 3: Reduced glacial lakes in Nepal. a. Annual Progress the target glacial locations have been Lumding Tsho Lakes and 1 m lakes during the
probability of GLOF Report (Reports - lakes are as completed, including reduction in water level in the implementation period.
events and flash MOEWRI) follows: topographical surveys, Hongu 2 Lake. The water
floods, through 2. NDRRMA/MoHA bathymetric investigation, levels of the target lakes after Communities maintain the
disaster risk reduction (https://bipad.gov.np/n Lower Barun: discharge analysis of the lowering will be as follows: downstream adaptation
measures p/report) 205 m Thulagi Glacier Lake outlet, interventions implemented in
implemented in priority a. Annual Progress Lumding Tsho: and geographical Lower Barun: the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-
glacial lake Report 114 m investigation through a 202 m basins.
watersheds. b. Nepal Disaster Hongu 2: 53.4 m GPR survey113. Lumding Tsho: 111 m
Thulagi: 76 m112 Hongu 2: 52.4 m
Report
Thulagi: 73 m
112 Residual Risk Modelling & Watershed /sub-watershed Environmental Vulnerability Assessment. 2021. UNDP.
113 This is because the pre-construction period is 2 years and the construction period 3 years, meaning that the full construction works required to lower the water level in the four lakes will be completed by end
Year 5/Year 6.

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 | 2.2. Change in lead times for
communities from when an
early warnings received till a
GLOF hits | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress
Report (Reports -
MOEWRI)
2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report | 0 |  |  | At least 30 minute lead
time for four communities
in target watersheds | At least 30 minute lead time
for all target communities |  |  |  | Lead times were considered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | to be zero in the absence of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | an EWS. The targets | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | consider the flood arrival time | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | at the first downstream | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | community from the point of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | triggering a GLOF based off | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of flood modelling. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The approach assumes that | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | there is sufficient demand for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | community level uptake and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the use of early warning | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | information products among | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | national-level decision- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | makers, the private sector | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and the entities responsible | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for the coordination of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | disaster response, including | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the NEOC, LEOC, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Community Disaster | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Management Committee | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (CDMC)/Task Force, and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | local communities. | 
Output 3: Reduced
probability of GLOF
events and flash
floods, through
disaster risk reduction
measures
implemented in priority
glacial lake
watersheds. | 3.1. Change in the water level
of the four most high-risk
glacial lakes in Nepal. | 1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress
Report (Reports -
MOEWRI)
2. NDRRMA/MoHA
(https://bipad.gov.np/n
p/report)
a. Annual Progress
Report
b. Nepal Disaster
Report |  | The baseline |  | All pre-construction actions
required in the four
locations have been
completed, including
topographical surveys,
bathymetric investigation,
discharge analysis of the
Thulagi Glacier Lake outlet,
and geographical
investigation through a
GPR survey113. |  | 3 m reduction in water level in |  | No external factors inhibit the
lowering of the four target
lakes during the
implementation period.
Communities maintain the
downstream adaptation
interventions implemented in
the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-
basins. | No external factors inhibit the | 
 |  |  |  | water levels for |  |  |  | the Thulagi, Lower Barun and |  |  | lowering of the four target | 
 |  |  |  | the target glacial |  |  |  | Lumding Tsho Lakes and 1 m |  |  | lakes during the | 
 |  |  |  | lakes are as |  |  |  | reduction in water level in the |  |  | implementation period. | 
 |  |  |  | follows: |  |  |  | Hongu 2 Lake. The water |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | levels of the target lakes after |  |  | Communities maintain the | 
 |  |  |  | Lower Barun: |  |  |  | lowering will be as follows: |  |  | downstream adaptation | 
 |  |  |  | 205 m |  |  |  |  |  |  | interventions implemented in | 
 |  |  |  | Lumding Tsho: |  |  |  | Lower Barun: |  |  | the Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub- | 
 |  |  |  | 114 m |  |  |  | 202 m |  |  | basins. | 
 |  |  |  | Hongu 2: 53.4 m |  |  |  | Lumding Tsho: 111 m |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Thulagi: 76 m112 |  |  |  | Hongu 2: 52.4 m |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Thulagi: 73 m |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 75 ---
2.2. Change in lead times for
communities from when an
early warnings received till a
GLOF hits

--- Table 3 on Page 75 ---
1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress
Report (Reports -
MOEWRI)

2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report


--- Table 4 on Page 75 ---
At least 30 minute lead
time for four communities
in target watersheds

--- Table 5 on Page 75 ---
At least 30 minute lead time
for all target communities

--- Table 6 on Page 75 ---
3.1. Change in the water level
of the four most high-risk
glacial lakes in Nepal.

--- Table 7 on Page 75 ---
1. DHM/MoEWRI
a. Annual Progress
Report (Reports -
MOEWRI)
2. NDRRMA/MoHA
(https://bipad.gov.np/n
p/report)
a. Annual Progress
Report
b. Nepal Disaster
Report

--- Table 8 on Page 75 ---
All pre-construction actions
required in the four
locations have been
completed, including
topographical surveys,
bathymetric investigation,
discharge analysis of the
Thulagi Glacier Lake outlet,
and geographical
investigation through a
GPR survey113.


--- Table 9 on Page 75 ---
Output 3: Reduced
probability of GLOF
events and flash
floods, through
disaster risk reduction
measures
implemented in priority
glacial lake
watersheds.

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
E
c. 5 W Dashboard Site-specific engineering
(https://bipad.gov.np/ designs have been
np/5w-dashboard- developed and validated
flood-and-landslide- for lowering the levels of all
four lakes.
september-2024)
3. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
3.2. Number or volume of 1. MOFE/ 0 At least 1,500 m3 of flood 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and
infrastructural risk reduction DOFSC/DNPWC walls and RCC revetments RCC revetments in the Arun
measures installed to reduce in the Arun Sub-basin Sub-basin
a. Annual Progress
the impacts of GLOFs and
Report At least 30 conservation 67 conservation ponds of at
flooding.
(https://www.mofe.gov ponds of at least 60m3 least 60m3 each (38 in the
.np/resources/progres each (15 in each of the Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the
s-reports-6128 Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub- Dudhkoshi Sub-basin)
basins)
b. Annual Progress
Report (Report |
Department of
National Park and
Wildlife Conservation)
2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 |  |  | c. 5 W Dashboard |  |  | Site-specific engineering
designs have been
developed and validated
for lowering the levels of all
four lakes. |  | 
 |  |  | (https://bipad.gov.np/ |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | np/5w-dashboard- |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | flood-and-landslide- |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | september-2024) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 3. Project Specific |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | a. Quarterly |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | b. Third party |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | c. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | d. Interim Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | e. Project Completion |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | f. Terminal Evaluation |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3.2. Number or volume of
infrastructural risk reduction
measures installed to reduce
the impacts of GLOFs and
flooding. |  | 1. MOFE/ |  | 0 | At least 1,500 m3 of flood
walls and RCC revetments
in the Arun Sub-basin
At least 30 conservation
ponds of at least 60m3
each (15 in each of the
Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-
basins) | 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and
RCC revetments in the Arun
Sub-basin
67 conservation ponds of at
least 60m3 each (38 in the
Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) | 
 |  |  | DOFSC/DNPWC |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | a. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (https://www.mofe.gov |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | .np/resources/progres |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | s-reports-6128 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | b. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report (Report | |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Department of |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | National Park and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Wildlife Conservation) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 2. Project Specific |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | a. Quarterly |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | b. Third party |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 76 ---
Site-specific engineering
designs have been
developed and validated
for lowering the levels of all
four lakes.

--- Table 3 on Page 76 ---
3.2. Number or volume of
infrastructural risk reduction
measures installed to reduce
the impacts of GLOFs and
flooding.

--- Table 4 on Page 76 ---
At least 1,500 m3 of flood
walls and RCC revetments
in the Arun Sub-basin
At least 30 conservation
ponds of at least 60m3
each (15 in each of the
Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-
basins)

--- Table 5 on Page 76 ---
3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and
RCC revetments in the Arun
Sub-basin
67 conservation ponds of at
least 60m3 each (38 in the
Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin)

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
E
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report
3.3. Area or volume of Eco- 1. MOFE/ 0 At least 75 ha of trees 153.3ha of trees planted (81.6
Contractors for restoration
DRR measures implemented DOFSC/DNPWC planted (37.5 ha each in ha in the Arun Sub-basin and
activities will source labour
in downstream catchments of the Arun and Dudhkoshi 71.6 ha in the Dudhkoshi
Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub- a. Annual Progress Sub-basins) Sub-basin) and inputs – including
Report seeds/seedlings – from local
basins
(https://www.mofe.gov At least 8,800 m3 of 17,744 m3 of vegetative suppliers.
.np/resources/progres vegetative gabion walls gabion walls constructed
s-reports-6128 constructed (5,400 m3 in (10,796 m3 in the Arun Sub- Seedlings are available at
numerous private and public
) the Arun Sub-basin and basin and 6,948 m3 in the
nurseries throughout Nepal.
b. Annual Progress 3,400 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
Report (Report | Sub-basin) Where local supply of specific
Department of
species is not readily
National Park and At least 475,000 m of live 978,436 m of live check dams available, contractors
Wildlife Conservation) check dams constructed constructed (955,396 m in the conducting restoration efforts
(465,000 m in the Arun Arun Sub-basin and 23,040 m will establish new temporary
Sub-basin and 10,000 m in in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). nurseries and seed
2. Project Specific
the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). replication units to meet
a. Quarterly
supply.
Monitoring Report At least 7,600 m3 of 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative
b. Third party vegetative gabion gabion revetments Drones are provided by the
Monitoring Report revetments constructed constructed (3,447.5 m3 in project for seed sowing.
c. Annual Progress (1,800 m3 in the Arun Sub- the Arun Sub-basin and
Report basin and 5,800 m3 in the 11,851.44 m3 in the Contractors for construction
d. Interim Evaluation Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). works (Embankments,
Report gabions, check dams,
At least 3,600 m3 of 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion
e. Project Completion revetments etc) will supply
vegetative gabion spurs spurs constructed (4,608 m3
Report necessary inputs.
constructed (2,300 m3 in in the Arun Sub-basin and
f. Terminal Evaluation the Arun Sub-basin and 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Restoration efforts and hybrid
Report 1,300 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
infrastructure will follow local
Sub-basin).
guidelines developed by
Ministry of Forests and
At least 14,800 m3 of 29,685 m3 of vegetative
Environment
vegetative gabion check gabion check dams

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
 |  |  | c. Annual Progress |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | d. Interim Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | e. Project Completion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | f. Terminal Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 3.3. Area or volume of Eco-
DRR measures implemented
in downstream catchments of
Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-
basins | 1. MOFE/
DOFSC/DNPWC
a. Annual Progress
Report
(https://www.mofe.gov
.np/resources/progres
s-reports-6128
)
b. Annual Progress
Report (Report |
Department of
National Park and
Wildlife Conservation)
2. Project Specific
a. Quarterly
Monitoring Report
b. Third party
Monitoring Report
c. Annual Progress
Report
d. Interim Evaluation
Report
e. Project Completion
Report
f. Terminal Evaluation
Report | 1. MOFE/ |  | 0 |  | At least 75 ha of trees |  |  | 153.3ha of trees planted (81.6 |  | Contractors for restoration
activities will source labour
and inputs – including
seeds/seedlings – from local
suppliers.
Seedlings are available at
numerous private and public
nurseries throughout Nepal.
Where local supply of specific
species is not readily
available, contractors
conducting restoration efforts
will establish new temporary
nurseries and seed
replication units to meet
supply.
Drones are provided by the
project for seed sowing.
Contractors for construction
works (Embankments,
gabions, check dams,
revetments etc) will supply
necessary inputs.
Restoration efforts and hybrid
infrastructure will follow local
guidelines developed by
Ministry of Forests and
Environment
 |  |  | DOFSC/DNPWC |  |  |  | planted (37.5 ha each in |  |  | ha in the Arun Sub-basin and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Arun and Dudhkoshi |  |  | 71.6 ha in the Dudhkoshi |  | 
 |  |  | a. Annual Progress |  |  |  | Sub-basins) |  |  | Sub-basin) |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | (https://www.mofe.gov |  |  |  | At least 8,800 m3 of |  |  | 17,744 m3 of vegetative |  | 
 |  |  | .np/resources/progres |  |  |  | vegetative gabion walls |  |  | gabion walls constructed |  | 
 |  |  | s-reports-6128 |  |  |  | constructed (5,400 m3 in |  |  | (10,796 m3 in the Arun Sub- |  | 
 |  |  | ) |  |  |  | the Arun Sub-basin and |  |  | basin and 6,948 m3 in the |  | 
 |  |  | b. Annual Progress |  |  |  | 3,400 m3 in the Dudhkoshi |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  | 
 |  |  | Report (Report | |  |  |  | Sub-basin) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Department of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | National Park and |  |  |  | At least 475,000 m of live |  |  | 978,436 m of live check dams |  | 
 |  |  | Wildlife Conservation) |  |  |  | check dams constructed |  |  | constructed (955,396 m in the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (465,000 m in the Arun |  |  | Arun Sub-basin and 23,040 m |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-basin and 10,000 m in |  |  | in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  | 
 |  |  | 2. Project Specific |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | a. Quarterly |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  | At least 7,600 m3 of |  |  | 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative |  | 
 |  |  | b. Third party |  |  |  | vegetative gabion |  |  | gabion revetments |  | 
 |  |  | Monitoring Report |  |  |  | revetments constructed |  |  | constructed (3,447.5 m3 in |  | 
 |  |  | c. Annual Progress |  |  |  | (1,800 m3 in the Arun Sub- |  |  | the Arun Sub-basin and |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  | basin and 5,800 m3 in the |  |  | 11,851.44 m3 in the |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  | 
 |  |  | d. Interim Evaluation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | At least 3,600 m3 of |  |  | 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion |  | 
 |  |  | e. Project Completion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | vegetative gabion spurs |  |  | spurs constructed (4,608 m3 |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | constructed (2,300 m3 in |  |  | in the Arun Sub-basin and |  | 
 |  |  | f. Terminal Evaluation |  |  |  | the Arun Sub-basin and |  |  | 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi |  | 
 |  |  | Report |  |  |  | 1,300 m3 in the Dudhkoshi |  |  | Sub-basin). |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | At least 14,800 m3 of |  |  | 29,685 m3 of vegetative |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | vegetative gabion check |  |  | gabion check dams |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 77 ---
3.3. Area or volume of Eco-
DRR measures implemented
in downstream catchments of
Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
E
dams constructed (11,200 constructed (21,960 m3 in the
m3 in the Arun Sub-basin Arun Sub-basin and 7,725 m3
and 3,600 m3 in the in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
At least 7,500 m3 of 15,009.8 m3 of vegetative dry
vegetative dry stone check stone check dams (9,371.25
dams constructed (4,700 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and
m3 in the Arun Sub-basin 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
and 2,800 m3 in the Sub-basin).
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
At least 1,500 m2 of 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone
vegetative stone rip-rap rip-rap planted (1,582.5 m2 in
constructed (750 m2 in the the Arun Sub-basin and
Arun Sub-basin and 750 1,611.5 m2 in the Dudhkoshi
m2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub- Sub-basin).
basin).
At least 22,500 m of brush
layering constructed 45,188 m of brush layering
(18,300 m in the Arun Sub- planted (36,750 m in the Arun
basin and 4,200 m in the Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
At least 149,000 m2 of
grass seedlings planted 298,162 m2 of grass
(77,708 m2 in the Arun seedlings planted (155,419
Sub-basin and 71,371 m2 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and
in the Dudhkoshi Sub- 142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi
basin). Sub-basin).
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
Co-benefit 1: Carbon tCO2-e sequestered Estimating 0 -5,320 tCO2-e -15,000 tCO2-e Targets for Carbon sequestration
Sequestration sequestration were estimated using the FAO
potential using FAO Project Lifespan: ExACT tool.
ExACT tool -100,104 tCO2-e
The estimates considered a 7-year
implementation phase and 20-year
capitalisation phase.

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 |  |  |  |  | dams constructed (11,200 |  |  | constructed (21,960 m3 in the |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | m3 in the Arun Sub-basin |  |  | Arun Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and 3,600 m3 in the |  |  | in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | At least 7,500 m3 of |  |  | 15,009.8 m3 of vegetative dry |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | vegetative dry stone check |  |  | stone check dams (9,371.25 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | dams constructed (4,700 |  |  | m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | m3 in the Arun Sub-basin |  |  | 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and 2,800 m3 in the |  |  | Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | At least 1,500 m2 of |  |  | 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | vegetative stone rip-rap |  |  | rip-rap planted (1,582.5 m2 in |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | constructed (750 m2 in the |  |  | the Arun Sub-basin and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Arun Sub-basin and 750 |  |  | 1,611.5 m2 in the Dudhkoshi |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | m2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub- |  |  | Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | basin). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | At least 22,500 m of brush |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | layering constructed |  |  | 45,188 m of brush layering |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (18,300 m in the Arun Sub- |  |  | planted (36,750 m in the Arun |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | basin and 4,200 m in the |  |  | Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  | Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | At least 149,000 m2 of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | grass seedlings planted |  |  | 298,162 m2 of grass |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (77,708 m2 in the Arun |  |  | seedlings planted (155,419 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Sub-basin and 71,371 m2 |  |  | m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | in the Dudhkoshi Sub- |  |  | 142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | basin). |  |  | Sub-basin). |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 1: Carbon
Sequestration | tCO2-e sequestered | Estimating
sequestration
potential using FAO
ExACT tool | 0 | -5,320 tCO2-e |  |  | -15,000 tCO2-e
Project Lifespan:
-100,104 tCO2-e |  |  | Targets for Carbon sequestration |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | were estimated using the FAO |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ExACT tool. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The estimates considered a 7-year |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implementation phase and 20-year |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capitalisation phase. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 78 ---
Co-benefit 1: Carbon
Sequestration

--- Table 3 on Page 78 ---
Estimating
sequestration
potential using FAO
ExACT tool


--- Table 4 on Page 78 ---
-15,000 tCO2-e

Project Lifespan:
-100,104 tCO2-e

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
E
Sequestration benefits were derived
from restoration efforts assumed
that trees are planted 2 m apart at a
density of 2800 trees per hectare fpr
153ha or restoration, and assumed
the area of vegetated EcoDRR
infrastructure to function as restored
grasslands.
Co-benefit 2: Soil Changes in rate of soil erosion MOFE/DOFSC An estimated Erosion rates per hectare Erosion rates per Downstream EcoDRR interventions
stabilisation in watershed areas 1.7 mm of reduced by 10% in restored hectare reduced by that reduce the impact of residual
a. Annual Progress
Report topsoil is lost areas 20% in restored areas flooding after lake lowering will
(https://www.mofe.gov each year due stabilize mountain slopes, reducing
.np/resources/progres to soil erosion in soil erosion and landslides.
s-reports-6128 Nepal. In the
) targeted Koshi Soil erosion baseline was
Basin, soil loss determined from a scientific analysis
of up to 22 t ha-1 by the Tribhuvan University in
year-1 in the Nepal, which estimated soil loss of
barren lands Nepal through the application of the
were reported. Revised Universal Soil Loss
Equation (RUSLE) model.114
Targets were set based on expert
opinion by Nepalese scientists
involved in developing and
modelling the impacts of EcoDRR
measures.
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables
1.1. Strengthen There is an urgent need within DHM for the development of an in- Develop methods and SOPs for inventory and development Approved methods and SOPs used by the
the knowledge house monitoring database for glaciers and glacial lakes. While of spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes Government of Nepal for inventory and
114 Koirala et al. 2019. Estimation of Soil E rosion in Nepal Using a RUSLE Modeling and Geospatial Tool. Geosciences 2019, 9, 147; doi:10.3390/geosciences9040147 and Chalise, D., Kumar, L. and
Kristiansen, P., 2019. Land degradation by soil erosion in Nepal: A review. Soil systems, 3(1): 12.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Sequestration benefits were derived | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | from restoration efforts assumed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | that trees are planted 2 m apart at a | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | density of 2800 trees per hectare fpr | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 153ha or restoration, and assumed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | the area of vegetated EcoDRR | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | infrastructure to function as restored | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | grasslands. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 2: Soil
stabilisation | Changes in rate of soil erosion
in watershed areas | MOFE/DOFSC
a. Annual Progress
Report
(https://www.mofe.gov
.np/resources/progres
s-reports-6128
) | An estimated
1.7 mm of
topsoil is lost
each year due
to soil erosion in
Nepal. In the
targeted Koshi
Basin, soil loss
of up to 22 t ha-1
year-1 in the
barren lands
were reported. | Erosion rates per hectare
reduced by 10% in restored
areas | Erosion rates per
hectare reduced by
20% in restored areas |  | Downstream EcoDRR interventions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | that reduce the impact of residual | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | flooding after lake lowering will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | stabilize mountain slopes, reducing | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | soil erosion and landslides. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Soil erosion baseline was | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | determined from a scientific analysis | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | by the Tribhuvan University in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Nepal, which estimated soil loss of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Nepal through the application of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Revised Universal Soil Loss | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Equation (RUSLE) model.114 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Targets were set based on expert | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | opinion by Nepalese scientists | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | involved in developing and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | modelling the impacts of EcoDRR | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | measures. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 79 ---
Co-benefit 2: Soil
stabilisation

--- Table 3 on Page 79 ---
Changes in rate of soil erosion
n watershed areas

--- Table 4 on Page 79 ---
MOFE/DOFSC
a. Annual Progress
Report
(https://www.mofe.gov
.np/resources/progres
s-reports-6128
)


--- Table 5 on Page 79 ---
An estimated
1.7 mm of
topsoil is lost
each year due
to soil erosion in
Nepal. In the
targeted Koshi
Basin, soil loss
of up to 22 t ha-1
year-1 in the
barren lands
were reported.

--- Table 6 on Page 79 ---
Erosion rates per hectare
reduced by 10% in restored
areas

--- Table 7 on Page 79 ---
Erosion rates per
hectare reduced by
20% in restored areas

--- Table 8 on Page 79 ---
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  | 
Activities | Description | Sub-activities | Deliverables
1.1. Strengthen
the knowledge | There is an urgent need within DHM for the development of an in-
house monitoring database for glaciers and glacial lakes. While | Develop methods and SOPs for inventory and development
of spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes | Approved methods and SOPs used by the
Government of Nepal for inventory and

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
E
base and technical DHM has the hardware and software capabilities, formal (including geophysical investigation, as well as topographic development of spatial digital database
capacities for Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and training are required and bathymetric surveys). (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes.
improved climate to catalyse the development and management of this database. Introduce methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization, Approved methods and tools used by the
research and risk To address this need, Activity 1.1 will strengthen DHM’s and mapping other extreme flood, landslide, mudflow and Government of Nepal for GLOF hazard
reduction institutional and technical capacity for implementing sustainable
soil erosion hazards and risks, using a combination of prioritization and mapping other extreme
strategies. GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal.
remote-sensing and satellite data, as well as ground- flood, landslide, mudflow and soil erosion
truthing and socio-economic vulnerability assessments. hazards and risks.
First, methods and SOPs for the inventory and development of a
Introduce methodology and standard operating procedures Approved methodology and standard
spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes will be
developed and institutionalised in DHM. The development of this (SOPs) for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in operation procedures (SOPs) used by the
GIS database is the first and most important step in the vulnerable watersheds. Government of Nepal for implementing
identification and quantification of risks through desk studies and integrated GLOF risk reduction in
remote sensing analysis. The SOPs for the GIS database should vulnerable watershed.
focus on: Train technical staff in DHM’s Remote Sensing and GIS Training workshops for technical DHM staff.
• data acquisition and frequency of data collection; and Snow Survey and Glacier Lake Departments on
• database management; regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritisation, as well
• methodologies/standard procedures for analysis and quality as how to use the risk information generated.
control;
• reporting and publication formats; and
• online geoportal management for the dissemination of
reports.
The establishment of the GIS database will be supported by
geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric
surveys. SOPs for the investigation and surveys should focus on:
• pre-field planning of logistics, including equipment checks
and survey layouts;
• human resources management;
• stepwise procedures for conducting field work;
• Monitoring and Evaluation protocols; and
• report generation and publication formats for bathymetric,
DGPS, GPR, ERT and other surveys.
The risk status of the identified glaciers and glacial lakes using
the GIS database, geophysical investigation and surveys will be
updated by DHM every five years to account for changes in
climate and geophysical conditions. The selection of this time
period was informed by international best practice; in India, the
usual practice is to update the status annually, while a recent
through the ICIMOD reported that updating the status every five
years is sufficient.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
base and technical
capacities for
improved climate
research and risk
reduction
strategies. | DHM has the hardware and software capabilities, formal
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and training are required
to catalyse the development and management of this database.
To address this need, Activity 1.1 will strengthen DHM’s
institutional and technical capacity for implementing sustainable
GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal.
First, methods and SOPs for the inventory and development of a
spatial digital database (GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes will be
developed and institutionalised in DHM. The development of this
GIS database is the first and most important step in the
identification and quantification of risks through desk studies and
remote sensing analysis. The SOPs for the GIS database should
focus on:
• data acquisition and frequency of data collection;
• database management;
• methodologies/standard procedures for analysis and quality
control;
• reporting and publication formats; and
• online geoportal management for the dissemination of
reports.
The establishment of the GIS database will be supported by
geophysical investigation, as well as topographic and bathymetric
surveys. SOPs for the investigation and surveys should focus on:
• pre-field planning of logistics, including equipment checks
and survey layouts;
• human resources management;
• stepwise procedures for conducting field work;
• Monitoring and Evaluation protocols; and
• report generation and publication formats for bathymetric,
DGPS, GPR, ERT and other surveys.
The risk status of the identified glaciers and glacial lakes using
the GIS database, geophysical investigation and surveys will be
updated by DHM every five years to account for changes in
climate and geophysical conditions. The selection of this time
period was informed by international best practice; in India, the
usual practice is to update the status annually, while a recent
through the ICIMOD reported that updating the status every five
years is sufficient. | (including geophysical investigation, as well as topographic
and bathymetric surveys). | development of spatial digital database
(GIS) of glaciers and glacial lakes.
 |  | Introduce methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization,
and mapping other extreme flood, landslide, mudflow and
soil erosion hazards and risks, using a combination of
remote-sensing and satellite data, as well as ground-
truthing and socio-economic vulnerability assessments. | Approved methods and tools used by the
Government of Nepal for GLOF hazard
prioritization and mapping other extreme
flood, landslide, mudflow and soil erosion
hazards and risks.
 |  | Introduce methodology and standard operating procedures
(SOPs) for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in
vulnerable watersheds. | Approved methodology and standard
operation procedures (SOPs) used by the
Government of Nepal for implementing
integrated GLOF risk reduction in
vulnerable watershed.
 |  | Train technical staff in DHM’s Remote Sensing and GIS
and Snow Survey and Glacier Lake Departments on
regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritisation, as well
as how to use the risk information generated. | Training workshops for technical DHM staff.

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
E
Second, methods and tools will be introduced into DHM’s
operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritization and mapping
other extreme events. This hazard prioritisation will use the
established GIS database, remote-sensing and satellite data, as
well as ground-truthing and socio-economic vulnerability
assessments.
Finally, methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated
GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds will be developed,
informed by the GIS database and hazard mapping that will also
be undertaken under this activity. The relevant staff in DHM’s
Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and Glacier Lake
Departments will be trained on regular/operational monitoring for
risk prioritisation, as well as how to use the risk information
generated to implement GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal’s
high-risk areas. Given the methods and tools established will be
robust and replicable on a national scale for operational
monitoring, DHM is committed to continuing to provide training to
its staff in the Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and
Glacier Lake Departments on the methods and tools established
under this project activity beyond the project lifetime, as well as
include training as priority work in its annual programme. Overall,
this project activity will contribute to the efficient and effective
implementation of Nepal’s Disaster Risk Reduction National
Strategic Plan of Action 2018–2030, and the Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act, 2074 and Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Rules, 2076 (2019). These are the
main guiding policy documents for disaster response in the
country.
This project activity will contribute to improving GLOF and flood Develop climate-induced hazard event recording and Operational climate-induced hazard event
risk reduction in Nepal by improving DHM’s capacity to develop management database systems. recording and management database
1.2. Develop and disseminate climate risk information to major economic systems.
public-private sectors (such as tourism and hydropower) and enhancing public- Develop climate risk information products and tailor them Climate risk information products used by
partnerships for private sector partnerships to encourage future investment into
for use by productive sectors (tourism and hydropower). productive sectors (tourism, and
sustainable GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal. At present, weather- and
hydropower).
investment in GLOF climate change-related risk information is accessible by the public
Establish public-private sector partnerships to generate Approved strategy by the Government of
and flood risk through the DHM website, phone messaging, radio, television and
long-term buy-in and incentives for investment in GLOF risk Nepal for public-private sector partnerships
information special tailored bulletins. Such platforms are also viable means to
services. disseminate sector-specific information. The tailoring of such reduction. to generate long-term buy-in and incentives
information, however, is currently limited to certain focused areas for investment in GLOF risk reduction.
and is only disseminated when a potential extreme climate event

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 | Second, methods and tools will be introduced into DHM’s
operating procedures for GLOF hazard prioritization and mapping
other extreme events. This hazard prioritisation will use the
established GIS database, remote-sensing and satellite data, as
well as ground-truthing and socio-economic vulnerability
assessments.
Finally, methodologies and SOPs for implementing integrated
GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds will be developed,
informed by the GIS database and hazard mapping that will also
be undertaken under this activity. The relevant staff in DHM’s
Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and Glacier Lake
Departments will be trained on regular/operational monitoring for
risk prioritisation, as well as how to use the risk information
generated to implement GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal’s
high-risk areas. Given the methods and tools established will be
robust and replicable on a national scale for operational
monitoring, DHM is committed to continuing to provide training to
its staff in the Remote Sensing and GIS and Snow Survey and
Glacier Lake Departments on the methods and tools established
under this project activity beyond the project lifetime, as well as
include training as priority work in its annual programme. Overall,
this project activity will contribute to the efficient and effective
implementation of Nepal’s Disaster Risk Reduction National
Strategic Plan of Action 2018–2030, and the Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act, 2074 and Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Rules, 2076 (2019). These are the
main guiding policy documents for disaster response in the
country. |  | 
1.2. Develop
public-private
partnerships for
sustainable
investment in GLOF
and flood risk
information
services. | This project activity will contribute to improving GLOF and flood
risk reduction in Nepal by improving DHM’s capacity to develop
and disseminate climate risk information to major economic
sectors (such as tourism and hydropower) and enhancing public-
private sector partnerships to encourage future investment into
GLOF risk reduction strategies in Nepal. At present, weather- and
climate change-related risk information is accessible by the public
through the DHM website, phone messaging, radio, television and
special tailored bulletins. Such platforms are also viable means to
disseminate sector-specific information. The tailoring of such
information, however, is currently limited to certain focused areas
and is only disseminated when a potential extreme climate event | Develop climate-induced hazard event recording and
management database systems. | Operational climate-induced hazard event
recording and management database
systems.
 |  | Develop climate risk information products and tailor them
for use by productive sectors (tourism and hydropower). | Climate risk information products used by
productive sectors (tourism, and
hydropower).
 |  | Establish public-private sector partnerships to generate
long-term buy-in and incentives for investment in GLOF risk
reduction. | Approved strategy by the Government of
Nepal for public-private sector partnerships
to generate long-term buy-in and incentives
for investment in GLOF risk reduction.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
E
has been identified. While DHM produces sector-specific, user-
friendly climate risk information to the aviation, agriculture and
tourism sectors, there is a need to expand the provision of tailored
climate risk information to the hydropower and tourism sectors
which will be done under Activity 1.2. This tailoring will be
supported by training DHM staff on the generation, recording and
maintenance of hydrometeorological databases to ensure the
most updated climate risk information disseminated to all
productive sectors. To record the use of this information by the
targeted productive sectors, user statistics will be registered on
DHM’s website, as well as through mobile applications and online
databases. Other opportunities to ensure use of the information
have been identified, including through sharing sector-specific
data to appropriate responsible agencies and developing
customized telephone applications.
To support the sustainability of GLOF risk reduction strategies in
Nepal, the establishment of public-private sector partnerships
should be established. Private sector actors in the hydropower,
tourism and insurance sectors have been identified as
appropriate partners, and most of the private and government
agencies targeted for these partnerships work directly with inter
alia the Ministry of Energy, Water, Resources and Irrigation: The
Department of Electricity Development, Nepal Electricity
Authority, Department of Water Resources and Irrigation and
Private Hydropower Developers. Under this project activity, policy
provisions will be made, and extensive stakeholder consultations
will be held with the relevant representatives in from the target
sectors to formalise and institutionalise long-term agreements to
support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal.
Risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early
warnings are the primary and the most important incentives for
investors in downstream areas. While access to such information
on a broader scale is a right of the public, customised targeted
information for such investment partners can be incentives for
cost-sharing. Other incentives include providing evacuation plans,
adaptation planning and knowledge dissemination workshops for
decision-makers.
2.1. Improve Under this activity, hydrological and meteorological stations will Install 6 Base Stations at Pangboche, Jayaram–Ghat - 6 Base stations installed.
observation network be installed across GLOF watersheds to fill gaps in the current Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani and

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
 | has been identified. While DHM produces sector-specific, user-
friendly climate risk information to the aviation, agriculture and
tourism sectors, there is a need to expand the provision of tailored
climate risk information to the hydropower and tourism sectors
which will be done under Activity 1.2. This tailoring will be
supported by training DHM staff on the generation, recording and
maintenance of hydrometeorological databases to ensure the
most updated climate risk information disseminated to all
productive sectors. To record the use of this information by the
targeted productive sectors, user statistics will be registered on
DHM’s website, as well as through mobile applications and online
databases. Other opportunities to ensure use of the information
have been identified, including through sharing sector-specific
data to appropriate responsible agencies and developing
customized telephone applications.
To support the sustainability of GLOF risk reduction strategies in
Nepal, the establishment of public-private sector partnerships
should be established. Private sector actors in the hydropower,
tourism and insurance sectors have been identified as
appropriate partners, and most of the private and government
agencies targeted for these partnerships work directly with inter
alia the Ministry of Energy, Water, Resources and Irrigation: The
Department of Electricity Development, Nepal Electricity
Authority, Department of Water Resources and Irrigation and
Private Hydropower Developers. Under this project activity, policy
provisions will be made, and extensive stakeholder consultations
will be held with the relevant representatives in from the target
sectors to formalise and institutionalise long-term agreements to
support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk reduction in Nepal.
Risk information for pre-project adaptation planning and early
warnings are the primary and the most important incentives for
investors in downstream areas. While access to such information
on a broader scale is a right of the public, customised targeted
information for such investment partners can be incentives for
cost-sharing. Other incentives include providing evacuation plans,
adaptation planning and knowledge dissemination workshops for
decision-makers. |  | 
2.1. Improve
observation network | Under this activity, hydrological and meteorological stations will
be installed across GLOF watersheds to fill gaps in the current | Install 6 Base Stations at Pangboche, Jayaram–Ghat -
Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani and | 6 Base stations installed.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
E
densit y in GLOF observational network. These gaps include inoperative monitoring Muglin (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
watersheds to stations, poor coverage in higher altitude areas and low-resolution basin and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin).
strengthen the temporal and spatial coverage. Install 24 automatic weather stations (AWS) at key 24 automatic weather stations (AWS)
technical capacity of locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi installed.
In response, the following will take place under the project activity:
DHM for the Basin, 5 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun
monitoring of Sub-basin).
6 base stations will be installed at Pangboche, Jayaram–Ghat -
climate hazard and Install 9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) at key locations in 9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) installed.
Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani and
risk. GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in the
Muglin (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin
and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin). Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
Integrate new and existing hydrology stations into a real- New and existing hydrology stations
24 automatic weather stations (AWS) will be installed at key time data acquisition system. integrated into a real-time data acquisition
locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi Basin, system
5 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun Sub-basin) to Install 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS) at key 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS)
measure temperature, atmospheric pressure, precipitation, locations in GLOF watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi Basin, installed.
humidity, horizontal
8 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin).
wind and snow depth.
Install a low-cost tower with a free air satellite mode system Low-cost tower and 9 accompanying siren
and 9 accompanying siren towers at Rabuwa, Jayaram and towers installed.
9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) will be installed at key locations in
other locations in GLOF watersheds to be determined
GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in the
through site validations (4 towers in the Marsyangdi Basin,
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to measure precipitation factors.
2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the Arun Sub-basin).
The real-time data acquired from this critical infrastructure will be
used by DHM to: i) observe and monitor GLOF risk; ii) support
EWS; and iii) inform glacier modelling. Additionally, the real-time
data acquisition system will integrate data from new and existing
hydrology stations.
To support real-time, mobile contact with vulnerable communities
vulnerable to GLOFs, as well as supplement insufficient coverage
of vulnerable communities, EWS coverage will be expanded
throughout Nepal. This will be achieved by installing 27 radar-
based water level sensors (RLS) at key locations in GLOF
watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 8 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin), using GCM technologies
provided by service providers under Nepal Telecom Authority115.
A low-cost tower with a free air satellite mode system will be
installed, accompanied by the installation of 9 accompanying
siren towers across the target GLOF watersheds (4 towers in the
115 A list of appropriate service providers that use GCM technologies is available at: https://www.nta.gov.np/en/.

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
densit y in GLOF
watersheds to
strengthen the
technical capacity of
DHM for the
monitoring of
climate hazard and
risk. | observational network. These gaps include inoperative monitoring
stations, poor coverage in higher altitude areas and low-resolution
temporal and spatial coverage.
In response, the following will take place under the project activity:
6 base stations will be installed at Pangboche, Jayaram–Ghat -
Middle Hill, Tumlingtar (Turkighat), Chatara, Dharapani and
Muglin (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin
and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin).
24 automatic weather stations (AWS) will be installed at key
locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi Basin,
5 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun Sub-basin) to
measure temperature, atmospheric pressure, precipitation,
humidity, horizontal
wind and snow depth.
9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) will be installed at key locations in
GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to measure precipitation factors.
The real-time data acquired from this critical infrastructure will be
used by DHM to: i) observe and monitor GLOF risk; ii) support
EWS; and iii) inform glacier modelling. Additionally, the real-time
data acquisition system will integrate data from new and existing
hydrology stations.
To support real-time, mobile contact with vulnerable communities
vulnerable to GLOFs, as well as supplement insufficient coverage
of vulnerable communities, EWS coverage will be expanded
throughout Nepal. This will be achieved by installing 27 radar-
based water level sensors (RLS) at key locations in GLOF
watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 8 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin), using GCM technologies
provided by service providers under Nepal Telecom Authority115.
A low-cost tower with a free air satellite mode system will be
installed, accompanied by the installation of 9 accompanying
siren towers across the target GLOF watersheds (4 towers in the | Muglin (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin and 2 in the Arun Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Install 24 automatic weather stations (AWS) at key
locations in GLOF watersheds (7 AWS in the Marsyangdi
Basin, 5 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 12 in the Arun
Sub-basin). | 24 automatic weather stations (AWS)
installed.
 |  | Install 9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) at key locations in
GLOF watersheds (2 in the Marsyangdi Basin and 7 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 9 Precipitation gauges (PCP) installed.
 |  | Integrate new and existing hydrology stations into a real-
time data acquisition system. | New and existing hydrology stations
integrated into a real-time data acquisition
system
 |  | Install 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS) at key
locations in GLOF watersheds (11 in the Marsyangdi Basin,
8 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 8 in the Arun Sub-basin). | 27 radar-based water level sensors (RLS)
installed.
 |  | Install a low-cost tower with a free air satellite mode system
and 9 accompanying siren towers at Rabuwa, Jayaram and
other locations in GLOF watersheds to be determined
through site validations (4 towers in the Marsyangdi Basin,
2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the Arun Sub-basin). | Low-cost tower and 9 accompanying siren
towers installed.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
E
Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the
Arun Sub-basin).
Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of DHM
Activity 2.2 will improve Nepal’s EWS to strengthen adaptive Training workshops and material for
to produce early warnings and disseminate them to
capacity and response among vulnerable communities in the DHM on improving their generation and
government agencies and productive sectors.
target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha and Solukhumbu to dissemination of early warnings.
GLOFs, rain-induced floods and other climate hazards.
Co-develop community-based response plans for 10 • 10 community-based response plans.
First, the coordination between DHM and NDDRMA will be districts, namely Bhojpur, Dhankuta, Khotang, • 10 community engagement workshops.
strengthened to enhance response to GLOFs and other extreme Okhaldhunga, Sankhuwasabha, Saptari, Sindhuli,
events in Nepal. This will be achieved by: i) establishing an Solukhumbu, Sunsari and Udayapur.
information dissemination and communication system; ii) Institutionalise GLOF EWS by developing multi-hazard- 3 multi-hazard-based risk assessments
establishing working groups for coordination between DHM, based risk assessments (integrating community knowledge developed (1 in the Arun Sub-basin; 1
NDRRMA and relevant stakeholders; iii) conducting engagement and science-based assessments), and train communities in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 1 in the
workshops between local emergency operation centres to on disaster risk management, first aid and search and Marsyangdi Basin).
strengthen localisation and roll out of DIMS/BIPAD Portal for Training workshops for community-
rescue.
effective disaster preparedness and information management; based DRM first aid and search and
2.2. Develop and and iv) developing and disseminating a household database of rescue.
implement early two target glaciated basins through the BIPAD Portal. Local government engagement
warning systems workshops (with the mayor,
planning to Second, the technical and institutional capacity of DHM will be chairperson, technical officers etc.) on
strengthen adaptive strengthened to enhance the rapid dissemination of early GLOF EWS, updates to the
capacity and warnings to: i) critical national and local entities involved in observational network, safety,
disaster response (including NEOC, DEOC, national operation and maintenance.
response to GLOFs
stakeholders, district and local stakeholders, LEOC, Community Strengthen vertical and horizontal linkages between Local Engagement workshops and meetings
and other climate
Disaster Management Committee (CDMC)/Task Force, and local Emergency Operation Centres and DHM to integrate to strengthen vertical and horizontal
hazards in
communities); ii) key actors in productive sector networks; and iii) DHM's dissemination mechanism, import household data to linkages between Local Emergency
vulnerable sectors vulnerable communities in the target districts and throughout the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and CAP Operation Centres and DHM.
and communities Nepal. This will be achieved by training the relevant technical staff Specialist(s) contracted to integrate
(cleaning; processing; import; verification), and localise and
at DHM staff on efficient and effective ways to generate and DHM's dissemination mechanism into
roll out the DIMS/BIPAD Portal for effective disaster
disseminate early warnings to improve community response to the LEOC, and import household data
GLOFs. To ensure that the observation network remains preparedness. to the BIPAD Portal for the application
operational, training will also be provided to the relevant staff on of DSS and CAP (cleaning; processing;
operating and maintaining the existing and newly installed import; verification)
hydrological and meteorological stations in the target basins. In DIMS/BIPAD Portal localised and rolled
so doing, DHM will have the required capacity to generate and out, supported by awareness raising
disseminate accurate forecasts and early warnings of impending targeting local government and
GLOFs. communities.
Improve the knowledge and awareness of target districts of Training workshops and material for
To ensure sufficient understanding among target communities of
how to access and respond to early warnings, including by vulnerable communities in the Arun and
how to access and respond to early warnings, community-based establishing and mobilising youth groups and volunteer’s Dudhkoshi Sub-basins and Marsynagdi
disaster response plans will be developed. These plans will be corps. Basin on how to access and respond to
developed in a participatory way with communities and ward
early warnings.

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 | Marsyangdi Basin, 2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 3 in the
Arun Sub-basin). |  | 
2.2. Develop and
implement early
warning systems
planning to
strengthen adaptive
capacity and
response to GLOFs
and other climate
hazards in
vulnerable sectors
and communities | Activity 2.2 will improve Nepal’s EWS to strengthen adaptive
capacity and response among vulnerable communities in the
target districts of Manang, Sankhuwasabha and Solukhumbu to
GLOFs, rain-induced floods and other climate hazards.
First, the coordination between DHM and NDDRMA will be
strengthened to enhance response to GLOFs and other extreme
events in Nepal. This will be achieved by: i) establishing an
information dissemination and communication system; ii)
establishing working groups for coordination between DHM,
NDRRMA and relevant stakeholders; iii) conducting engagement
workshops between local emergency operation centres to
strengthen localisation and roll out of DIMS/BIPAD Portal for
effective disaster preparedness and information management;
and iv) developing and disseminating a household database of
two target glaciated basins through the BIPAD Portal.
Second, the technical and institutional capacity of DHM will be
strengthened to enhance the rapid dissemination of early
warnings to: i) critical national and local entities involved in
disaster response (including NEOC, DEOC, national
stakeholders, district and local stakeholders, LEOC, Community
Disaster Management Committee (CDMC)/Task Force, and local
communities); ii) key actors in productive sector networks; and iii)
vulnerable communities in the target districts and throughout
Nepal. This will be achieved by training the relevant technical staff
at DHM staff on efficient and effective ways to generate and
disseminate early warnings to improve community response to
GLOFs. To ensure that the observation network remains
operational, training will also be provided to the relevant staff on
operating and maintaining the existing and newly installed
hydrological and meteorological stations in the target basins. In
so doing, DHM will have the required capacity to generate and
disseminate accurate forecasts and early warnings of impending
GLOFs.
To ensure sufficient understanding among target communities of
how to access and respond to early warnings, community-based
disaster response plans will be developed. These plans will be
developed in a participatory way with communities and ward | Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of DHM
to produce early warnings and disseminate them to
government agencies and productive sectors. | Training workshops and material for
DHM on improving their generation and
dissemination of early warnings.
 |  | Co-develop community-based response plans for 10
districts, namely Bhojpur, Dhankuta, Khotang,
Okhaldhunga, Sankhuwasabha, Saptari, Sindhuli,
Solukhumbu, Sunsari and Udayapur. | • 10 community-based response plans.
• 10 community engagement workshops.
 |  | Institutionalise GLOF EWS by developing multi-hazard-
based risk assessments (integrating community knowledge
and science-based assessments), and train communities
on disaster risk management, first aid and search and
rescue. | 3 multi-hazard-based risk assessments
developed (1 in the Arun Sub-basin; 1
in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin and 1 in the
Marsyangdi Basin).
Training workshops for community-
based DRM first aid and search and
rescue.
Local government engagement
workshops (with the mayor,
chairperson, technical officers etc.) on
GLOF EWS, updates to the
observational network, safety,
operation and maintenance.
 |  | Strengthen vertical and horizontal linkages between Local
Emergency Operation Centres and DHM to integrate
DHM's dissemination mechanism, import household data to
the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and CAP
(cleaning; processing; import; verification), and localise and
roll out the DIMS/BIPAD Portal for effective disaster
preparedness. | Engagement workshops and meetings
to strengthen vertical and horizontal
linkages between Local Emergency
Operation Centres and DHM.
Specialist(s) contracted to integrate
DHM's dissemination mechanism into
the LEOC, and import household data
to the BIPAD Portal for the application
of DSS and CAP (cleaning; processing;
import; verification)
DIMS/BIPAD Portal localised and rolled
out, supported by awareness raising
targeting local government and
communities.
 |  | Improve the knowledge and awareness of target districts of
how to access and respond to early warnings, including by
establishing and mobilising youth groups and volunteer’s
corps. | Training workshops and material for
vulnerable communities in the Arun and
Dudhkoshi Sub-basins and Marsynagdi
Basin on how to access and respond to
early warnings.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
E
leaders 116 in the target districts and provide step-by-step Youth groups and volunteer’s corps
guidance on how to access early warning and what actions to take established and mobilised.
once an early warning is received, in line with CDMC protocols. Develop climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Engagement workshops for the
Training will then be delivered by representatives from NEOC, Preparedness and Response Plans, as well as Local-level preparation and completion of the
LEOC and CDMC on how to implement the actions contained in Climate-resilient Action Plans. plans.
the response plans and response drills will be organised by these Climate-responsive Municipal Disaster
entities to practice what actions to take in the event of a GLOF, Preparedness and Response Plans
flood or another climate hazard. Local-level Climate-resilient Action
Plans.
GLOF EWS will be fully institutionalised by developing multi- Validation workshops and action plans
hazard-based risk assessments — which integrate community for the implementation of the plans.
knowledge and science-based assessments — and holding
annual training workshop for communities on disaster risk
management (DRM), first aid and search and rescue. NDRRMA
will lead this institutionalisation process, supported by local
government actors. Engagement workshops with inter alia the
mayor, chairperson, technical officers on GLOF EWS, updates to
the observational network, safety, operation and maintenance will
also be conducted to ensure the establishment and uptake of
knowledge and early warning processes at the national, local and
community levels.
Effective collaboration between Local Emergency Operation
Centres and DHM will be ensured through engagement
workshops and meetings that will strengthen vertical and
horizontal linkages between these entities. This collaboration will
facilitate integration of DHM's dissemination mechanism into the
LEOC, with specialist(s) contracted to import household data to
the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and CAP — cleaning;
processing; importing; and verifying. This will also allow for
localising and rolling out of the DIMS/BIPAD Portal, supported by
awareness raising that targets local government and
communities, for effective disaster preparedness.
To ensure that target districts within the are able to access and
respond to early warnings effectively, knowledge and awareness
will be improved with training workshops and materials for
vulnerable communities in the Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-basins
and Marsyangdi Basin. This process will be supported by the
establishment and mobilising of youth groups as well as
116 A ward is the smallest unit of local gov ernment in Nepal.

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
 | leaders 116 in the target districts and provide step-by-step
guidance on how to access early warning and what actions to take
once an early warning is received, in line with CDMC protocols.
Training will then be delivered by representatives from NEOC,
LEOC and CDMC on how to implement the actions contained in
the response plans and response drills will be organised by these
entities to practice what actions to take in the event of a GLOF,
flood or another climate hazard.
GLOF EWS will be fully institutionalised by developing multi-
hazard-based risk assessments — which integrate community
knowledge and science-based assessments — and holding
annual training workshop for communities on disaster risk
management (DRM), first aid and search and rescue. NDRRMA
will lead this institutionalisation process, supported by local
government actors. Engagement workshops with inter alia the
mayor, chairperson, technical officers on GLOF EWS, updates to
the observational network, safety, operation and maintenance will
also be conducted to ensure the establishment and uptake of
knowledge and early warning processes at the national, local and
community levels.
Effective collaboration between Local Emergency Operation
Centres and DHM will be ensured through engagement
workshops and meetings that will strengthen vertical and
horizontal linkages between these entities. This collaboration will
facilitate integration of DHM's dissemination mechanism into the
LEOC, with specialist(s) contracted to import household data to
the BIPAD Portal for the application of DSS and CAP — cleaning;
processing; importing; and verifying. This will also allow for
localising and rolling out of the DIMS/BIPAD Portal, supported by
awareness raising that targets local government and
communities, for effective disaster preparedness.
To ensure that target districts within the are able to access and
respond to early warnings effectively, knowledge and awareness
will be improved with training workshops and materials for
vulnerable communities in the Arun and Dudhkoshi Sub-basins
and Marsyangdi Basin. This process will be supported by the
establishment and mobilising of youth groups as well as |  | Youth groups and volunteer’s corps
established and mobilised.
 |  | Develop climate-responsive Municipal Disaster
Preparedness and Response Plans, as well as Local-level
Climate-resilient Action Plans. | Engagement workshops for the
preparation and completion of the
plans.
Climate-responsive Municipal Disaster
Preparedness and Response Plans
Local-level Climate-resilient Action
Plans.
Validation workshops and action plans
for the implementation of the plans.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
volunteer’s corps, increasing community involvement in the early
warning processes.
Climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Preparedness and
Response Plans will be developed with effective collaboration at
the municipal level through engagement workshops for the
preparation and completion of these plans. Local-level Climate-
resilient Action Plans will also be developed through this method,
with validation workshops held and action plans developed for the
implementation of these plans, ensuring local-level stakeholder
participation, as well as ownership and uptake by the target
communities and local government.
Under this activity, detailed site-specific engineering designs will Site-specific engineering designs
Undertake detailed site-specific engineering designs for
be undertaken for the lowering of the Thulagi, Lower Barun, completed for lowering water levels of
lake lowering.
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 glacial lakes. These designs will be the four target lakes.
informed by the following assessments and validated by
engineers and the AE before construction starts:
A topographical survey of the site and the moraine dam
is needed for detailed analysis and precise design.
Bathymetric investigation to determine the most recent
volume of the lake, depth and topography, lake
extension, and end moraines change.
Hydrometeorology: We only measured discharge using
the most basic method, the floating method. In the
Thulagi Glacier Lake, the tracer approach was not
3.1. Lower the
used. Therefore, to design the more detailed structural All pre-construction actions and
levels of four of the
intervention needed, we must have the current construction completed for the four
highest risk glacial
lakes. discharge of the glacier outlet. Lower the levels of the four lakes (Thulagi, Lower Barun, lakes.
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2). Water levels of the Thulagi, Lower
A geophysical investigation using a GPR survey, and
Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2
an electric resistivity tomography of the sites are
lakes lowered by 3 m.
required to determine the stability of the moraine dam
and the intensity of the geophysical environment.
Once the designs have been validated, construction will
commence in Year 2 of project implementation to lower the
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 lakes by 3 m.
These lakes and the level by which they will all be lowered were
determined through a preliminary options analysis and
vulnerability assessment commissioned by UNDP for the
proposed project. The findings from these assessments indicated
that the four target glacial lakes are the most at risk of breaching.

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | volunteer’s corps, increasing community involvement in the early
warning processes.
Climate-responsive Municipal Disaster Preparedness and
Response Plans will be developed with effective collaboration at
the municipal level through engagement workshops for the
preparation and completion of these plans. Local-level Climate-
resilient Action Plans will also be developed through this method,
with validation workshops held and action plans developed for the
implementation of these plans, ensuring local-level stakeholder
participation, as well as ownership and uptake by the target
communities and local government. |  | 
3.1. Lower the
levels of four of the
highest risk glacial
lakes. | Under this activity, detailed site-specific engineering designs will
be undertaken for the lowering of the Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 glacial lakes. These designs will be
informed by the following assessments and validated by
engineers and the AE before construction starts:
A topographical survey of the site and the moraine dam
is needed for detailed analysis and precise design.
Bathymetric investigation to determine the most recent
volume of the lake, depth and topography, lake
extension, and end moraines change.
Hydrometeorology: We only measured discharge using
the most basic method, the floating method. In the
Thulagi Glacier Lake, the tracer approach was not
used. Therefore, to design the more detailed structural
intervention needed, we must have the current
discharge of the glacier outlet.
A geophysical investigation using a GPR survey, and
an electric resistivity tomography of the sites are
required to determine the stability of the moraine dam
and the intensity of the geophysical environment.
Once the designs have been validated, construction will
commence in Year 2 of project implementation to lower the
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 lakes by 3 m.
These lakes and the level by which they will all be lowered were
determined through a preliminary options analysis and
vulnerability assessment commissioned by UNDP for the
proposed project. The findings from these assessments indicated
that the four target glacial lakes are the most at risk of breaching. | Undertake detailed site-specific engineering designs for
lake lowering. | Site-specific engineering designs
completed for lowering water levels of
the four target lakes.
 |  | Lower the levels of the four lakes (Thulagi, Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2). | All pre-construction actions and
construction completed for the four
lakes.
Water levels of the Thulagi, Lower
Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2
lakes lowered by 3 m.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
Given that climate change is expected to increase this risk, these
lakes were prioritised for lowering to reduce the impacts of a
GLOF on surrounding and downstream communities.
The conceptual design for lowering the water levels of the four
target lakes are as follows:
For Thulagi, Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun, the outlet channel
at the end moraine will be blocked by cofferdam, and a diversion
channel will be built to divert the flow of the lake. For Thulagi,
Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun, the effluent from this diversion
channel will be discharged at 165 m, 70 m, and 55 m,
respectively, downstream of the proposed structure. During this
period, a sluice gate will be built at the identified site. The main
channel will be trapezoidal in shape, 70 m downstream from the
cofferdam for Thulagi and 25 m and 40 m for Lower Barun and
Lumding Tsho, respectively. This channel will carry the lake
discharge after the cofferdam is removed. The banks adjacent to
the main channel will be strengthened with boulder impact gabion
walls to protect it against bank erosion when the water is released
after removing the cofferdam. For Hongu 2, only the main channel
is proposed. Since there is no outlet discharge of the lake, the end
moraine itself will act as a sluice gate and no diversion canals are
required. Once the main channels are built, the end moraine will
be excavated to lower the glacial lake.
Under this activity, check dams and other protective infrastructure Install 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments.
will be established at strategic locations in the Dudhkoshi and
Arun Sub-basins. The purpose of this infrastructure will be to
attenuate and divert the intense flow of water caused by GLOFs
and flash floods from the Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu
3.2. Construction of 2 glacial lakes. The specific infrastructure that will be constructed
structural and non- under Activity 3.2 is described below.
3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC
structural measures
revetments.
(Civil and NbS/ • 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments will be built
67 conservation ponds constructed (38
Bioengineering) for along stretches of riverbank where a high possibility of bank Construct 67 conservation ponds (38 in the Arun Sub-basin
in the Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the
the risk reduction undercutting and inundation was identified. and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
of GLOF and flash • 67 conservation ponds will be established (38 in the Arun
flood.. Sub-basin and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to reduce
concentrated surface flow following a GLOF or during a
monsoon or other extreme rainfall event and consequently
prevent the formation of gullies and the triggering of shallow
landslides.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
 | Given that climate change is expected to increase this risk, these
lakes were prioritised for lowering to reduce the impacts of a
GLOF on surrounding and downstream communities.
The conceptual design for lowering the water levels of the four
target lakes are as follows:
For Thulagi, Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun, the outlet channel
at the end moraine will be blocked by cofferdam, and a diversion
channel will be built to divert the flow of the lake. For Thulagi,
Lumding Tsho, and Lower Barun, the effluent from this diversion
channel will be discharged at 165 m, 70 m, and 55 m,
respectively, downstream of the proposed structure. During this
period, a sluice gate will be built at the identified site. The main
channel will be trapezoidal in shape, 70 m downstream from the
cofferdam for Thulagi and 25 m and 40 m for Lower Barun and
Lumding Tsho, respectively. This channel will carry the lake
discharge after the cofferdam is removed. The banks adjacent to
the main channel will be strengthened with boulder impact gabion
walls to protect it against bank erosion when the water is released
after removing the cofferdam. For Hongu 2, only the main channel
is proposed. Since there is no outlet discharge of the lake, the end
moraine itself will act as a sluice gate and no diversion canals are
required. Once the main channels are built, the end moraine will
be excavated to lower the glacial lake. |  | 
3.2. Construction of
structural and non-
structural measures
(Civil and NbS/
Bioengineering) for
the risk reduction
of GLOF and flash
flood.. | Under this activity, check dams and other protective infrastructure
will be established at strategic locations in the Dudhkoshi and
Arun Sub-basins. The purpose of this infrastructure will be to
attenuate and divert the intense flow of water caused by GLOFs
and flash floods from the Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu
2 glacial lakes. The specific infrastructure that will be constructed
under Activity 3.2 is described below.
• 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments will be built
along stretches of riverbank where a high possibility of bank
undercutting and inundation was identified.
• 67 conservation ponds will be established (38 in the Arun
Sub-basin and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) to reduce
concentrated surface flow following a GLOF or during a
monsoon or other extreme rainfall event and consequently
prevent the formation of gullies and the triggering of shallow
landslides. | Install 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC revetments. | 3,101.61 m3 of flood walls and RCC
revetments.
67 conservation ponds constructed (38
in the Arun Sub-basin and 29 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
 |  | Construct 67 conservation ponds (38 in the Arun Sub-basin
and 29 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
Combined, these interventions will reduce the damages and
losses from GLOFs and flooding in the target basins.
Furthermore, the infrastructure installed under this activity will
complement the Eco-disaster Risk Reduction solutions
implemented under Activity 3.3 by reducing the impacts of GLOFs
and flash floods while these long-term interventions are being
established.
Concept drawings and bill of quantities for the interventions
proposed under this activity are presented in Annex 23: Concept
drawings and bill of quantities for downstream interventions.
Plant 153.3 ha of trees along vulnerable riverbanks, sub-
153.3 ha trees planted (81.6 ha trees in
Under Activity 3.3, Eco-disaster Risk Reduction (Eco-DRR) watershed areas and flood plains of 4 river systems (81.6 the Arun Sub-basin and 71.6 ha in the
solutions will be implemented at strategic locations in the
ha trees in the Arun Sub-basin and 71.6 ha in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin ).
Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to reduce the impacts of
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls
residual flooding from GLOFs on vulnerable communities in the
Establish 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls (10,796 m3 established (10,796 m3 in the Arun Sub-
basins, while simultaneously contributing to the restoration and
in the Arun Sub-basin and 6,948 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub- basin and 6,948 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems in floodplain areas.
basin). Sub-basin).
978,436 m of live check dams built
The interventions that will be implemented under this project Install 978,436 m of live check dams (955,396 m in the
(955,396 m in the Arun Sub-basin and
activity include: i) planting 4.6 million trees along vulnerable Arun Sub-basin and 23,040 m in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
23,040 km in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
riverbanks, sub-watershed areas and floodplains of 4 river Install 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments
basin).
3.3. Implement eco- systems; ii) constructing 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls; (3,447.5 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 11,851.44 m3 in the 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion
disaster risk iii) building 978,436 m of live check dams; iv) constructing Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). revetments installed (3,447.5 m3 in the
reduction and 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments; v) installing Install 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs (4,608 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 11,851.44 m3 in the
7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs; vi) installing 29,685 m3 of
nature-based Arun Sub-basin and 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
vegetative gabion check dams and 15,009.8 m3 of vegetative dry
solutions to reduce Install a total of 29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check dams 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs
stone check dams; vii) establishing 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone
the impact of (21,960 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 in the (4,608 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and
rip-rap; viii) undertaking 45,188 m of brush layering; and ix)
GLOFs and flash planting 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings. These Eco-DRR Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) and a total of 15,009.8 m3 of 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
floods. solutions will reduce soil erosion and increase the infiltration vegetative dry stone check dams (9,371.25 m3 in the Arun 29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check
capacity of the soil in floodplain areas. This in turn will decrease Sub-basin and 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). dams installed (21,960 m3 in the Arun
Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 in the
surface runoff and reduce the sedimentation of tributaries Install a total of 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) and 15,009.8 m3
caused by flooding in the project areas. Combined, these (1,582.5 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and 1,611.5 m2 in the
of vegetative dry stone check dams
interventions will reduce the damages and losses to from Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). installed (9,371.25 m3 in the Arun Sub-
GLOFs and flooding in the target basins. Implement a total of 45,188 m of brush layering (36,750 m basin and 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
in the Arun Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the Dudhkoshi Sub- Sub-basin).
Concept drawings and bill of quantities for the interventions
basin). 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap
proposed under this activity are presented in Annex 23: Concept
Plant a total of 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings (155,419 m2 installed (1,582.5 m2 in the Arun Sub-
drawings and bill of quantities for downstream interventions.
in the Arun Sub-basin and 142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi basin and 1,611.5 m2 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin). Sub-basin).

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 | Combined, these interventions will reduce the damages and
losses from GLOFs and flooding in the target basins.
Furthermore, the infrastructure installed under this activity will
complement the Eco-disaster Risk Reduction solutions
implemented under Activity 3.3 by reducing the impacts of GLOFs
and flash floods while these long-term interventions are being
established.
Concept drawings and bill of quantities for the interventions
proposed under this activity are presented in Annex 23: Concept
drawings and bill of quantities for downstream interventions. |  | 
3.3. Implement eco-
disaster risk
reduction and
nature-based
solutions to reduce
the impact of
GLOFs and flash
floods. | Under Activity 3.3, Eco-disaster Risk Reduction (Eco-DRR)
solutions will be implemented at strategic locations in the
Dudhkoshi and Arun Sub-basins to reduce the impacts of
residual flooding from GLOFs on vulnerable communities in the
basins, while simultaneously contributing to the restoration and
rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems in floodplain areas.
The interventions that will be implemented under this project
activity include: i) planting 4.6 million trees along vulnerable
riverbanks, sub-watershed areas and floodplains of 4 river
systems; ii) constructing 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls;
iii) building 978,436 m of live check dams; iv) constructing
15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments; v) installing
7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs; vi) installing 29,685 m3 of
vegetative gabion check dams and 15,009.8 m3 of vegetative dry
stone check dams; vii) establishing 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone
rip-rap; viii) undertaking 45,188 m of brush layering; and ix)
planting 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings. These Eco-DRR
solutions will reduce soil erosion and increase the infiltration
capacity of the soil in floodplain areas. This in turn will decrease
surface runoff and reduce the sedimentation of tributaries
caused by flooding in the project areas. Combined, these
interventions will reduce the damages and losses to from
GLOFs and flooding in the target basins.
Concept drawings and bill of quantities for the interventions
proposed under this activity are presented in Annex 23: Concept
drawings and bill of quantities for downstream interventions. | Plant 153.3 ha of trees along vulnerable riverbanks, sub-
watershed areas and flood plains of 4 river systems (81.6
ha trees in the Arun Sub-basin and 71.6 ha in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 153.3 ha trees planted (81.6 ha trees in
the Arun Sub-basin and 71.6 ha in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin ).
17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls
established (10,796 m3 in the Arun Sub-
basin and 6,948 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin).
978,436 m of live check dams built
(955,396 m in the Arun Sub-basin and
23,040 km in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin).
15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion
revetments installed (3,447.5 m3 in the
Arun Sub-basin and 11,851.44 m3 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs
(4,608 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and
2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check
dams installed (21,960 m3 in the Arun
Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) and 15,009.8 m3
of vegetative dry stone check dams
installed (9,371.25 m3 in the Arun Sub-
basin and 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin).
3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap
installed (1,582.5 m2 in the Arun Sub-
basin and 1,611.5 m2 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin).
 |  | Establish 17,744 m3 of vegetative gabion walls (10,796 m3
in the Arun Sub-basin and 6,948 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin). | 
 |  | Install 978,436 m of live check dams (955,396 m in the
Arun Sub-basin and 23,040 m in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Install 15,298.94 m3 of vegetative gabion revetments
(3,447.5 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 11,851.44 m3 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Install 7,246 m3 of vegetative gabion spurs (4,608 m3 in the
Arun Sub-basin and 2,638 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Install a total of 29,685 m3 of vegetative gabion check dams
(21,960 m3 in the Arun Sub-basin and 7,725 m3 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin) and a total of 15,009.8 m3 of
vegetative dry stone check dams (9,371.25 m3 in the Arun
Sub-basin and 5,638.5 m3 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Install a total of 3,194 m2 of vegetative stone rip-rap
(1,582.5 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and 1,611.5 m2 in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin). | 
 |  | Implement a total of 45,188 m of brush layering (36,750 m
in the Arun Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin). | 
 |  | Plant a total of 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings (155,419 m2
in the Arun Sub-basin and 142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi
Sub-basin). | 

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
Physical adaptation interventions under this activity will be 45,188 m of brush layering (36,750 m in
supported by developing Integrated Watershed Management the Arun Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the
and National Park Management plans to create the regulatory Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
framework for sustainable land management and climate 298,162 m2 of grass seedlings planted
change adaptation. Training and capacity building interventions (155,419 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and
targeting the relevant groups will ensure the effective 142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
implementation of these plans. The capacity development of basin).
community members, CBOs, NGOs and relevant government
officials will be delivered under thematic training modules, Develop and implement integrated, climate- and gender- Integrated, climate- and gender-responsive
including: i) capacity development of community members and responsive watershed and national park management watershed and national park management
local government on climate change induced hazards and plans. plans.
disasters, and adaptation measures; ii) curriculum for climate
Develop and implement a climate-resilient agricultural Climate-resilient agricultural management
change related education and trainings for secondary level
management and information system. and information system developed and
school teachers and students; and iii) capacity development of
implemented.
trainings for CBOs of various kinds, including mothers groups,
women-lead cooperatives, Indigenous peoples organisations Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of • 3-day capacity development training on
and local eco- and youth- clubs. Training participants will be community members, government officials and CBOs to CCA, MHRA tools and models and risk
identified according to the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion understand and implement multi-hazard risk assessments, reduction measures for relevant
(GESI) Action Plan, including Indigenous peoples, Dalits, and use climate-resilient agricultural management and government officials and community
women representatives. information system, and implement climate-resilient GLOF members (12 trainings in Arun basin and
and flood risk reduction strategies.
7 trainings in Dudhkoshi basin).
The training modules will be designed to engage government • Workshops held for curriculum
officials in the implementation of Multi-Hazard Risk Reduction development and training on climate-
change related education for 10
Measures (MHRRM). The training will enhance their capacity
Secondary school level teachers and 8
with tools and techniques used in the MHRA and implementation
students from Arun and Dudhkoshi
techniques in Climate Change Adaptation (CCA), Ecosystem-
basins.
based Disaster Risks Reduction (Eco-DRR), and the use of
• Training prepared and delivered to
Agriculture Management Information Systems (AMIS). Capacity
community-based organisations on the
development of the relevant stakeholders and local and regional
implementation of Indigenous and
levels will support the development of multi-hazard assessment,
Traditional Knowledge based activities
and integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and (15 CBOs from Arun basin and 12 CBOs
national park management plans in the Arun and Dudhkoshi from Dudhkoshi basin).
Sub-basins.
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
178. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP Evaluation Policy. The Project Manager, Monitoring,
Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist, under the oversight of UNDP as the AE, will be responsible for monitoring the progress of all
project activities against the outcome-based indicators presented in the Logical Framework (Section E of this Funding Proposal). Any delays or challenges experienced during
the implementation phase will be communicated timeously to the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office by the Project Manager, so that any appropriate support and
corrective measures required can be actioned efficiently. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain transparency, responsibility and accountability in
monitoring and reporting on project results.

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
 |  | Physical adaptation interventions under this activity will be
supported by developing Integrated Watershed Management
and National Park Management plans to create the regulatory
framework for sustainable land management and climate
change adaptation. Training and capacity building interventions
targeting the relevant groups will ensure the effective
implementation of these plans. The capacity development of
community members, CBOs, NGOs and relevant government
officials will be delivered under thematic training modules,
including: i) capacity development of community members and
local government on climate change induced hazards and
disasters, and adaptation measures; ii) curriculum for climate
change related education and trainings for secondary level
school teachers and students; and iii) capacity development of
trainings for CBOs of various kinds, including mothers groups,
women-lead cooperatives, Indigenous peoples organisations
and local eco- and youth- clubs. Training participants will be
identified according to the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
(GESI) Action Plan, including Indigenous peoples, Dalits, and
women representatives.
The training modules will be designed to engage government
officials in the implementation of Multi-Hazard Risk Reduction
Measures (MHRRM). The training will enhance their capacity
with tools and techniques used in the MHRA and implementation
techniques in Climate Change Adaptation (CCA), Ecosystem-
based Disaster Risks Reduction (Eco-DRR), and the use of
Agriculture Management Information Systems (AMIS). Capacity
development of the relevant stakeholders and local and regional
levels will support the development of multi-hazard assessment,
and integrated, climate- and gender-responsive watershed and
national park management plans in the Arun and Dudhkoshi
Sub-basins. |  | 45,188 m of brush layering (36,750 m in
the Arun Sub-basin and 8,438 m in the
Dudhkoshi Sub-basin).
298,162 m2 of grass seedlings planted
(155,419 m2 in the Arun Sub-basin and
142,743 m2 in the Dudhkoshi Sub-
basin). | 
 |  |  | Develop and implement integrated, climate- and gender-
responsive watershed and national park management
plans. | Integrated, climate- and gender-responsive
watershed and national park management
plans. | 
 |  |  | Develop and implement a climate-resilient agricultural
management and information system. | Climate-resilient agricultural management
and information system developed and
implemented. | 
 |  |  | Strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of
community members, government officials and CBOs to
understand and implement multi-hazard risk assessments,
use climate-resilient agricultural management and
information system, and implement climate-resilient GLOF
and flood risk reduction strategies. | • 3-day capacity development training on
CCA, MHRA tools and models and risk
reduction measures for relevant
government officials and community
members (12 trainings in Arun basin and
7 trainings in Dudhkoshi basin).
• Workshops held for curriculum
development and training on climate-
change related education for 10
Secondary school level teachers and 8
students from Arun and Dudhkoshi
basins.
• Training prepared and delivered to
community-based organisations on the
implementation of Indigenous and
Traditional Knowledge based activities
(15 CBOs from Arun basin and 12 CBOs
from Dudhkoshi basin). | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  | 
 | 178. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP Evaluation Policy. The Project Manager, Monitoring, |  |  |  | 
 | Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist, under the oversight of UNDP as the AE, will be responsible for monitoring the progress of all |  |  |  | 
 | project activities against the outcome-based indicators presented in the Logical Framework (Section E of this Funding Proposal). Any delays or challenges experienced during |  |  |  | 
 | the implementation phase will be communicated timeously to the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office by the Project Manager, so that any appropriate support and |  |  |  | 
 | corrective measures required can be actioned efficiently. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain transparency, responsibility and accountability in |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring and reporting on project results. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
179. Monitoring and evaluation of project activities will be undertaken on an annual basis. The type of monitoring activities to be conducted during the implementation phase,
as well as the responsible parties for undertaking these activities, are detailed in Annex 11: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan. Such activities include field observations,
key informant interviews and focus group sessions. The costs associated with undertaking the necessary monitoring, assessments and engagements required to inform the
project evaluations are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget.
180. A project inception workshop will be held after project approval and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) becomes effective and UNDP project document has been signed
by all relevant parties to: i) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that may influence project implementation; ii)
discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; iii) review the project Logical
Framework; iv) discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalise the M&E plan (Annex 11); v) review the financial reporting procedures and
mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; and vi) plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalise the first year annual work plan
for the project. The final inception report will be shared with the UNDP Country Office, UNDP Regional Technical Advisor and Project Board for clearance. Once the report has
been cleared by the relevant parties, it will be submitted to the GCF for approval. This will happen within six months after the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) becomes
effective.
181. An Annual Performance Report (APR) will be prepared by the Project Manager, UNDP Country Office, and UNDP Regional Technical Advisor for submission to the GCF,
Project Board and relevant project stakeholders. The Project Manager, supported by the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, will ensure that the indicators included
in the project Logical Framework are monitored annually and that the results from regular M&E activities are presented in the GCF APR. Any challenges and delays experienced
during the implementation phase will be monitored by the Project Manager and reported in the GCF APR.
182. During the implementation phase, specific means of verification will be used to assess the: i) progress of project interventions towards achieving GCF Fund-level impacts
and Fund-level outcomes; and ii) performance of interventions against the project performance indicators presented in Section E.5 of this Funding Proposal. A Monitoring,
Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will be employed to conduct and coordinate on-the-ground monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of
the project and ensure that gender targets are met. The Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will design and operationalise
a performance monitoring framework to track the project’s progress towards achieving its targets. This will be achieved by: i) measuring the performance against the project
indicators (Sections E.3–5) to evaluate the progress of the project; ii) reporting the project’s performance to the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Project Implementing
Unit (PIU); and iii) providing technical support to the Project Manager. Additionally, Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist
will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring the application of gender-disaggregated indicators117. At particular milestones (e.g. baseline, mid-term and project closure),
the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will undertake evidence-gathering exercises to verify the project’s performance
against the outcomes-based indicators presented in the Logical Framework, M&E Plan and Gender Action Plan. The results from this process will be presented in periodic
reports developed by the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist, supported by the Project Manager. These reports will be
submitted to the PSC and validated during the Independent Interim and Final Evaluations for the project, as described below.
183. UNDP will be responsible for managing the Independent Interim (mid-term) and Final Evaluations of the project, including the process for contracting these positions. For
the Interim Evaluation, an independent consultant will be contracted to provide an assessment of project performance against its targets at the project’s mid-term. This will be
an outcomes-based assessment and will include analysing whether the project is on track, what problems and challenges the project is encountering, and what corrective
117 The project’s gender targets as well as the associated gender-disaggregated indicators are presented in Annex 8: Gender Assessment and Action Plan.

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 |  | 
 | 179. Monitoring and evaluation of project activities will be undertaken on an annual basis. The type of monitoring activities to be conducted during the implementation phase, | 
 | as well as the responsible parties for undertaking these activities, are detailed in Annex 11: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan. Such activities include field observations, | 
 | key informant interviews and focus group sessions. The costs associated with undertaking the necessary monitoring, assessments and engagements required to inform the | 
 | project evaluations are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget. | 
 |  | 
 | 180. A project inception workshop will be held after project approval and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) becomes effective and UNDP project document has been signed | 
 | by all relevant parties to: i) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that may influence project implementation; ii) | 
 | discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; iii) review the project Logical | 
 | Framework; iv) discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalise the M&E plan (Annex 11); v) review the financial reporting procedures and | 
 | mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; and vi) plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalise the first year annual work plan | 
 | for the project. The final inception report will be shared with the UNDP Country Office, UNDP Regional Technical Advisor and Project Board for clearance. Once the report has | 
 | been cleared by the relevant parties, it will be submitted to the GCF for approval. This will happen within six months after the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) becomes | 
 | effective. | 
 |  | 
 | 181. An Annual Performance Report (APR) will be prepared by the Project Manager, UNDP Country Office, and UNDP Regional Technical Advisor for submission to the GCF, | 
 | Project Board and relevant project stakeholders. The Project Manager, supported by the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, will ensure that the indicators included | 
 | in the project Logical Framework are monitored annually and that the results from regular M&E activities are presented in the GCF APR. Any challenges and delays experienced | 
 | during the implementation phase will be monitored by the Project Manager and reported in the GCF APR. | 
 |  | 
 | 182. During the implementation phase, specific means of verification will be used to assess the: i) progress of project interventions towards achieving GCF Fund-level impacts | 
 | and Fund-level outcomes; and ii) performance of interventions against the project performance indicators presented in Section E.5 of this Funding Proposal. A Monitoring, | 
 | Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will be employed to conduct and coordinate on-the-ground monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of | 
 | the project and ensure that gender targets are met. The Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will design and operationalise | 
 | a performance monitoring framework to track the project’s progress towards achieving its targets. This will be achieved by: i) measuring the performance against the project | 
 | indicators (Sections E.3–5) to evaluate the progress of the project; ii) reporting the project’s performance to the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Project Implementing | 
 | Unit (PIU); and iii) providing technical support to the Project Manager. Additionally, Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist | 
 | will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring the application of gender-disaggregated indicators117. At particular milestones (e.g. baseline, mid-term and project closure), | 
 | the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist will undertake evidence-gathering exercises to verify the project’s performance | 
 | against the outcomes-based indicators presented in the Logical Framework, M&E Plan and Gender Action Plan. The results from this process will be presented in periodic | 
 | reports developed by the Monitoring, Evaluation and Training Specialist, and Gender and Social Inclusion Specialist, supported by the Project Manager. These reports will be | 
 | submitted to the PSC and validated during the Independent Interim and Final Evaluations for the project, as described below. | 
 |  | 
 | 183. UNDP will be responsible for managing the Independent Interim (mid-term) and Final Evaluations of the project, including the process for contracting these positions. For | 
 | the Interim Evaluation, an independent consultant will be contracted to provide an assessment of project performance against its targets at the project’s mid-term. This will be | 
 | an outcomes-based assessment and will include analysing whether the project is on track, what problems and challenges the project is encountering, and what corrective | 

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
E
a ctions are required, so that the project can achieve its intended outcomes by project completion in the most efficient and sustainable way. Following this evaluation, the PSC
will develop a management response to the evaluation recommendations along with an implementation plan for undertaking the required actions. It is the responsibility of
UNDP to assess whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented during the remainder of the project period. The completed Interim Evaluation report will be
cleared by the UNDP Country Office as well as the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor.
184. Independent national and international consultants will be contracted by UNDP to conduct the Final Evaluation Report at the end of project implementation. UNDP will be
responsible for overseeing the Final Evaluation Report, which is a summative evaluation. This evaluation will include an independent assessment of the project’s overall
performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability), as well as against the project
indicators presented in the Logical Framework. This evaluation will be based on inter alia documentaries of evidence, field observation visits and key informant interviews.
Following completion of the evaluation, the Final Evaluation report will be developed and shared with the UNDP Country Office as well as the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor
for clearance.
185. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project evaluations in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan. All evaluation reports, including responses to feedback
received from the public, will be uploaded in English to the UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC)118. The UNDP CO will retain all M&E records for this project for up to
eight years after financial closure to support ex-post evaluations.
118 available at: www.erc.undp.org

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 | a ctions are required, so that the project can achieve its intended outcomes by project completion in the most efficient and sustainable way. Following this evaluation, the PSC | 
 | will develop a management response to the evaluation recommendations along with an implementation plan for undertaking the required actions. It is the responsibility of | 
 | UNDP to assess whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented during the remainder of the project period. The completed Interim Evaluation report will be | 
 | cleared by the UNDP Country Office as well as the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor. | 
 |  | 
 | 184. Independent national and international consultants will be contracted by UNDP to conduct the Final Evaluation Report at the end of project implementation. UNDP will be | 
 | responsible for overseeing the Final Evaluation Report, which is a summative evaluation. This evaluation will include an independent assessment of the project’s overall | 
 | performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability), as well as against the project | 
 | indicators presented in the Logical Framework. This evaluation will be based on inter alia documentaries of evidence, field observation visits and key informant interviews. | 
 | Following completion of the evaluation, the Final Evaluation report will be developed and shared with the UNDP Country Office as well as the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor | 
 | for clearance. | 
 |  | 
 | 185. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project evaluations in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan. All evaluation reports, including responses to feedback | 
 | received from the public, will be uploaded in English to the UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC)118. The UNDP CO will retain all M&E records for this project for up to | 
 | eight years after financial closure to support ex-post evaluations. | 

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Selected Risk Factor 1
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Turnover of key project personnel, as well as relevant staff from provincial and local governments, could delay
project implementation and negatively impact the retention and transfer of institutional knowledge gained under the
project. Staff in key government institutions may lack the capacity to implement effectively and on time. Staffing
challenges may be further compounded by remote locations and short windows of opportunity for work in high
altitudes.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Regular stakeholder consultations will be held with all project partners involved in project implementation to ensure
that institutional capacity is retained in the event of turnover of key project personnel. In addition, the PSC will be
responsible for ensuring coordination between relevant project stakeholders during the implementation phase. The
PSC will identify personnel whose primary responsibilities will be to act as a focal point for facilitating stakeholder
engagements undertaken during the implementation of the project. Moreover, project operational handbooks will be
developed to provide project staff with standardised training on project interventions. UNDP, as AE, will provide
close oversight on project implementation, supporting government staff where needed to avoid delays related to
capacity shortfalls.
For remote location access: drawing on past experience, the project will engage in advanced planning to ensure
timely mobilization of human resources not to miss the working season in harsh remote locations (in such locations,
working season is only a few month-window during the year for hard work). The project will also use the local work
force who are accustomed to the conditions and are capable of doing hard work in such locations. UNDP Nepal and
Govt. of Nepal has prior experience implemented a GLOF project in Imja lake and a similar approach will be
employed in this project, including capturing lessons and best practices. In addition, lessons from similar projects
implemented in Bhutan and Nepal can also be employed for this project.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
The occurrence of a GLOF, other flooding event, earthquake or other natural disaster or climate change-related
event during project implementation could delay the implementation of project interventions and negatively impact
project areas and target communities.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Project interventions will be continuously monitored to identify potential extreme events for appropriate measures to
be enacted should such an event occur. Operational manuals will also be developed to identify the necessary
measures to be enacted for different extreme events and hazards (Activity 1.1). To ensure as minimal disruption as
possible to project interventions, disaster mitigation and response activities will be prioritised at the target
communities while the project interventions are being established. In addition, project implementation schedules will
consider historical trends regarding the frequency of extreme climate events and will plan around these periods
accordingly. All available information from DHM will be used to assess the GLOF risk prior to and during
implementation. Where possible, downstream risk reduction interventions will be conducted after lake lowering and
EWS interventions, when the risk is already reduced. Workers will be briefed on the potential risks, signs to be
aware of, and actions to take in the event of an emergency.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Category Probability Impact

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 |  |  | 
Category | Probability |  | Impact
Technical and operational | Low |  | Medium
Description |  |  | 
Turnover of key project personnel, as well as relevant staff from provincial and local governments, could delay
project implementation and negatively impact the retention and transfer of institutional knowledge gained under the
project. Staff in key government institutions may lack the capacity to implement effectively and on time. Staffing
challenges may be further compounded by remote locations and short windows of opportunity for work in high
altitudes. |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
Regular stakeholder consultations will be held with all project partners involved in project implementation to ensure
that institutional capacity is retained in the event of turnover of key project personnel. In addition, the PSC will be
responsible for ensuring coordination between relevant project stakeholders during the implementation phase. The
PSC will identify personnel whose primary responsibilities will be to act as a focal point for facilitating stakeholder
engagements undertaken during the implementation of the project. Moreover, project operational handbooks will be
developed to provide project staff with standardised training on project interventions. UNDP, as AE, will provide
close oversight on project implementation, supporting government staff where needed to avoid delays related to
capacity shortfalls.
For remote location access: drawing on past experience, the project will engage in advanced planning to ensure
timely mobilization of human resources not to miss the working season in harsh remote locations (in such locations,
working season is only a few month-window during the year for hard work). The project will also use the local work
force who are accustomed to the conditions and are capable of doing hard work in such locations. UNDP Nepal and
Govt. of Nepal has prior experience implemented a GLOF project in Imja lake and a similar approach will be
employed in this project, including capturing lessons and best practices. In addition, lessons from similar projects
implemented in Bhutan and Nepal can also be employed for this project. |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 |  |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  | 
The occurrence of a GLOF, other flooding event, earthquake or other natural disaster or climate change-related
event during project implementation could delay the implementation of project interventions and negatively impact
project areas and target communities. |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
Project interventions will be continuously monitored to identify potential extreme events for appropriate measures to
be enacted should such an event occur. Operational manuals will also be developed to identify the necessary
measures to be enacted for different extreme events and hazards (Activity 1.1). To ensure as minimal disruption as
possible to project interventions, disaster mitigation and response activities will be prioritised at the target
communities while the project interventions are being established. In addition, project implementation schedules will
consider historical trends regarding the frequency of extreme climate events and will plan around these periods
accordingly. All available information from DHM will be used to assess the GLOF risk prior to and during
implementation. Where possible, downstream risk reduction interventions will be conducted after lake lowering and
EWS interventions, when the risk is already reduced. Workers will be briefed on the potential risks, signs to be
aware of, and actions to take in the event of an emergency. |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 |  |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact | 

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
F
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Delays during the procurement process could disrupt the efficient implementation of project interventions.
Mitigation Measure(s)
UNDP will assist DHM with the procurement process to ensure that the process proceeds according to international
standards and to ensure that any delays or problems that arise are resolved quickly and efficiently. Moreover,
UNDP’s experience in the adaptation field will enable them to directly approach potential partners should the initial
rounds of the procurement process prove unsuccessful.
Additional mitigation actions identified to avoid procurement delay include: i) advance procurement planning and
approval of procurement plan at the time of approval of annual work plan of the project; and ii) directly working with
the entities who have gone through competitive process and the government or UNDP has long-term agreements
signed. Fair pricing and transparency is mandatory for both the government and UNDP to ensure a competitive
process has been adopted in procurement as set by standard procurement rules of the government and UNDP. All
procurement notices are made public and given sufficient time to seek quotations or bids, which are evaluated
based on pre-set criteria, which is part of procurement notice. All project transactions are mandatory audited by the
government and UNDP as per set audit rules every year which also includes financial management
Given the relevance of EWS, weather stations and measuring equipment and civil works among the projected
procurement needs for this project, a dedicated meeting will be scheduled between UNDP Nepal and Bureau of
Management/Office of Procurement/Crises, Climate and Infrastructure Team soon after securing GCF Board
approval. UNDP also has the option to channel high-value procurement actions through existing corporate LTAs. In
addition, UNDP can also provide specialized support for infrastructure/civil works and lessons learnt through other
GCF projects of a similar nature.
Selected Risk Factor 4
Category Probability Impact
Governance Low Medium
Description
The Government of Nepal’s transition from a unitary governance system to a federal democratic republic over the
past decade could alter political priorities. This shift could lead to project stakeholders diverting their efforts away
from project implementation. Similar risks may emerge following elections, when key government stakeholders
might change.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The Government of Nepal’s transition from a unitary governance system to a federal democratic republic means that
the mandates, capacities and interagency relationships of governmental institutions and mechanisms are still being
established. While Nepal’s Constitution and its Local Government Operation Act (2017) both provide detailed
information on the roles, responsibilities and coordination mechanisms of government operations, the project will be
developed with the lessons learned from previous and existing projects in Nepal to ensure that project activities
incorporate, but are not solely reliant on, government agencies. This approach aims to minimise the impact of any
potential shifts in the political landscape. The PSC will engage directly with the NDA to ensure close communication
with government officials and to identify and address potential delays or changes to project management or
interventions.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Potential risks related to the implementation of project interventions in the remote project target areas include: i)
difficulty accessing project areas for installation and maintenance of equipment; ii) ESS risks related to altering river

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
Technical and operational |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Delays during the procurement process could disrupt the efficient implementation of project interventions. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
UNDP will assist DHM with the procurement process to ensure that the process proceeds according to international
standards and to ensure that any delays or problems that arise are resolved quickly and efficiently. Moreover,
UNDP’s experience in the adaptation field will enable them to directly approach potential partners should the initial
rounds of the procurement process prove unsuccessful.
Additional mitigation actions identified to avoid procurement delay include: i) advance procurement planning and
approval of procurement plan at the time of approval of annual work plan of the project; and ii) directly working with
the entities who have gone through competitive process and the government or UNDP has long-term agreements
signed. Fair pricing and transparency is mandatory for both the government and UNDP to ensure a competitive
process has been adopted in procurement as set by standard procurement rules of the government and UNDP. All
procurement notices are made public and given sufficient time to seek quotations or bids, which are evaluated
based on pre-set criteria, which is part of procurement notice. All project transactions are mandatory audited by the
government and UNDP as per set audit rules every year which also includes financial management
Given the relevance of EWS, weather stations and measuring equipment and civil works among the projected
procurement needs for this project, a dedicated meeting will be scheduled between UNDP Nepal and Bureau of
Management/Office of Procurement/Crises, Climate and Infrastructure Team soon after securing GCF Board
approval. UNDP also has the option to channel high-value procurement actions through existing corporate LTAs. In
addition, UNDP can also provide specialized support for infrastructure/civil works and lessons learnt through other
GCF projects of a similar nature. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 4 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
The Government of Nepal’s transition from a unitary governance system to a federal democratic republic over the
past decade could alter political priorities. This shift could lead to project stakeholders diverting their efforts away
from project implementation. Similar risks may emerge following elections, when key government stakeholders
might change. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
The Government of Nepal’s transition from a unitary governance system to a federal democratic republic means that
the mandates, capacities and interagency relationships of governmental institutions and mechanisms are still being
established. While Nepal’s Constitution and its Local Government Operation Act (2017) both provide detailed
information on the roles, responsibilities and coordination mechanisms of government operations, the project will be
developed with the lessons learned from previous and existing projects in Nepal to ensure that project activities
incorporate, but are not solely reliant on, government agencies. This approach aims to minimise the impact of any
potential shifts in the political landscape. The PSC will engage directly with the NDA to ensure close communication
with government officials and to identify and address potential delays or changes to project management or
interventions. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  | 
Potential risks related to the implementation of project interventions in the remote project target areas include: i)
difficulty accessing project areas for installation and maintenance of equipment; ii) ESS risks related to altering river |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
F
channels/check dams; and iii) the risk of project staff and community members suffering from acute mountain sickness
or being affected by adverse weather conditions. In addition, community members have limited capacity for the
maintenance of equipment related to project interventions.
Mitigation Measure(s)
An assessment of project areas prior to implementation and installation of equipment and/or infrastructure will ensure
that the correct measures are established to enable the effective installation, and later maintenance, of that
equipment/infrastructure (Activities 2.1, 2.2, 3.1 and 3.2). Continuous monitoring from local government officials and
community-based organisations (CBOs) in the project areas, to inform the PSC, will ensure the safety of contractors
and workers during project implementation, and will serve as the institutional mechanism to ensure effective
maintenance of project interventions. In addition, this monitoring will serve to identify potential ESS risks to ensure
they are addressed quickly and efficiently.
Selected Risk Factor 6
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Check dams constructed as part of project interventions may not sufficiently mitigate extreme flood events, resulting
in continued impacts on target communities.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Prior to construction, all infrastructure will be designed based on site evaluations, with specifications relevant to
each target site (Activities 3.1 and 3.2). The construction of these infrastructure will occur during periods when
extreme climate events are less likely — according to historical trends — to minimise the potential risks during
construction. All infrastructure will be designed and built to be consistent with international engineering standards, to
ensure that they are resilient to extreme climate events and natural disasters.
Selected Risk Factor 7
Category Probability Impact
Governance Low Medium
Description
A lack of buy-in or commitment from communities where project interventions are intended to be implemented will
undermine the effectiveness of these activities.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project will actively seek to create community ownership of the project through community consultations and
trainings and will accordingly encourage community participation in project activities. These community
consultations and trainings will ensure that community members understand the importance of the project
interventions, in addition to enabling them to effectively maintain, monitor and report on these interventions.
Selected Risk Factor 8
Category Probability Impact
Governance Low Medium
Description
Limited collaboration and coordination between project stakeholders, including relevant government departments,
ministries and the private sector will reduce the timely delivery and effectiveness of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Extensive stakeholder consultations will ensure that the roles and responsibilities of project stakeholders are well
defined, while also developing and strengthening existing interagency collaboration and coordination. The PSC will
be responsible for ensuring coordination between all relevant project stakeholders during project implementation.
This responsibility also includes facilitating stakeholder engagements during the project implementation to ensure
continued collaboration and to mediate potential disputes.

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
channels/check dams; and iii) the risk of project staff and community members suffering from acute mountain sickness
or being affected by adverse weather conditions. In addition, community members have limited capacity for the
maintenance of equipment related to project interventions. |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
An assessment of project areas prior to implementation and installation of equipment and/or infrastructure will ensure
that the correct measures are established to enable the effective installation, and later maintenance, of that
equipment/infrastructure (Activities 2.1, 2.2, 3.1 and 3.2). Continuous monitoring from local government officials and
community-based organisations (CBOs) in the project areas, to inform the PSC, will ensure the safety of contractors
and workers during project implementation, and will serve as the institutional mechanism to ensure effective
maintenance of project interventions. In addition, this monitoring will serve to identify potential ESS risks to ensure
they are addressed quickly and efficiently. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Check dams constructed as part of project interventions may not sufficiently mitigate extreme flood events, resulting
in continued impacts on target communities. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
Prior to construction, all infrastructure will be designed based on site evaluations, with specifications relevant to
each target site (Activities 3.1 and 3.2). The construction of these infrastructure will occur during periods when
extreme climate events are less likely — according to historical trends — to minimise the potential risks during
construction. All infrastructure will be designed and built to be consistent with international engineering standards, to
ensure that they are resilient to extreme climate events and natural disasters. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 7 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
A lack of buy-in or commitment from communities where project interventions are intended to be implemented will
undermine the effectiveness of these activities. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
The project will actively seek to create community ownership of the project through community consultations and
trainings and will accordingly encourage community participation in project activities. These community
consultations and trainings will ensure that community members understand the importance of the project
interventions, in addition to enabling them to effectively maintain, monitor and report on these interventions. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 8 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Low | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Limited collaboration and coordination between project stakeholders, including relevant government departments,
ministries and the private sector will reduce the timely delivery and effectiveness of the project. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
Extensive stakeholder consultations will ensure that the roles and responsibilities of project stakeholders are well
defined, while also developing and strengthening existing interagency collaboration and coordination. The PSC will
be responsible for ensuring coordination between all relevant project stakeholders during project implementation.
This responsibility also includes facilitating stakeholder engagements during the project implementation to ensure
continued collaboration and to mediate potential disputes. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
F
Selected Risk Factor 9
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low High
Description
Risks may arise related to procurement and management of construction/civil works related to lake lowering and
EWS equipment. These include: i) potential for unfair procurement process and price manipulation; ii) contractors
lack capacity/experience to deliver on time and in budget; and iii) contractors not following the procedures laid out in
the ESMP.
Mitigation Measure(s)
UNDP, as the accredited entity, will ensure that fair and transparent procurement processes are followed, and that a
detailed vendor selection process is carried out to assess the experience and credentials of potential vendors. The
quality assurance process for the procurement of technical suppliers will include inputs from a suitably qualitied
chief technical advisor, who will sit on the PMU, with support from members of the TAG. This includes screening
proposals against the project’s ESMP to ensure that all provisions for environmental and social safeguards are
strictly adhered to. Should suitably experienced firms not be identified for the glacial lake lowering, the Nepal Army,
who has experience implementing similar activities from previous GLOF risk reduction projects, may be brought in
to support.
Selected Risk Factor 10
Category Probability Impact
Governance Low Medium
Description
The project may face challenges in maintaining financial sustainability and ensuring compliance with evolving
environmental regulations, and protect infrastructure against natural hazards given Nepal's economic situation and
the challenges faces related to adapting to changing political priorities during federal transition.
Mitigation Measure(s)
a) Nepal's priorities to build resilience against risks including from GLOFs prevails all other priorities, including
economic development, which will continue despite changes in political landscape, as risk reduction remains at the
top of political parties agenda, b) as the transition towards federal system of governance will be expedited in the
near future, empowering sub-national governments who will be expected to play more stronger role in risk mitigation
as per constitutional mandates c) project sites mainly include protected areas of Nepal, governed under strict
environment conservation regulations supported by protected area laws, which has remained stable in comparison
to other environment conservation related regulations d) at national level monitoring of GLOF risks and sharing risk
information with concerned authorities has been embedded in the regular work stream of DHM funded from the
government budget.
Selected Risk Factor 11
Category Probability Impact
ML/FT Low Medium
Description
Risks related to money laundering (ML), terrorist financing (TF), and prohibited practices (PP) could undermine the
integrity of project financing, leading to misallocation of funds, reputational damage, and potential legal
repercussions. Weak financial oversight in remote or high-risk areas may also expose the project to illicit financial
flows, impacting effective implementation and stakeholder trust.
Mitigation Measure(s)

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
Selected Risk Factor 9 |  |  |  | 
Category | Probability |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational | Low |  | High | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Risks may arise related to procurement and management of construction/civil works related to lake lowering and
EWS equipment. These include: i) potential for unfair procurement process and price manipulation; ii) contractors
lack capacity/experience to deliver on time and in budget; and iii) contractors not following the procedures laid out in
the ESMP. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
UNDP, as the accredited entity, will ensure that fair and transparent procurement processes are followed, and that a
detailed vendor selection process is carried out to assess the experience and credentials of potential vendors. The
quality assurance process for the procurement of technical suppliers will include inputs from a suitably qualitied
chief technical advisor, who will sit on the PMU, with support from members of the TAG. This includes screening
proposals against the project’s ESMP to ensure that all provisions for environmental and social safeguards are
strictly adhered to. Should suitably experienced firms not be identified for the glacial lake lowering, the Nepal Army,
who has experience implementing similar activities from previous GLOF risk reduction projects, may be brought in
to support. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 10 |  |  |  | 
Category | Probability |  |  | Impact
Governance | Low |  |  | Medium
Description |  |  |  | 
The project may face challenges in maintaining financial sustainability and ensuring compliance with evolving
environmental regulations, and protect infrastructure against natural hazards given Nepal's economic situation and
the challenges faces related to adapting to changing political priorities during federal transition. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
a) Nepal's priorities to build resilience against risks including from GLOFs prevails all other priorities, including
economic development, which will continue despite changes in political landscape, as risk reduction remains at the
top of political parties agenda, b) as the transition towards federal system of governance will be expedited in the
near future, empowering sub-national governments who will be expected to play more stronger role in risk mitigation
as per constitutional mandates c) project sites mainly include protected areas of Nepal, governed under strict
environment conservation regulations supported by protected area laws, which has remained stable in comparison
to other environment conservation related regulations d) at national level monitoring of GLOF risks and sharing risk
information with concerned authorities has been embedded in the regular work stream of DHM funded from the
government budget. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 11 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability |  | Impact
ML/FT |  | Low |  | Medium
Description |  |  |  | 
Risks related to money laundering (ML), terrorist financing (TF), and prohibited practices (PP) could undermine the
integrity of project financing, leading to misallocation of funds, reputational damage, and potential legal
repercussions. Weak financial oversight in remote or high-risk areas may also expose the project to illicit financial
flows, impacting effective implementation and stakeholder trust. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93
F
UNDP has robust processes in place to safeguard against money laundering, terrorist financing, and prohibited
practices, clearly articulated in the stand-alone AML-CFT policy. The project will strictly follow the processes and
procedures defined in this policy, including related to due diligence and partnership assessment criteria for all
partners it engages. Each entity will be screened against the criteria set out in this policy and other policies
referenced herein. Core project partners have already been screened, with the overall PCAT risk rating for all
partners to be engaged in the project assessed as “Low risk” or “Very Low Risk”.
Selected Risk Factor 12
Category Probability Impact
Low Medium
Description
Given the complex nature of the engineering activities under the project, there is a potential reputation risk for
UNDP should the project experience significant delays related to procurement issues or logistical challenges for
works in remote and high-altitude glacial lakes, or more seriously should the works not meet international technical
standards.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project has been designed in close consultation with technical experts both locally and globally. This includes
detailed assessments during the design of the project’s lake lowering interventions, with technical experts to ensure
that designs are fully in line with international standards. The implementation plan, including disbursement schedule,
logistical support and procurement actions are also prepared based on the narrow working season under
difficult/remote conditions. During implementation, the project will continue to engage technical experts to bolster
Project’s internal capacity for meeting engineering standards. This will include ensuring that the full-time project
manager has considerable experience in managing complex engineering projects (including experience related to
GLOF risk reduction), as well as the establishment of a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) that will bring together
local and international expertise to provide technical oversight and guidance for the implementation of all technical
engineering works.
Furthermore, approaches to avoid reputational damage include the mitigation measures linked to procurement
detailed in Risks 3 and 9 above, as well as mitigation measures related to works happening in remote locations and
high altitudes described under Risk 5.

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
UNDP has robust processes in place to safeguard against money laundering, terrorist financing, and prohibited
practices, clearly articulated in the stand-alone AML-CFT policy. The project will strictly follow the processes and
procedures defined in this policy, including related to due diligence and partnership assessment criteria for all
partners it engages. Each entity will be screened against the criteria set out in this policy and other policies
referenced herein. Core project partners have already been screened, with the overall PCAT risk rating for all
partners to be engaged in the project assessed as “Low risk” or “Very Low Risk”. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 12 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
 | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Given the complex nature of the engineering activities under the project, there is a potential reputation risk for
UNDP should the project experience significant delays related to procurement issues or logistical challenges for
works in remote and high-altitude glacial lakes, or more seriously should the works not meet international technical
standards. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The project has been designed in close consultation with technical experts both locally and globally. This includes
detailed assessments during the design of the project’s lake lowering interventions, with technical experts to ensure
that designs are fully in line with international standards. The implementation plan, including disbursement schedule,
logistical support and procurement actions are also prepared based on the narrow working season under
difficult/remote conditions. During implementation, the project will continue to engage technical experts to bolster
Project’s internal capacity for meeting engineering standards. This will include ensuring that the full-time project
manager has considerable experience in managing complex engineering projects (including experience related to
GLOF risk reduction), as well as the establishment of a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) that will bring together
local and international expertise to provide technical oversight and guidance for the implementation of all technical
engineering works.
Furthermore, approaches to avoid reputational damage include the mitigation measures linked to procurement
detailed in Risks 3 and 9 above, as well as mitigation measures related to works happening in remote locations and
high altitudes described under Risk 5. |  | 

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94
G
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
The environmental and social risks associated with this project have been evaluated in accordance with GCF’s
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) as well as UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards (SES). The
186.project is classified as Substantial according to UNDP’s Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP).
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for the project to guide the
management of environmental and social issues, including.
187. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to summarise the potential
environmental and social risks that may be associated with the project, as well as provide a framework under which
these risks will be addressed during and after the implementation period. Further environmental and social impact
assessments (ESIA) and the development of environmental and social management plans ESMPs, along with the
other safeguard plans (e.g., gender action plan, stakeholder management plan, indigenous peoples plans, labour
management etc) are specified in the ESMF. A summary of the findings of this ESMF is presented below, with the
full ESMF included as Annex 6 to this Funding Proposal.
Environmental impacts
188. Environmental impacts are primarily associated with the project are linked to potential impacts associated with
the installation of equipment, flood mitigation structures and construction surrounding lake lowering measures.
Further targeted impact assessments (ESIAs) will be undertaken for each of the three catchments. ESMPs for
each catchment will also be prepared prior to commencement of construction.
189. To limit the potential damage caused by monsoon rains, all construction activities will take place during the dry
season. This will also limit soil erosion and sedimentation caused by construction activities and limit the
environmental impacts. To reduce the potential for a negative visual impact on the landscape, local materials will
be used where possible. Construction designs will also consider the inclusion of culturally appropriate measures.
The potential environmental impact of sourcing construction materials — such as tree, shrubs and rocks — will be
managed through the establishment of small-scale community-based nurseries and sourcing through existing legal
quarries only. Planting of trees will only be done according to site-specific guidance developed to match key tree
species which are adapted to the local context. Site-specific matching will avoid any risks to local biodiversity and
ensure compliance with Nepal’s Forestry Policy. Appropriate monitoring of the environmental impacts will be further
developed as part of the project’s ESMPs.
190. Several of the project sites are within National Parks, in the high alpine areas of Nepal. These areas are
particularly sensitive. ESIAs will be undertaken to further assess potential impacts to the parks. The existing
National Park Management Plans will be updated to permit and control the proposed activities within the parks. No
activities will be undertaken within the parks before assessment and without approval from the National Parks
authority.
191. The design of the physical interventions has taken into account potential climate change variations and have
been validated through modelling. Dam break modelling to determine areas of impact if catastrophic failure and
assist in identifying mitigation measure designs and identifying ‘safe zones’/escape pathways as part of EWS.
Operation and maintenance plans will assist in the sustainability of the interventions.
Social impacts
192. The main potential adverse social impacts associated with the project include the potential discrimination or
limited engagement of Indigenous Peoples, Dalits or other marginalized groups — including women. Indigenous
Peoples of the mountain communities in the proposed project sites and the broader Himalayan region have deep
cultural and spiritual connections to conserving water sources, nature, and soil. Their traditional knowledge plays
a crucial role in shaping sustainable climate resilience strategies through local actions. Practices such as
community-led watershed management, traditional weather forecasting, sacred landscape preservation, and
sustainable resource use offer valuable insights into Glacier Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) risk reduction, nature-
based solutions, and ecological conservation. Indigenous monitoring techniques, oral histories, and traditional
communication practices also enhance Early Warning Systems by complementing scientific methods with localized
expertise, while social / cultural groups offer social safety nets for disaster preparedness and actions. This will be
managed through implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Engagement Framework that has been prepared. In
addition to ensuring engagement, the Framework will also ensure inclusion of Indigenous Peoples in project
planning and implementation, to ensure they are not adversely impacted by proposed measures, such as lake
lowering. Early in the project implementation phase, Indigenous Peoples Plans will be prepared for each of the
three catchments. Activities that could trigger the need for FPIC have been identified in the IPPF. Organizations
like the Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN) and the National Indigenous Women’s Federation

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
The environmental and social risks associated with this project have been evaluated in accordance with GCF’s
Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) as well as UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards (SES). The
186.project is classified as Substantial according to UNDP’s Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP).
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for the project to guide the
management of environmental and social issues, including.
187. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to summarise the potential
environmental and social risks that may be associated with the project, as well as provide a framework under which
these risks will be addressed during and after the implementation period. Further environmental and social impact
assessments (ESIA) and the development of environmental and social management plans ESMPs, along with the
other safeguard plans (e.g., gender action plan, stakeholder management plan, indigenous peoples plans, labour
management etc) are specified in the ESMF. A summary of the findings of this ESMF is presented below, with the
full ESMF included as Annex 6 to this Funding Proposal.
Environmental impacts
188. Environmental impacts are primarily associated with the project are linked to potential impacts associated with
the installation of equipment, flood mitigation structures and construction surrounding lake lowering measures.
Further targeted impact assessments (ESIAs) will be undertaken for each of the three catchments. ESMPs for
each catchment will also be prepared prior to commencement of construction.
189. To limit the potential damage caused by monsoon rains, all construction activities will take place during the dry
season. This will also limit soil erosion and sedimentation caused by construction activities and limit the
environmental impacts. To reduce the potential for a negative visual impact on the landscape, local materials will
be used where possible. Construction designs will also consider the inclusion of culturally appropriate measures.
The potential environmental impact of sourcing construction materials — such as tree, shrubs and rocks — will be
managed through the establishment of small-scale community-based nurseries and sourcing through existing legal
quarries only. Planting of trees will only be done according to site-specific guidance developed to match key tree
species which are adapted to the local context. Site-specific matching will avoid any risks to local biodiversity and
ensure compliance with Nepal’s Forestry Policy. Appropriate monitoring of the environmental impacts will be further
developed as part of the project’s ESMPs.
190. Several of the project sites are within National Parks, in the high alpine areas of Nepal. These areas are
particularly sensitive. ESIAs will be undertaken to further assess potential impacts to the parks. The existing
National Park Management Plans will be updated to permit and control the proposed activities within the parks. No
activities will be undertaken within the parks before assessment and without approval from the National Parks
authority.
191. The design of the physical interventions has taken into account potential climate change variations and have
been validated through modelling. Dam break modelling to determine areas of impact if catastrophic failure and
assist in identifying mitigation measure designs and identifying ‘safe zones’/escape pathways as part of EWS.
Operation and maintenance plans will assist in the sustainability of the interventions.
Social impacts
192. The main potential adverse social impacts associated with the project include the potential discrimination or
limited engagement of Indigenous Peoples, Dalits or other marginalized groups — including women. Indigenous
Peoples of the mountain communities in the proposed project sites and the broader Himalayan region have deep
cultural and spiritual connections to conserving water sources, nature, and soil. Their traditional knowledge plays
a crucial role in shaping sustainable climate resilience strategies through local actions. Practices such as
community-led watershed management, traditional weather forecasting, sacred landscape preservation, and
sustainable resource use offer valuable insights into Glacier Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) risk reduction, nature-
based solutions, and ecological conservation. Indigenous monitoring techniques, oral histories, and traditional
communication practices also enhance Early Warning Systems by complementing scientific methods with localized
expertise, while social / cultural groups offer social safety nets for disaster preparedness and actions. This will be
managed through implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Engagement Framework that has been prepared. In
addition to ensuring engagement, the Framework will also ensure inclusion of Indigenous Peoples in project
planning and implementation, to ensure they are not adversely impacted by proposed measures, such as lake
lowering. Early in the project implementation phase, Indigenous Peoples Plans will be prepared for each of the
three catchments. Activities that could trigger the need for FPIC have been identified in the IPPF. Organizations
like the Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN) and the National Indigenous Women’s Federation

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95
G
(NIWF) are actively involved in engaging Indigenous communities, ensuring their knowledge is systematically
integrated into policies and interventions. This approach strengthens efforts of the project, fostering culturally
appropriate, community-driven, and ecologically sustainable solutions for long-term climate resilience. It should be
noted that for no activities will indigenous people be relocated from their land or have traditional access to land
removed.
193. There are activities within the project that could represent gender risks e.g., unequal representation of women,
GBV/SEAH due to worker influx etc. The project Gender Action Plan includes measures to promote women’s
empowerment and gender equality within the framework of the project. The Plan includes detailed measures that
target the empowerment of women within the project, while also taking into account gender-specific contexts and
vulnerabilities. Further to this, participation from women, Indigenous groups, Dalit communities and other
marginalized groups will be ensured by their representation of 50% of the project beneficiaries. Finally the ESMF
includes a GBV/SEAH Action plan to address SEAH-related risks and the grievance redress mechanism includes
specific pathways for the management of complaints relating to GBV/SEAH.
194. As mentioned above, country ownership is prioritised as critical to the sustainability of the project. Similarly, the
importance of Indigenous traditional practices, knowledge and skills on resilience to natural disasters — including
extreme climate events — has been emphasised. Careful consideration of the physical impacts of construction on
water conditions downstream is also necessary, as water is traditionally considered sacred in Dolakha, Manang
and other Buddhist and animist Indigenous communities.
195. The project will involve a wide range of stakeholders over large areas, therefore multi-level, systematic
engagement will be required if all stakeholders are to be effectively communicated with and mis-information
avoided. The project includes development of EWS warnings and GLOF reduction measures, communicating
these to all stakeholders in terms that are readily understood is critical to the success of the project. Further, the
various safeguard documents produced for the project need to be disclosed. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has
been developed for the project to help guide the engagement process.
196. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been developed for this project and is described in in the ESMF.
These GRM is compatible with Nepalese legislation and compliant with UNDP and GCF standards, allowing any
project stakeholder with complaints or grievances towards the project to communicate their concerns through an
appropriate process. The GRM will be used at all stages of the project and will provide an accessible, rapid, fair
and effective response to concerned stakeholders, in particular any vulnerable groups that may lack access to
formal legal systems or support. As previously noted, the GRM contains specific pathways for the treatment of
SEAH and GBV complaints.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
197. A Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Assessment — in line with the objectives of the GCF’s Gender Policy
and gender guidelines — has been developed by UNDP to inform the design of the proposed project (Annex 8).
The document was based on field consultations –– including 30 key informant interviews, nine focus group
discussions (FGDs) and two multi-stakeholder national level workshops –– as well as available data from studies
conducted by the GoN, UN agencies, civil society organisations (CSOs), donor agencies and multilateral
development banks.
198. The gender assessment indicates the extent to which gender inequality exists in Nepal. The country has a
medium Gender Development Index (GDI), ranking 147 out of 189 countries in 2018. Gender inequalities,
vulnerability and risk is exacerbated by climate change in multiple, nuanced and overlapping ways in Nepal. Gender
norms, imbalanced division of labour, unequal wages, and less access to and control over land and other productive
assets for women result in fewer livelihood options available to women, making them more vulnerable to climate
change. Women are particularly vulnerable because of a lack of gender sensitivity in planning, development and
post-disaster relief.
199. Other key vulnerable groups identified in the GESI assessment include Dalits and Indigenous groups. Dalits –
– members of the lowest caste according to the Hindu social structure –– residing in the Terai and Pahad119 region
are considered to be the most excluded and vulnerable group in the target areas. Indigenous groups, particularly
those living in the disaster prone and remote areas of Majhi, Kumal, and Botes were also found to be extremely
vulnerable. Within these different marginalised groups, women, women-headed households, the elderly, people
with disabilities (PWD), pregnant and lactating mothers and children are considered to be even more vulnerable to
climate change and extreme climate events. Other groups vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters are
119 The Terai region of Nepal encompass es the lowland plains along the country’s border with India. The Pahad region is the geophysical
region that includes the lower hills. More information can be found in Annex 2: Feasibility Study.

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
(NIWF) are actively involved in engaging Indigenous communities, ensuring their knowledge is systematically
integrated into policies and interventions. This approach strengthens efforts of the project, fostering culturally
appropriate, community-driven, and ecologically sustainable solutions for long-term climate resilience. It should be
noted that for no activities will indigenous people be relocated from their land or have traditional access to land
removed.
193. There are activities within the project that could represent gender risks e.g., unequal representation of women,
GBV/SEAH due to worker influx etc. The project Gender Action Plan includes measures to promote women’s
empowerment and gender equality within the framework of the project. The Plan includes detailed measures that
target the empowerment of women within the project, while also taking into account gender-specific contexts and
vulnerabilities. Further to this, participation from women, Indigenous groups, Dalit communities and other
marginalized groups will be ensured by their representation of 50% of the project beneficiaries. Finally the ESMF
includes a GBV/SEAH Action plan to address SEAH-related risks and the grievance redress mechanism includes
specific pathways for the management of complaints relating to GBV/SEAH.
194. As mentioned above, country ownership is prioritised as critical to the sustainability of the project. Similarly, the
importance of Indigenous traditional practices, knowledge and skills on resilience to natural disasters — including
extreme climate events — has been emphasised. Careful consideration of the physical impacts of construction on
water conditions downstream is also necessary, as water is traditionally considered sacred in Dolakha, Manang
and other Buddhist and animist Indigenous communities.
195. The project will involve a wide range of stakeholders over large areas, therefore multi-level, systematic
engagement will be required if all stakeholders are to be effectively communicated with and mis-information
avoided. The project includes development of EWS warnings and GLOF reduction measures, communicating
these to all stakeholders in terms that are readily understood is critical to the success of the project. Further, the
various safeguard documents produced for the project need to be disclosed. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has
been developed for the project to help guide the engagement process.
196. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been developed for this project and is described in in the ESMF.
These GRM is compatible with Nepalese legislation and compliant with UNDP and GCF standards, allowing any
project stakeholder with complaints or grievances towards the project to communicate their concerns through an
appropriate process. The GRM will be used at all stages of the project and will provide an accessible, rapid, fair
and effective response to concerned stakeholders, in particular any vulnerable groups that may lack access to
formal legal systems or support. As previously noted, the GRM contains specific pathways for the treatment of
SEAH and GBV complaints.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
197. A Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Assessment — in line with the objectives of the GCF’s Gender Policy
and gender guidelines — has been developed by UNDP to inform the design of the proposed project (Annex 8).
The document was based on field consultations –– including 30 key informant interviews, nine focus group
discussions (FGDs) and two multi-stakeholder national level workshops –– as well as available data from studies
conducted by the GoN, UN agencies, civil society organisations (CSOs), donor agencies and multilateral
development banks.
198. The gender assessment indicates the extent to which gender inequality exists in Nepal. The country has a
medium Gender Development Index (GDI), ranking 147 out of 189 countries in 2018. Gender inequalities,
vulnerability and risk is exacerbated by climate change in multiple, nuanced and overlapping ways in Nepal. Gender
norms, imbalanced division of labour, unequal wages, and less access to and control over land and other productive
assets for women result in fewer livelihood options available to women, making them more vulnerable to climate
change. Women are particularly vulnerable because of a lack of gender sensitivity in planning, development and
post-disaster relief.
199. Other key vulnerable groups identified in the GESI assessment include Dalits and Indigenous groups. Dalits –
– members of the lowest caste according to the Hindu social structure –– residing in the Terai and Pahad119 region
are considered to be the most excluded and vulnerable group in the target areas. Indigenous groups, particularly
those living in the disaster prone and remote areas of Majhi, Kumal, and Botes were also found to be extremely
vulnerable. Within these different marginalised groups, women, women-headed households, the elderly, people
with disabilities (PWD), pregnant and lactating mothers and children are considered to be even more vulnerable to
climate change and extreme climate events. Other groups vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters are

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96
G
poor women, elderly people, people living with disabilities across all caste and ethnic groups living in geographically
remote and disaster-prone areas. These groups are particularly vulnerable because of, inter alia, both historical
and recent inadequate consideration and integration of Indigenous groups in resilience efforts.
200. In line with the GCF’s gender priorities, and the recommendations put forward by the GESI experts following
consultations, the proposed project will integrate the following key areas in the Gender Action Plan (GAP):
intersectional mapping and defining of primary stakeholders and their different and overlapping exclusions,
vulnerabilities, roles and contributions in terms of climate change and disaster risks;
partnerships with specialised government and non-governmental institutions to support climate-smart technology
–– at household and commercial level –– that is accessible to women;
systematic and formal linkages of new or existing entities for improved networking and participation, through: i)
women and marginalised people’s groups ii) local wards and municipalities; and iii) Disaster Risk Reduction and
climate change-related committees' planning structures;
improved accessibility to established institutions with experience of value chains (VCs) and micro-enterprises in
the Koshi Basin areas for women and men from poor and marginalised groups;
timely, accurate and accessible communication with poor women and marginalised groups about the project and
local government resources;
gender outcomes captured in the Monitoring Information System (MIS) of the project for feedback and improved
upscaling purposes;
climate change and DRR management strategies with systematic integration of GESI for the project cycle; and
capacity building packages for project staff and key partners with a GESI focus.
201. These measures will ensure equal participation and maximise benefits from investment in this project. The key
results regarding gender expected from this project include enabling poor and marginalised women and men to
lead and manage at least 35% of the GLOF/DRR, Integrated Watershed Management and Eco-system based
related committees in the project areas, providing opportunities for women to hold 50% of key decision-making
positions, training 60% of women technical staffs in DHM in regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritization,
providing employment and training to 60% marginalised people and ensuring that 35% women’s groups in five
watershed/sub-watershed areas are leading and implementing project activities (see Annex 8 for further details).
The AE, EE and project PMU will ensure the implementation of activities and expected outcomes will be achieved,
monitored and evaluated.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
202. The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations.
Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and
Operations Policies and Procedures available here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as
outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and
Procedures (POPP). The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the
procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP120.
203. Any materials or intangible assets procured under the project is governed by UNDP’s Programme and
Operations Policies and Procedures – under chapters (i) Asset Management - Property, plant and equipment and
ii) Asset Management - Intangible assets (https://popp.undp.org/administrative-services). For technology solutions,
clauses under the UNDP contract General Terms and Conditions, regulate Intellectual Property (IP) rights
depending on the type of software or license being procured. As per the terms of the AMA, in relation to a Funded
Activity that is a grant financed in whole or in part with GCF Proceeds, if any part of such grant is used to purchase
any durable assets or equipment used to implement the relevant Funded Activity (such as vehicles or office
equipment), upon completion of the Funded Activity or termination of the relevant FAA in accordance with its terms,
the Accredited Entity shall take such steps in relation to such assets or equipment which it reasonably deems in
the best interest of the continued operation of the Funded Activity taking into consideration the objectives of the
Fund and the terms of the applicable SBAA. For the transfer of asset from UNDP to the Government a UNDP
Template has to be completed to transfer Title of Assets from UNDP to the Government
(https://popp.undp.org/document/transfer-title-assets-undp-government-country-office), where it is stated that "The
transfer of title is limited to the use of such assets solely for the stated purposes of the Project in the manner and
place as set out in the Project Document.
The project will be implemented following UNDP CO Support to National Implementation Modality (NIM) in line with
UNDP’s POPP guidelines available here. This choice is justified given the GoN’s request for UNDP to execute the
project and the findings of the capacity assessment of government agencies (Harmonized Approach to Cash
Transfers — HACT assessments) that indicate low risk in national implementation. UNDP will ascertain the national
120 Further details on the POPP are availa ble at: https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit.

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
poor women, elderly people, people living with disabilities across all caste and ethnic groups living in geographically
remote and disaster-prone areas. These groups are particularly vulnerable because of, inter alia, both historical
and recent inadequate consideration and integration of Indigenous groups in resilience efforts.
200. In line with the GCF’s gender priorities, and the recommendations put forward by the GESI experts following
consultations, the proposed project will integrate the following key areas in the Gender Action Plan (GAP):
intersectional mapping and defining of primary stakeholders and their different and overlapping exclusions,
vulnerabilities, roles and contributions in terms of climate change and disaster risks;
partnerships with specialised government and non-governmental institutions to support climate-smart technology
–– at household and commercial level –– that is accessible to women;
systematic and formal linkages of new or existing entities for improved networking and participation, through: i)
women and marginalised people’s groups ii) local wards and municipalities; and iii) Disaster Risk Reduction and
climate change-related committees' planning structures;
improved accessibility to established institutions with experience of value chains (VCs) and micro-enterprises in
the Koshi Basin areas for women and men from poor and marginalised groups;
timely, accurate and accessible communication with poor women and marginalised groups about the project and
local government resources;
gender outcomes captured in the Monitoring Information System (MIS) of the project for feedback and improved
upscaling purposes;
climate change and DRR management strategies with systematic integration of GESI for the project cycle; and
capacity building packages for project staff and key partners with a GESI focus.
201. These measures will ensure equal participation and maximise benefits from investment in this project. The key
results regarding gender expected from this project include enabling poor and marginalised women and men to
lead and manage at least 35% of the GLOF/DRR, Integrated Watershed Management and Eco-system based
related committees in the project areas, providing opportunities for women to hold 50% of key decision-making
positions, training 60% of women technical staffs in DHM in regular/operational monitoring for risk prioritization,
providing employment and training to 60% marginalised people and ensuring that 35% women’s groups in five
watershed/sub-watershed areas are leading and implementing project activities (see Annex 8 for further details).
The AE, EE and project PMU will ensure the implementation of activities and expected outcomes will be achieved,
monitored and evaluated. |  | 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 202. The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations. | 
 | Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and | 
 | Operations Policies and Procedures available here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as | 
 | outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and | 
 | Procedures (POPP). The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the | 
 | procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP120. | 
 |  | 
 | 203. Any materials or intangible assets procured under the project is governed by UNDP’s Programme and | 
 | Operations Policies and Procedures – under chapters (i) Asset Management - Property, plant and equipment and | 
 | ii) Asset Management - Intangible assets (https://popp.undp.org/administrative-services). For technology solutions, | 
 | clauses under the UNDP contract General Terms and Conditions, regulate Intellectual Property (IP) rights | 
 | depending on the type of software or license being procured. As per the terms of the AMA, in relation to a Funded | 
 | Activity that is a grant financed in whole or in part with GCF Proceeds, if any part of such grant is used to purchase | 
 | any durable assets or equipment used to implement the relevant Funded Activity (such as vehicles or office | 
 | equipment), upon completion of the Funded Activity or termination of the relevant FAA in accordance with its terms, | 
 | the Accredited Entity shall take such steps in relation to such assets or equipment which it reasonably deems in | 
 | the best interest of the continued operation of the Funded Activity taking into consideration the objectives of the | 
 | Fund and the terms of the applicable SBAA. For the transfer of asset from UNDP to the Government a UNDP | 
 | Template has to be completed to transfer Title of Assets from UNDP to the Government | 
 | (https://popp.undp.org/document/transfer-title-assets-undp-government-country-office), where it is stated that "The | 
 | transfer of title is limited to the use of such assets solely for the stated purposes of the Project in the manner and | 
 | place as set out in the Project Document. | 
 |  | 
 | The project will be implemented following UNDP CO Support to National Implementation Modality (NIM) in line with | 
 | UNDP’s POPP guidelines available here. This choice is justified given the GoN’s request for UNDP to execute the | 
 | project and the findings of the capacity assessment of government agencies (Harmonized Approach to Cash | 
 | Transfers — HACT assessments) that indicate low risk in national implementation. UNDP will ascertain the national | 

=== PAGE 100 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97
G
capacities of the Implementing Partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash
Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers — HACT).
204. The UNDP Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Policy identifies 'Capacities of the Partners' as a key Strategic
Risk to be managed for the success of UNDP's work. The Partner Capacity Assessment Tool (PCAT) was designed
to assess the level of risk that is present when UNDP works with partners to implement programmes and projects.
The level of risk is identified by analysing partner capacity and matching project management and oversight with
the level of risk assessed. By identifying areas for capacity improvement, the PCAT should also help to reduce
future partner risk levels if the capacity building actions are implemented and sustained. The Partner Capacity
Assessment is conducted for all projects and covers executing entities, responsible partners, grant recipients and
other partners to ensure that the proposed project partners are not a prohibited organisation and do not engage in
practices that are inconsistent with UNDP's social and environmental standards and code of ethics.
205. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and
together with any specific requirements agreed in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA). According to the current
audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP, scheduled audits are performed during the project
cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, based on the Implementing Partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines.
A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the Implementing Partner were used for
the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit
and/or an internal control audit.
Avoidance of money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions violations, or prohibited practices.
206. UNDP has a stand-alone AML-CFT policy which defines due diligence and partnership assessment criteria for
all partners it engages. Each entity is screened against the criteria set out in this policy and other policies
referenced herein.
207. UNDP also applies a zero-tolerance policy in relation to fraud and corruption. The guiding principles of UNDP's
commitment to prevent, identify and address all acts of fraud and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP
Policy against Fraud and Corrupt Practices (the "FCP Policy"), which applies to all activities and operations of
UNDP, including projects and programmes. The fundamental principles of UNDP's FCP Policy serve as the basis
for and are integrated in UNDP's policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, internal
control and accountability and staff rules and regulations.
208. Under the terms of the FCP Policy, AML-CFT Policy and related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when
developing a new programme or project, to ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt practices are fully identified
and considered in the programme/project design and processes and that adequate and effective measures to
mitigate such risks are put in place. In this light, the processes and requirements for UNDP's partnership capacity
assessment (PCAT) require UNDP to carry out a thorough due diligence of the risks in relation to the
programme/project it intends to engage in, as well as in relation to the potential partners who will be involved in the
implementation of such programmes/projects. Such capacity assessments include, among other things, a
screening of all entities being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated UN
Security Council Sanctions List (to which UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore
being part of the same entity, is also beholden), an assessment of any history of fraud, corruption or other fraudulent
practices and/or potential conflicts of interest. Based on this capacity assessment, UNDP then builds an internal
control component into the design of the project and ensures that the financial management of the
programme/project contains adequate safeguards to prevent, monitor and address any risks and acts of fraud,
corruption or AML/CFT that may be identified.
209. Reference is also made to the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) applied by UNDP, which
represents a common operational (harmonized) framework for transferring cash to government and non-
governmental Partners (both Implementing Partners and Responsible Parties). The common objective of the HACT
framework is to support a closer alignment of development aid with national priorities and to strengthen national
capacities for management and accountability. It serves as a set of procedures on requesting, disbursing, providing
assurance, and reporting on funds to effectively manage risks, reduce transaction costs and promote sustainable
development in a coordinated manner. Cash transfers (above the threshold of $300,000 in a programme cycle, or
otherwise in all circumstances where UNDP considers the operating environment high risk or has no prior
experience with the partner) are presumed to present a material risk to UNDP and will require a HACT micro
assessment and risk rating by qualified third party service providers. Spot checks, programmatic Output verification
and auditing requirements are then determined and carried out at a frequency determined in line with the risk rating.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
 | capacities of the Implementing Partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash | 
 | Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers — HACT). | 
 | 204. The UNDP Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Policy identifies 'Capacities of the Partners' as a key Strategic | 
 | Risk to be managed for the success of UNDP's work. The Partner Capacity Assessment Tool (PCAT) was designed | 
 | to assess the level of risk that is present when UNDP works with partners to implement programmes and projects. | 
 | The level of risk is identified by analysing partner capacity and matching project management and oversight with | 
 | the level of risk assessed. By identifying areas for capacity improvement, the PCAT should also help to reduce | 
 | future partner risk levels if the capacity building actions are implemented and sustained. The Partner Capacity | 
 | Assessment is conducted for all projects and covers executing entities, responsible partners, grant recipients and | 
 | other partners to ensure that the proposed project partners are not a prohibited organisation and do not engage in | 
 | practices that are inconsistent with UNDP's social and environmental standards and code of ethics. | 
 |  | 
 | 205. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and | 
 | together with any specific requirements agreed in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA). According to the current | 
 | audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP, scheduled audits are performed during the project | 
 | cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, based on the Implementing Partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. | 
 | A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the Implementing Partner were used for | 
 | the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit | 
 | and/or an internal control audit. | 
 |  | 
 | Avoidance of money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions violations, or prohibited practices. | 
 | 206. UNDP has a stand-alone AML-CFT policy which defines due diligence and partnership assessment criteria for | 
 | all partners it engages. Each entity is screened against the criteria set out in this policy and other policies | 
 | referenced herein. | 
 |  | 
 | 207. UNDP also applies a zero-tolerance policy in relation to fraud and corruption. The guiding principles of UNDP's | 
 | commitment to prevent, identify and address all acts of fraud and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP | 
 | Policy against Fraud and Corrupt Practices (the "FCP Policy"), which applies to all activities and operations of | 
 | UNDP, including projects and programmes. The fundamental principles of UNDP's FCP Policy serve as the basis | 
 | for and are integrated in UNDP's policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, internal | 
 | control and accountability and staff rules and regulations. | 
 |  | 
 | 208. Under the terms of the FCP Policy, AML-CFT Policy and related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when | 
 | developing a new programme or project, to ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt practices are fully identified | 
 | and considered in the programme/project design and processes and that adequate and effective measures to | 
 | mitigate such risks are put in place. In this light, the processes and requirements for UNDP's partnership capacity | 
 | assessment (PCAT) require UNDP to carry out a thorough due diligence of the risks in relation to the | 
 | programme/project it intends to engage in, as well as in relation to the potential partners who will be involved in the | 
 | implementation of such programmes/projects. Such capacity assessments include, among other things, a | 
 | screening of all entities being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated UN | 
 | Security Council Sanctions List (to which UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore | 
 | being part of the same entity, is also beholden), an assessment of any history of fraud, corruption or other fraudulent | 
 | practices and/or potential conflicts of interest. Based on this capacity assessment, UNDP then builds an internal | 
 | control component into the design of the project and ensures that the financial management of the | 
 | programme/project contains adequate safeguards to prevent, monitor and address any risks and acts of fraud, | 
 | corruption or AML/CFT that may be identified. | 
 |  | 
 | 209. Reference is also made to the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) applied by UNDP, which | 
 | represents a common operational (harmonized) framework for transferring cash to government and non- | 
 | governmental Partners (both Implementing Partners and Responsible Parties). The common objective of the HACT | 
 | framework is to support a closer alignment of development aid with national priorities and to strengthen national | 
 | capacities for management and accountability. It serves as a set of procedures on requesting, disbursing, providing | 
 | assurance, and reporting on funds to effectively manage risks, reduce transaction costs and promote sustainable | 
 | development in a coordinated manner. Cash transfers (above the threshold of $300,000 in a programme cycle, or | 
 | otherwise in all circumstances where UNDP considers the operating environment high risk or has no prior | 
 | experience with the partner) are presumed to present a material risk to UNDP and will require a HACT micro | 
 | assessment and risk rating by qualified third party service providers. Spot checks, programmatic Output verification | 
 | and auditing requirements are then determined and carried out at a frequency determined in line with the risk rating. | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98
G
No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
☒
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
☐
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
 | No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | ☒
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | ☐
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an | 
 | explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☐ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☐ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☐ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☐ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☐ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
-
☐ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☐ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☐ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☐ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☐ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☐ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
☐
financed by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment [HACT Micro Assessment Reports]
☐ Annex 21 Operations and Maintenance Manual (Operations and maintenance)
☐ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)
☐ Annex 23a Residual Risk Modeling & Watershed Vulnerability Assessment Risk Reduction Measures
☐ Annex 23b Residual Risk Modeling & Watershed Vulnerability Assessment Risk Reduction Measures - Cost
Estimates, Models & Drawings
☐ Annex 24 Dam Breach Assessment Report
☐ Annex 25 Hydrological and Meteorological Stations for proposed GCF funded project
☐ Annex 26 Technical Lake Lowering Design report
☐ Annex 27 a) Adaptation Beneficiaries
b) Adaptation Beneficiaries (Excel)
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 102 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☐ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☐ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
- | 
☐ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☐ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment [HACT Micro Assessment Reports] | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations and Maintenance Manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects) | 
☐ |  | Annex 23a | Residual Risk Modeling & Watershed Vulnerability Assessment Risk Reduction Measures | 
☐ |  | Annex 23b | Residual Risk Modeling & Watershed Vulnerability Assessment Risk Reduction Measures - Cost
Estimates, Models & Drawings | 
☐ |  | Annex 24 | Dam Breach Assessment Report | 
☐ |  | Annex 25 | Hydrological and Meteorological Stations for proposed GCF funded project | 
☐ |  | Annex 26 | Technical Lake Lowering Design report | 
☐ |  | Annex 27 | a) Adaptation Beneficiaries
b) Adaptation Beneficiaries (Excel) | 

=== PAGE 103 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 104 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake
Existence of subproject(s) to Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced
be identified after GCF Board flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal
approval
Sector (public or private) Yes
Accredited entity
Environmental and social Public
safeguards (ESS) category United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Location – specific
Category B
location(s) of project or
target country or location(s) Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal – Glacial Lakes and
of programme its downstream Watersheds of Lower Barun
(Sankhuwasabha), Lumding Tsho (Solukhumbu),
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Dona/Thulagi (Manang) and Hongu 2 (Solukhumbu)
Date of disclosure on
Tuesday, May 13, 2025
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Nepali
Nepali is the official language of Nepal, and the most widely
Explanation on language
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
Full ESMF
English:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001
Link to disclosure
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337021
Summary ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337066
Other link(s)
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337081
“Environmental and Social
AMna nESaIgAe mcoennstis Fternatm weiwtho trhke ( rEeSqMuiFr)e”ments for a Category B
Remarks project is contained in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
Tuesday, May 13, 2025
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Nepali
Nepali is the official language of Nepal, and the most widely
Explanation on language
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
Full ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001
Link to disclosure
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337021

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  | Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced
flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | Yes | 
 | Accredited entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Public
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | Category B
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal – Glacial Lakes and
its downstream Watersheds of Lower Barun | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or location(s) |  |  | 
 | of programme |  |  | 
 | (Sankhuwasabha), Lumding Tsho (Solukhumbu),
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Dona/Thulagi (Manang) and Hongu 2 (Solukhumbu) | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Tuesday, May 13, 2025 | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Nepali | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Nepali is the official language of Nepal, and the most widely
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
Full ESMF
English:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001 | 
Other link(s) |  |  | Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337021
Summary ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337066 | 
 |  |  | Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337081
“Environmental and Social
AMna nESaIgAe mcoennstis Fternatm weiwtho trhke ( rEeSqMuiFr)e”ments for a Category B | 
 | Remarks project is contained in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Tuesday, May 13, 2025 | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Nepali | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Nepali is the official language of Nepal, and the most widely
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
Full ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001 | 

=== PAGE 105 ===
Summary ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337066
Other link(s)
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337081
Environmental and Social
AMna nESaMgePm ceonnts iFsrteanmt ewwitohr tkh e(E rSeMquFi)rements for a Category B
Remarks project is contained in the “
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)
”.
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN./gA. R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigeNn/oAu s Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP)
report/disclosure on
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Nepali
Nepali is the official language of Nepal and the most widely
Explanation on language
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
SESP
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337061
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1336976
Link to disclosure
Full ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337021
Other link(s) N/A
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework is included as
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Annex.
Date Friday, May 16, 2025
-Regional Office, Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology, Dharan, Koshi Basin (covering Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2)
Place -UNDP Field Office, Janakpur (covering Koshi Basin)
- Regional Office, Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology, Pokhora, Gandaki Basin (covering Thulagi)
-UNDP Field Office, Pokhara (covering Gandaki Basin)

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
Other link(s) |  |  | Summary ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337066 | 
 |  |  | Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337081
Environmental and Social
AMna nESaMgePm ceonnts iFsrteanmt ewwitohr tkh e(E rSeMquFi)rements for a Category B | 
 | Remarks project is contained in the “
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  | ”. | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN./gA. R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigeNn/oAu s Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of |  |  | 
 | report/disclosure on |  | Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP) | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Nepali | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Nepali is the official language of Nepal and the most widely
used language within the project landscapes/districts.
SESP
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337061
Nepali:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1336976
Full ESMF
E nglish:
https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337001 | 
 |  |  | Nepali: | 
Other link(s) |  |  | https://www.undp.org/media/document/1337021
N/A | 
 | An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework is included as
RDeismcalorskus re in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Annex. | 
Date
Place |  |  | Friday, May 16, 2025
-Regional Office, Department of Hydrology and
Meteorology, Dharan, Koshi Basin (covering Lower Barun,
Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2)
-UNDP Field Office, Janakpur (covering Koshi Basin)
- Regional Office, Department of Hydrology and | 

=== PAGE 106 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of accredited entity’s
N/A
Board meeting
NDoatete: Tofh GisC fFo’sr mBo warads mpreeeptianrge d by Mthoen adcacyr, eJudnitee 3d0 e, n2t0i2ty5 stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | N/A | 

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 107
Secretariat’s assessment of FP272
Proposal name: Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake
Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in
glacial river basins of Nepal
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country: Nepal
Project size: Small
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The project, “Protecting livelihoods and The project will be implemented under the
assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst Direct Implementation Modality in
Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced accordance with United Nations
flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal”, Development Programme (UNDP)
presents innovative and long-term solutions operational modalities. Hence, the Secretariat
for improving, at scale, the adaptive capacity strongly recommends that UNDP, as the
of communities in the glacial river basins of accredited entity (AE), ensure proactive and
Nepal by addressing critical vulnerability continuous engagement with national and
issues related to the increasing risks local authorities in order to ensure full
associated with GLOFs through ecosystem- ownership and involvement of all the main
based disaster risk reduction approaches and stakeholders, which is critical for the success
improved production, dissemination and use of the project.
of climate information and early warning
systems (EWS) among vulnerable
communities in three target river basins. This
will contribute towards ensuring that the
incidence and prevalence of GLOFs is reduced
and that vulnerable communities receive
timely early warnings and develop the
capacity to undertake anticipatory action to
mitigate, prepare for and respond to GLOF
hazards and their impacts.
The project focuses on promoting the design
of pragmatic and holistic approaches that
integrate nature- and ecosystem-based
disaster risk reduction solutions with climate
information and EWS and activities to protect
the lives and livelihoods of communities. It

--- Table 1 on Page 107 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
 |  |  | The project will be implemented under the
Direct Implementation Modality in
accordance with United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP)
operational modalities. Hence, the Secretariat
strongly recommends that UNDP, as the
accredited entity (AE), ensure proactive and
continuous engagement with national and
local authorities in order to ensure full
ownership and involvement of all the main
stakeholders, which is critical for the success
of the project. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The project, “Protecting livelihoods and |  |  |  | 
 | assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst |  |  |  | 
 | Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced |  |  |  | 
 | flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal”, |  |  |  | 
 | capacity to undertake anti |  |  |  | 
 | mitigate, prepare for and respond to GLOF |  |  |  | 
 | hazards and their impacts. |  |  |  | 
 | The project focuses on promoting the de |  |  |  | 
 | of pragmatic and holistic approaches that |  |  |  | 
 | integrate nature- and ecosystem-based |  |  |  | 
 | disaster risk reduction solutions with climat |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 107 ---
for improving, at scale, the adaptive capa
of communities in the glacial river b

--- Table 3 on Page 107 ---
issues related to the increasing risks
associated with GLOFs through ecosystem-
based disaster risk reduction approache
improved production, disseminat
of climate information and early warning
systems (EWS) among vulnerable
communities in three target river basins. Thi
will contribute towards ensuring that th
incidence and prevalence of GLOFs is r

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 108
will also aim to protect infrastructure and
private assets, transport networks,
agricultural production, power supplies from
hydropower plants and tourism activities in
the target river basins, based on lessons
learned from earlier work carried out by the
AE on GLOF risk reduction in Nepal. This will
help the country to establish, operate, and
maintain and expand the coverage of GLOF
risk reduction and end-to-end GLOF EWS that
are tested, sustainable and effective in
reducing the exposure of vulnerable
communities to GLOF hazards and the
associated impacts.
The project also focuses on promoting a
coordinated approach to addressing the
barriers and challenges that hinder the
adoption of integrated approaches to GLOF
risk management in Nepal by promoting a
suite of solutions that blend institutional and
technical capacities, physical protection
entailing both grey and green infrastructure
approaches, and hazard monitoring and EWS.
In addition, the project’s implementation
through both national- and local-level
institutions is commendable because it will
facilitate the improvement of the existing
capacities, structures and governance
mechanisms across the different levels of
g overnance in the country.
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the
terms listed in the term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the AE, and, if considered
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II to document GCF/B.42/02.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2 .1 Project background
3.
The project, “Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
(GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal”, aims to safeguard
the lives and livelihoods of communities in glacial river basins, as well as some major economic
sectors, by reducing GLOF risks through an integrated approach combining physical lake
lowering, downstream eco-disaster risk reduction measures and EWS. The objective of the
project is to use the integrated watershed management approach to develop climate-resilient
community livelihoods in three major watersheds, namely Marsyangdi, Dudkoshi and Arun,
located across two target river basins, namely the Gandaki Basin and Koshi Basin, by

--- Table 1 on Page 108 ---
 | 
 | 
 | will also aim to protect infrastructure and
 | agricultural production, power supplies
 | hydropower plants and tourism activities in
 | the target river basins, based on lessons
 | learned from earlier work carried out by t
 | AE on GLOF risk reduction in Nepal. This w
 | help the country to establish, operate, and
 | maintain and expand the coverage of
 | risk reduction and end-to-end GLOF
 | are tested, sustainable and effective in
 | reducing the expos
 | communities to GLOF hazards and the
 | associated impacts.
 | The project also focuses on promoting
 | coordinated approach to addressing the
 | barriers and challenges that hinder the
 | adoption of integrated approaches to GLOF
 | risk management in Nepal by promoting
 | technical capacities, physical protection
 | entailing both grey and green infrastructu
 | approaches, and hazard monitoring a
 | In addition, the project’s implementation
 | through both national- and local-level
 | institutions is commendable because i
 | facilitate the improvement of the existing
 | capacities, structures and g

--- Table 2 on Page 108 ---



=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 109
establishing the necessary policies and institutional frameworks, introducing and scaling up
integrated watershed management practices and climate-smart agriculture, and strengthening
hy drometeorological monitoring systems within the Sunkoshi basin and its neighbouring areas.
4.
Within the Gandaki Basin, the project targets the Thulagi Glacial Lake which drains into
Marsyangdi river and Marsyangdi Watershed, while in the Koshi Basin, the project targets three
glacial lakes, two of them, namely - Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 drain into Dudhkoshi river of
Dudhkoshi watershed and the other, namely Lower Barun, drains into Arun river in Arun
Watershed. The project’s target glacial lakes and river basins and watersheds face increasing
risks from disasters owing to the increasing prevalence and severity of GLOFS caused by the
climate change-induced and accelerated glacial retreat that Nepal is facing. The heightened
risks of GLOFs threaten lives, infrastructure and livelihoods in downstream communities as
they cause severe flooding, landslides and mudflows that damage infrastructure and private
assets, disrupt transport networks, agricultural production, power supplies from hydropower
pl ants and tourism activities, and often spread water- and vector-borne diseases.
5.
The project will overcome these challenges by implementing an integrated approach to
GLOF risk management in the target glacial river basins and watersheds that includes building
institutional and technical capacities for GLOF risk management and mitigation, deploying
physical protection measures, including both grey and green infrastructure approaches, and
en hancing hazard monitoring and EWS.
6.
The project is requesting USD 36.16 million of GCF financing. The total cost of the
project, including co-financing, is USD 49.94 million, with co-financing primarily in the form of
in-kind grants from the Government of Nepal, the Independent Power Producers’ Association of
Nepal (IPPAN) and UNDP. The project will also receive parallel financing of USD 60.61 million
from the Government of Nepal, IPPAN and 30 of the municipalities located in the target glacial
ri ver basins.
7.
In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), this proposal has been
categorized as environmental and social (E&S) risk category B. The review by the Secretariat
confirms the E&S risk category assigned by the AE.
2Ou.2tput 1C: oInmstiptuotnioennalt a-bndy t-eccohmnicpaol cnaepnacti tayn starleynsgitsh ened to develop and integrate climate risk
and hazard information into planning and development (total cost: USD 4.32 million; GCF cost:
USD 3.21 million)
8.
Output 1 will enhance the technical and institutional capacity of the relevant
government departments to develop and disseminate tailored climate risk information and will
establish public–private partnerships to encourage investment into GLOF risk reduction in
Nepal. The output will focus on building capacity for GLOF hazard mapping and monitoring,
operation and maintenance of existing risk databases, and identification of GLOF risk reduction
strategies; leveraging investment from the private sector into GLOF risk reduction; and
disseminating tailored, user-friendly climate risk information to major economic sectors in the
country. This will provide a basis for ongoing and sustainable glacial monitoring processes in
Nepal that will promote the adaptive management of GLOF risks across the country and foster
the adoption and uptake of proactive preventive measures for the identification and mitigation
of potential GLOF-related risks.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 110
Output 2: Improved hazard monitoring and the generation of early warnings, including the
dissemination of early warnings to local communities and important economic sectors (total cost:
USD 10.39 million; GCF cost: USD 8.53 million)
9.
Output 2 will focus on strengthening Nepal’s GLOF EWS and on enhancing the capacity
of the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) to detect and monitor GLOF hazards
and hazards associated with other extreme climate events and to disseminate early warning
information in a timely manner, and hence enable communities and businesses to anticipate
GLOFs and respond by taking early action to mitigate or reduce their associated risks and
impacts. The output will entail installing hydrological and meteorological stations across the
project’s target GLOF watersheds; enhancing technical capacity for the collection, processing
and management of climate data from the stations and for the development of early warning
information products that are easily accessible for local communities; and implementing
capacity-building and awareness-raising interventions aimed at improving the capacity of
vulnerable communities in the target glacial river basins and watersheds to respond and adapt
to GLOF risks and impacts.
Output 3: GLOF and flash flood risk and impact reduction measures implemented in priority glacial
lake watersheds (total cost: USD 31.74 million; GCF cost: USD 22.70 million)
10.
Output 3 will focus on the implementation of GLOF risk reduction measures in the target
glacial river basins, namely Gandaki basin, and Dudhkoshi and Arun sub-basins of Koshi Basin,
which were selected because their respective hazard levels warrant the immediate
implementation of potential measures for GLOF mitigation as they contain the glacial lakes that
pose the highest risk of breaching. The output will entail the implementation of an approach
combining physical lake lowering to lower the water levels of the four priority lakes, namely
Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2 (also known as Chamlang North), in order to
reduce the potential of triggering a GLOF or the magnitude of a GLOF if it occurs; and
downstream adaptation interventions, consisting of eco-disaster risk reduction measures based
on a hybrid approach of green and grey infrastructure to reduce the residual impacts of a GLOF
Project management and coordination and monitoring and evaluation (total cost: USD 3.50
after lake lowering.
million; GCF cost: USD 1.72 million)
11.
Project implementation and monitoring and evaluation costs have been adequately
provided for, and specific activities have been planned and integrated within the design of the
project to ensure that project implementation and monitoring and evaluation processes will be
Gender and environmental and social management framework aspects
effectively coordinated.
12.
An environmental and social management framework (ESMF) and a gender action plan
have been developed for the project, outlining specific activities that will sufficiently ensure that
ESS safeguards are put in place and observed throughout the project’s lifespan, as described in
sections 4.1 and 4.2 below.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
Scale: N/A
3. 1 Impact potential
13.
Climate change is causing accelerated glacial retreat in Nepal, thereby increasing the
risk of GLOFs, which threaten lives, infrastructure and livelihoods in downstream communities.
Four lakes, namely Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2, are known to pose the

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 111
highest hazard levels and consequently the highest risk of breaching. Without intervention,
these lakes could breach at any time, potentially causing catastrophic flooding with economic
los ses of up to USD 109 million per event.
14.
The project seeks to support the communities in the watersheds of these glacial lakes
and associated glacial river basins and the country at large to invest in proactive action to
address the risk posed by the glacial lakes by lowering the water levels in the four lakes,
implementing ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction measures downstream and enhancing
the ability of EWS in the target watersheds and glacial river basins to foster anticipatory and
early response action to mitigate GLOF risk and impacts. In doing this, the project would
harness and promote the critical and proven role that risk reduction and early response actions
play in supporting the protection of lives, livelihoods and infrastructure, and key economic
sec tors, from the huge potential losses to which they would be exposed.
15.
The proposal robustly presents the climate change context and demonstrates how the
significant level of GLOF risk reduction can be achieved through an integrated and
comprehensive blending of physical, ecosystem-based and early warning approaches. All of the
watersheds and glacial river basins that are targeted by the project face very high levels of GLOF
risk, putting livelihoods, food security and economic stability at stake. Since the 1970s, 26
GLOFs have led to loss of lives, livelihoods and infrastructure, agricultural losses, food and
water insecurity, flooding and environmental degradation in the areas of Nepal that are the
foc us of the project.
16.
The project is impactful in that it will support at least 385,000 direct beneficiaries and
1.99 million indirect beneficiaries. It will effectively increase climate change resilience among
the large number of people living in the target watersheds and glacial river basins by providing
technical capacity development (component 1), implementation support for the installation and
operation of early warning infrastructure and systems (component 2) and implementation
support for the deployment of grey and green infrastructure for mitigating GLOF hazards and
risks in the glacial river basins (component 3). These interventions are all vital in ensuring that
the communities in the target glacial river basins have the kind of knowledge, infrastructure and
climate information and EWS that will be effective and sustainable in protecting them from
GLOF risks and in supporting them to undertake adequate anticipatory action in response to the
threats that GLOF hazards pose to their lives, livelihoods, and social and economic systems and
inf rastructure.
17.
The project will specifically promote adaptation and resilience-building through the
impact that it will deliver across some of the core areas for local climate resilience-building in
the target watersheds and glacial river basins, namely climate change-resilient agriculture;
ecosystems and ecosystem services; food, water and health security; and climate-resilient
infrastructure. The grant finance will cover the additional costs of GLOF risk reduction
inf rastructure and public early warning investments.
18.
The benefits and impact potential of this intervention are therefore very significant.
Scale: N/A
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
19.
The project has a high paradigm shift potential in that it seeks to transition GLOF risk
reduction and management processes in Nepal from reactive approaches focused on a response
to the impacts of GLOF hazards and GLOF-induced disasters towards an approach that focuses
on preparation and anticipatory and proactive action, in which measures are taken to lower the
incidence of GLOF hazards and their impacts by lowering water levels in glacial lakes. The
approach also seeks to ensure that vulnerable communities and decision makers in glacial river
basins and watersheds have easy and wide access to, and can make use of, reliable science-

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 112
based climate information and early warnings in order to protect themselves from the huge
po tential losses that GLOFs pose.
20.
The project promotes an approach that fosters the development of an integrated and
comprehensive blend of technical capacity, grey and green infrastructure, ecosystem-based
disaster risk reduction and EWS-based solutions, which provide a long-term investment option
and strategy for enabling the sustainable reduction of GLOF risks and associated impacts. The
project uses lessons learned from previous work by the AE within Nepal to inform the design of
the physical grey and green infrastructure and EWS and processes in a way that has potential
for scaling up and replication in glacial lake and river watersheds and basins across Nepal and
in glacial watersheds and basins around the world, as it is an approach that is scalable and can
be practically implemented in any country facing GLOF challenges.
21.
The paradigm shift potential is well embedded across all the three components of the
project and is designed to be impactful over the long term. The project presents an innovative
and strategic approach to promoting and increasing the participation of national and local
governments, communities and local-level private sector actors in the development and
implementation of GLOF risk reduction strategies and actions.
Scale: N/A
3. 3 Sustainable development potential
22.
The project will significantly reduce the exposure of poor and vulnerable communities
to GLOF hazards and will thereby be instrumental in helping these communities to safeguard
their lives, assets and economic resources from potential damage from such hazards. These
avoided human and economic losses and the development of local and national economies that
are resilient to climate risks would in the long-term yield vast social, economic and
environmental benefits for the vulnerable communities in the target glacial lake and river
basins and watersheds, and for the sustainable development aspirations and goals that Nepal
an d the global community at large seek to achieve.
23.
The project contributes directly towards Nepal’s efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 3 (good health and well-being), SDG 5 (gender
equality), SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities), SDG 13 (climate action) and SDG 15 (life
on land).
24.
The project has the potential to deliver environmental co-benefits through the
restoration of 200 hectares of mountain ecosystems and sequestering 339,480 tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent through reforestation activities. Other economic, social and environmental
co-benefits that the project offers would be achieved and sustained through strengthening the
capacity of relevant government departments and communities to increase their ability to
sustainably manage the grey and green GLOF risk reduction infrastructure that the project
would foster and developing, operating, maintaining and sustainably managing climate
information and EWS and dissemination channels. This will contribute directly to building
awareness of GLOF hazards and to building capacity to mitigate the risks that they pose and
ad equately respond to their impacts.
25.
The sustainable development potential of this investment is therefore estimated to be
high.
Scale: N/A
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
26.
The project targets glacial lake and river basins and watersheds that contain some of the
communities most vulnerable to GLOFs in the world, communities that face water, food, health
and livelihood insecurities as a result of GLOFs.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 113
27.
The target communities face climate change-induced GLOF hazards that threaten their
livelihoods but lack reliable access to climate information and EWS. Currently, livelihoods, food
supplies, water, health and transport systems, and infrastructure in the target areas are not
safeguarded from the potential loss and damage posed by their exposure to GLOFs. Through the
development of physical grey and green infrastructure, ecosystem-based risk reduction
measures and EWS, the proposed project will reduce the exposure of communities and the
economic sector to GLOF risks and impacts and would help communities to develop strategies
for safeguarding and transforming their livelihoods, food supplies, water, health systems and
eco systems to become resilient to GLOF hazards.
28.
Moreover, Nepal is heavily indebted and has insufficient resources to invest in proactive
actions to safeguard its population from GLOF hazards and risks and associated impacts and
losses. The target communities are currently unable to invest in the measures required to
reduce the likelihood of GLOFs occurring, struggle to access usable climate information and do
not have the EWS that they need to prepare and secure their well-being, livelihoods, food
supplies, water, health and socioeconomic systems, and infrastructure from GLOF hazards.
Without access to GLOF risk reduction measures, climate information and EWS, the local
communities and economies in the target glacial river basins will remain exposed to GLOF
hazards and will be unable to protect their lives and livelihoods against such risks. The project
will therefore fill an important gap through working with key national and local institutions in
Nepal’s public and private sectors to foster long-term solutions for enhanced GLOF risk
reduction and access to, and use of, climate information and EWS for building resilience to such
risks.
Scale: N/A
3. 5 Country ownership
29.
Country ownership is well embedded in the project, which is fully aligned with the
climate change and broader development aspirations, strategies and policies of Nepal. The
project will promote the development of capacity among national and local governmental and
non-governmental actors in the target glacial river basins to identify and plan for GLOF risks
and to disseminate and use climate information and EWS to guide their own responses and
solutions for ensuring adequate preparation and anticipatory action. The project also places an
important focus on ensuring better synergy with ongoing national strategies and actions being
im plemented in the country.
30.
The project is aligned with the nationally determined contributions, national adaptation
plan, national adaptation plan of action and a wide range of other climate change and
environmental policies and programmes, as well as the GCF country programme of Nepal.
Furthermore, the project has been developed with the strong participation and commitment of
the Government, as well as the participation and commitment of other national and local-level
stakeholders, involving all levels of stakeholder groups, including grass-roots groups, women
an d youth.
31.
The AE is the UNDP, which has a long-standing presence in the country and a wealth of
experience working with stakeholders and dealing with the development and environmental
challenges in the country, including those related to GLOFs. UNDP offers a unique structure as
well as experience and partnerships that will facilitate the meaningful engagement and
involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the successful implementation and scaling up of the
pr oject’s activities and outputs.
32.
The architecture of the project consists of a project board and project management unit
(PMU) through which the various relevant government ministries and departments will
participate directly in the governance and management of the project and its activities. This will
bolster the integration of local contexts and ownership in the project’s activities and outputs.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 114
33.
The project is built on well-designed stakeholder consultations that were conducted
throughout the project development process, ensuring local knowledge, innovation and
sustainability, and participation is fully embedded in the design of the project.
Scale: N/A
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
34.
This project will directly support poor and vulnerable communities in the target glacial
river basins to strengthen their ability to secure, diversify and transform their own adaptive
capacity and livelihood systems. It will target at least 385,000 direct beneficiaries and about
1.99 million indirect beneficiaries and will drive innovation and transformation by fostering
blended grey and green GLOF risk reduction measures and providing access to climate
information and EWS for communities and businesses to use in undertaking anticipatory action
to protect themselves from GLOF hazards and risks.
35.
The economic analysis demonstrates that the proposed interventions, lake lowering and
downstream flood risk reduction measures offer substantial economic benefits, making the
project both effective and efficient in addressing the risks posed by GLOFs. The net present
value (NPV) shows a positive result, with the annual probability scenario providing an NPV of
USD 86,919,219 and a cost–benefit ratio of 4.9, while the return period-based scenario yields an
NPV of 45,126,562 and a cost–benefit ratio of 3.75. The high cost–benefit ratios indicate that the
benefits of the intervention will far outweigh the costs, underscoring the project’s effectiveness.
The funding amount is well justified to provide the support needed to safeguard lives,
livelihoods and local health, water, food supplies, and agricultural and transport systems, as
well as critical infrastructure, including hydropower facilities, to reduce potential economic
losses by USD 45–87 million, and to provide innovative approaches and lessons for
transforming disaster risk reduction governance in the target glacial river basins and across
Nepal at large. The project would foster an enabling environment for private and public sector
investments in GLOF risk and disaster risk reduction and in climate information and EWS. It will
use the GCF and co-financing investments to achieve this through an integrated and
comprehensive mix of solutions for addressing the technical and financial capacity and
infrastructural barriers to GLOF risk reduction through fostering an innovative approach to
helping the country to develop long-term and sustainable solutions for GLOF risk reduction and
management. The project’s investment will further deliver environmental co-benefits through
the restoration of 200 hectares of mountain ecosystems and sequestering 339,480 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent through reforestation activities, which presents a significant non-
fin ancial return on the investment.
36.
The project also has an innovative exit strategy that will enable scaling up its approach
across Nepal and the broader Himalayan region and will build partnerships between the
Government, communities, other non-governmental actors and private sector actors to tackle
local GLOF-related challenges with innovative and locally appropriate solutions supported by
reliable and science-based approaches and climate information. The long-term financing for
operation and maintenance provided by agencies such as DHM, the Department of National
Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC) and the Department of Forests and Soil Conservation
(DoFSC) would ensure that the project remains financially sustainable after the implementation
phase, which contributes to the project’s ongoing effectiveness.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 115
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 EPrnovjeircto onvmerevnietwal. and social safeguards
37.
The project aims to safeguard the lives and livelihoods of people and
the environment by reducing the risk of GLOFs and related hazards in three identified
watershed areas in Nepal. The project will adopt an integrated approach through the following:
lowering the lake levels in Thulagi, Lower Barun and Lumding Tsho by 3 m and in Hongu 2 by 1
m through tested engineering methods; implementing downstream interventions such as
reforestation, forest cover maintenance and flood infrastructure, reinforced by bioengineering
technologies, to complement the lake lowering interventions; strengthening technical and
institutional capacity in relation to GLOF risks and hazards; installing GLOF observation,
monitoring and EWS equipment; and increasing community awareness on GLOF and EWS. The
E&S co-benefits would include, among others, improved soil stability and quality from
reforestation activities and bioengineering measures; increased security of the lives and
livelihoods of communities; increased employment opportunities from project activities during
construction and during operation and maintenance; increased resilience of communities to
ex treme
E
c
n
l
v
im
ir
a
o
t
n
ic
m
ev
e
e
n
n
ta
ts
l
;
a
a
n
n
d
d
s
a
o
n
c
i
i
m
al
p
r
r
i
o
s
v
k
e
c
m
a
e
te
n
g
t
o
in
r y
th
a
e
n
l
d
ev
s
e
a
l
f
s
e
o
g
f
u
s
a
o
r
c
d
ia
i
l
n
in
st
c
r
lu
u
s
m
io
e
n
n
.
t .
38.
The project has
been screened using the AE internal E&S screening procedure and is deemed as equivalent to a
GCF category B classification and is aligned with the accreditation level of the AE. Potential E&S
impacts will mainly be generated from work associated with the lake lowering in the three
watershed areas, installation of observation, monitoring and EWS equipment, and construction
and installation activities related to grey and green flood infrastructure. Key risks and impacts
identified include labour and occupational health and safety risks during construction and
operation and maintenance; waste generation; community health and safety risks; land
acquisition risks; habitat modification and biodiversity risks from construction work;
introduction of inappropriate species during the implementation of eco-based solutions;
impacts on lands and territories claimed by or that are important to Indigenous Peoples; and
impacts on cultural heritage. While a number of key risks have been identified, the AE notes that
no significant adverse E&S impacts are foreseen. The activities to be undertaken are not
considered to be unprecedented (UNDP has experience in lowering Imja Lake); reversible (the
lakes could be refilled); generally site-specific; and the impacts can be readily addressed
through mitigation measures. An ESMF has been prepared and budgeted to guide the screening
and assessment of subprojects during implementation. A prohibited actions list is part of the
ESMF to ensure that the project will not support any activity that is deemed to have high E&S
ris ks.
Compliance GCF ESS standards.
39.
The following paragraphs describe how the project
co mplie
E
s
S
w
S
i
1
th
: A
th
s
e
s e
st
s
a
s
n
m
d
e
a
n
rd
t
s
a
.
nd management of environmental and social risks and
impacts.
40.
The project’s ESMF describes the procedures for screening and assessing the potential
E&S risks and impacts; identification of potential mitigating measures and associated plans; the
triggered UNDP ESS standards; arrangements with regard to safeguards implementation; the
grievance redress mechanism; the information disclosure requirements; and the stakeholder
engagement process during project design and formulation (further details on the continuous
stakeholder engagement process are detailed in annex 7 to the funding proposal package).
Three subprojects are identified, covering three watershed areas, but the specific locations of all
activities will be identified during implementation. Three environmental and social impact
assessments are expected to be prepared and finalized during implementation, and
environmental clearances shall be secured prior to commencement of any work, in line with

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 116
national requirements. The AE will ensure that the mitigation measures and requirements will
be in lin
E
e
S
w
S
i
2
th
: L
n
a
a
b
ti
o
o
u
n
r
a l
a
l
n
aw
d
s
w
a
o
n
r
d
k
r
in
eg
g
u
c
l
o
at
n
io
d
n
it
s
i o
a
n
nd
s.
UNEP and GCF E&S policies and standards.
41.
The project will promote, respect and realize
fundamental principles and rights at work and ensure that there will be no discrimination and
no forced or child labour. The employment of project workers will be based on the principle of
equal opportunity. Based on the information provided, the expected workforce per site would
be approximately 50, to be procured from the local population, who are well-adapted to the
local conditions. The expected work will primarily be local labour, with no blasting or use of
heavy machinery. The ESMF provides an outline for the labour management procedures and the
detailed labour management plan, which will be prepared during implementation. The labour
management plan will set out the written labour procedures for each subproject; identify the
main labour requirements and risks; determine the resources necessary to address labour
issues and risks; and set out an action plan. The project would prohibit the employment of
workers under the age of 18 years to perform hazardous work. Any worker-related concerns
wo uld be raised through the project’s unified grievance redress mechanism.
42.
With regard to occupational health and safety, UNDP commits to protecting and
promoting the health and safety of all workers. The following mitigating measures have been
identified by UNDP: ensuring appropriate control of site access; adopting appropriate
engineering and administrative control measures, including safe design of work platforms and
use of safety barriers; using appropriate personal protective equipment; ensuring appropriate
worker qualifications; and the provision of health and safety training. The legal system of Nepal
has developed specific occupational health and safety measures, such as requiring on-site
medical facilities, limiting work during the dry season, limiting exposure to occupational health
and safety risks through the use of shift work patterns, strict selection criteria for workers,
ensuring relevant skills and experience in a similar work environment, provision of insurance,
etc. Health and safety plans, contractor medical emergency plans and emergency preparedness
plans will be prepared as part of the environmental and social management plan (ESMP) prior
to any w
E
o
S
r
S
k
3
in
: R
o
e
rd
so
er
u
t
r
o
c e
s a
e
f
f
e
f
g
ic
u
i
a
e
r
n
d
c
w
y
o
a
r
n
k
d
e r
p
h
o
e
ll
a
u
l
t
th
io
a
n
n
p
d
r
s
e
a
v
fe
e
t
n
y
t
.
i o n.
43.
Construction work related to
lake lowering, installation of equipment and eco-disaster risk and nature-based interventions
are anticipated to result in the generation of waste and pollutants. This will be managed through
the preparation of waste management plans as part of the ESMP to be developed during project
implementation. Wherever feasible, materials from excavation will be reused and other
materials will be acquired locally from legally permitted sources. The use of locally available
materials addresses the potential negative impact on the landscape. Water quality impacts will
be managed through sediment and erosion management plans as part of the ESMP. The project
will only use locally adapted species when establishing small-scale community-based nurseries,
in compliance with relevant national legislation, such as the Forest Policy and Environmental
Pr otecti
E
o
S
n
S
A
4
c
:
t .
C ommunity health, safety and security.
44.
The project sites for lake lowering,
installation of check dams and other infrastructure for residual GLOF and flash flood flow will
be located far away from settlements. To address potential harm from a failure of structural
elements or residual risks from GLOFs, and as part of ensuring community safety, technical
engineering measures and studies, such as hydrologic modelling and dam break modelling, have
been undertaken to determine protective measures and the appropriate engineering design, as
appraised by DHM. An independent technical review and assessment will be undertaken prior
to construction in order to make any adjustments deemed necessary. During the operation and
maintenance phase, institutional requirements for periodic safety inspections, emergency
procedures and proper maintenance will be integrated within the existing mandates of DHM
and DoFSC. To address potential risks related to labour influx, the workforce will generally be

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 117
sourced from local communities. Detailed measures will be developed as part of the site-specific
ES MP du
E
r
S
i
S
n g
5 :
i m
La
p
n
le
d
m
a
e
c
n
q
t
u
at
is
io
it
n
i
.
o n and involuntary resettlement.
45.
The AE does not foresee any
physical or economic displacement resulting from the project’s activities. The majority of the
construction-related work will be carried out on public land. During implementation, land
tenure will be confirmed at all project sites as part of the detailed site surveys. In the event that
public land is found to be unavailable or unsuitable, efforts will be made to identify alternative
public land. There may be risks associated with sites located in territories in which there are
customary user rights but no legal ownership rights. In such circumstances, the local
government will facilitate consultations with the affected communities and use land for project
activities only upon agreement of those communities. UNDP will work closely with Indigenous
Peoples and other users who depend on public land to ensure that the any public land used by
the project is unencumbered and/or not land on which local livelihoods depend. As a last resort,
in the event that privately owned land is needed, the PMU will undertake negotiations on a
willing buyer/willing seller basis. In such cases, the AE will ensure that the following conditions
are met: land markets or other opportunities for the productive investment of the sales income
exist; the transaction occurs with the seller’s informed consent; and the seller is provided with
fair compensation based on prevailing market values. A land acquisition plan will be prepared
to describe the process for the identification of land tenure and the process for obtaining legal
use of the land. The application of the land acquisition plan and Indigenous Peoples plan will
ensure that land is unencumbered and that access to natural resources or for traditional uses is
no t adve
E
r
S
s
S
e l
6
y
:
i
B
m
i
p
o
a
d
c
i
t
v
e
e
d
r
.
s ity conservation and sustainable management of living natural
resources.
46.
The AE has identified potential adverse impacts to habitats, ecosystems and
ecosystem services, risks to endangered species, risks in relation to the introduction of invasive
alien species, risks related to diversion of water and risks related to plantation development
and reforestation. The AE has identified two national parks (Makalan Barun National Park and
Sagamartha National Park) and one conservation area (Annapurna Conservation Area) in the
proposed project sites. The glacial lakes Hongu 2 and Lower Barun fall under the jurisdiction of
Makalu Barun National Park, while Lumding Tsho falls under the territory of the buffer zone of
Sagarmatha National Park. Before commencement of any work, the AE will ensure that all
project activities are legally permitted and that the project meets the requirements of the
respective national park management plans. The AE has consulted with DNPWC, affected
communities, and Indigenous Peoples and other stakeholders, as presented in annex 7 to the
funding proposal. DNPWC has committed to reviewing and updating the existing national parks
management plans to consider climate-resilient measures. The lake lowering will be undertaken
in an area with limited habitat diversity, consisting mainly of rock, sediment and ice. However,
further biodiversity assessments through an environmental and social impact assessment will
be undertaken to identify proper mitigation measures once the exact locations of all project
activities have been identified. Critical habitats will be avoided in all the project’s activities. The
prohibited actions list prohibits activities that are detrimental to the conservation status of
habitats and species, have measurable adverse impacts to critical habitats or lead to a reduction
in endangered species. The project will not introduce invasive species in the covered sites. In
the unlikely event that the need for a biodiversity action plan is identified during
implementation, appropriate experts will be engaged to prepare such a plan. An outline is
pr ovide
G
d
C
in
F
t
I
h
n
e
d
a
ig
n
e
n
n
e
o
x
u
to
s P
th
e
e
o
E
p
S
le
M
s
F
P
.
o licy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples.
47.
The project meets
the requirements of the Indigenous Peoples Policy and includes an Indigenous Peoples policy
framework as an annex to the ESMF. Consultations with Indigenous Peoples informed the
design of the project and three Indigenous Peoples Policies, one for each catchment, will be
developed to guide engagement with Indigenous Peoples. The project will also promote the

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 118
integration of traditional knowledge and practices in the EWS. In line with its roles and
functions, the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group will be available to provide advice to the AE
and executing entities. In line with the Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples
foc al po
E
in
S
t
S
w
8
i
:
l l
C
b
u
e
l t
a
u
v
r
a
a
il
l
a
h
b
e
le
r i
f
t
o
a
r
g
a
e
s
.
sistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.
48.
Lakes and other landscape features are culturally important
to Indigenous Peoples, who have deep respect and a spiritual connection with their
environment. There are also tangible cultural heritage items, such as mani walls, small shrines
and prayer wheels, along trails between villages, close to the rivers that will be protected as part
of the mitigating measures. A heritage management plan will be developed during project
implementation. Prior to any work, community leaders will be consulted to ensure adherence to
their cultural practices, such as rituals. In addition, the project will not support action that leads
to significant damage or removal of cultural heritage, as reflected in the prohibited actions list in
the ESMF. A chance find procedure will also be in place in the event of the discovery of tangible
cultural heritage items during construction work. The project, as part of its overall objective,
aims to reduce the risk of natural hazards such as GLOFs, which could potentially damage
cu ltural
I
h
m
e
p
ri
l
t
e
a
m
ge
e
.
n tation arrangements.
49.
UNDP, as the AE, will provide an oversight role in
safeguards implementation. The Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation, as a
project implementing partner, will establish a project steering committee to include members
from relevant federal and provincial ministries, including the National Planning Commission,
UNDP, community organizations, Indigenous Peoples organizations, academia, development
partners and the private sector, as necessary. The project steering committee will oversee
project execution, including matters relating to E&S risks and grievance redress. At the PMU
level, an environmental and social specialist will be engaged to, among other tasks, ensure
overall compliance with the ESMF; oversee preparation of the environmental and social impact
assessment and ESMP; provide capacity-building; ensure that national environmental
clearances, ESMPs, other required safeguards plans and free, prior and informed consent
agreements are prepared, as applicable, and are included in the bidding and contract
documents; manage the grievance redress mechanism; and monitor safeguards performance.
The implementation and effectiveness of the ESMF will be reviewed by the PMU every six
mo nths
S
a
t
n
a
d
k e
m
h
o
o
n
l
i
d
to
e
r
r
i n
e
g
n g
re
a
p
g
o
e
r
m
ts
e
w
nt
i
.
ll form part of the annual performance reports.
50.
The AE has identified a potential risk of exclusion of some
groups, leading to reduced employment opportunities and inequitable access to information or
lack of representation. The AE has addressed such potential risks through early consultations
and the preparation of a stakeholder engagement plan for continuous engagements and an
Indigenous Peoples planning framework. Various iterative consultations with local
communities, including Indigenous Peoples, government representatives, private sector
organizations, civil society organizations, non-governmental organizations, international
development cooperation agencies, other vulnerable groups (i.e. Dalits, women, youth and
people with disabilities) and academic institutions were undertaken from 2018 to 2024 to
gather views and inputs at the project design and formulation stage. Several key concerns relate
to technical design, biodiversity conservation, respect for tangible and intangible cultural
aspects, labour, community safety, labour prioritization, land utilization, etc. With UNDP
providing an oversight role, the DHM, National Risk Reduction and Management Authority and
DoFSC will lead and continue the stakeholder engagements during implementation, as guided
by the s
G
ta
r
k
i
e
e
h
v
o
a
l
n
d
c
e
e
r
r
e
e
n
d
ga
re
ge
ss
m
m
en
e
t
c
p
h
l
a
a
n
n
i
.
s m.
51.
A local grievance redress mechanism will be
established that will be open to all project stakeholders to address project-related grievances
during implementation. Customary practices of different community, ethnic and religious
groups to manage conflicts will also be integrated into the grievance redress mechanism. The
monitoring and reporting specialist of the PMU will work closely with community or traditional

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 119
leaders in implementing the grievance redress mechanism. In addition, the institutional
grievance redress mechanism of the AE (the Stakeholder Response Mechanism) and the
Independent Redress Mechanism of the GCF will be made available to the stakeholders as
additional formal channels. While a grievance redress mechanism will be established, it will not
impede access to the use of the judicial system of Nepal at any time to seek resolution. The
project’s grievance redress mechanism will be communicated to all stakeholders through a
range of channels, such as the UNDP website, social media, radio, project information
packages/newsletters, community meetings and consultations, village notice boards and/or
pa mphle
S
t
e
s
x
.
u al exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) safeguarding.
52.
The revised GCF
Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding
from SEAH in GCF-financed activities. The AE provided SEAH safeguarding in its submission of
the funding proposal. The project includes activities that involve engaging with various actors,
such as training for DHM technical staff. Participatory development of community-based
disaster response plans, municipal disaster preparedness and response plans, and local-level
climate resilient plans in target watersheds will involve communities in the project through
holding training workshops and establishing and mobilizing youth and volunteer groups. Risk
factors include the high vulnerability of women living in the geographically remote and disaster-
prone areas that will be targeted by the project as well as gender and social norms that
negatively affect women. Identified potential SEAH risks outlined in the ESMF include a risk of
influx of workers to carry out the construction work and the lack of capacity by contractors to
prevent SEAH incidents. To mitigate risks, the project will, among other things, provide SEAH
and grievance redress mechanism training for project staff, municipalities and wards, which is
included in the gender action plan; establish a code of conduct and require its signing by
personnel, contractors, consultants, vendors and organizations engaged by the project; and
raise awareness of SEAH in the communities in which the project will operate. Additionally, the
project will employ multiple grievance redress mechanism channels to report incidents and
provide information on services available to assist survivors. The institutional-level grievance
mechanism of the AE and the Independent Redress Mechanism of the GCF will also be available
to stakeholders for reporting SEAH complaints. Mitigation measures will be monitored for their
effectiveness on an ongoing basis during implementation.
4. 2 Gender policy
53.
The AE has provided a gender assessment and action plan and therefore complies with
the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. The gender assessment outlines the national
policies and international conventions that the country has committed to for fostering an
enabling environment to address gender issues and women’s empowerment. National climate
change related plans and policies also recognize the need for gender equality and social
inclusion in disaster risk reduction. The gender impacts of climate change related disasters such
as GLOFs are also discussed in the gender assessment. Women are identified as being most
vulnerable in the event of a disaster, exacerbating existing gender inequities. After a disaster,
women are particularly exposed to risks and are likely to suffer higher rates of mortality,
morbidity and post-disaster impacts on their livelihoods. Women also face the burden of
providing increased care for children, the sick, disabled people and elderly people after climate
change related disasters. Several underlying factors exacerbate the vulnerability of women to
the impacts of disasters, including limited livelihood options, restricted access to education and
basic services, and discriminatory social and cultural legal practices. Furthermore,
intersectionalities, such as old age, castes that are historically excluded, the status of Indigenous
Peoples, illiteracy and disability, further exacerbate the vulnerabilities of women.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 120
54.
The gender action plan has activities that are aligned with the project’s outputs with
baseline, sex-disaggregated targets, performance indicators, timelines, responsibilities and an
allocated budget for their implementation. Issues outlined in the gender assessment will be
addressed by conducting training on incorporating gender and social inclusion in disaster risk
and GLOF management for technical ministerial staff and partners such as civil society
organizations and collaborating with municipalities to support women-led cooperatives and
groups with mobilizing financial resources and skills development. Additionally, targets are
included in the gender action plan for vulnerable people, such as people with disabilities and
Indigenous Peoples, to participate in project activities such as awareness-raising and leadership
roles in community-based committees. Consultations and participatory workshops will be
undertaken with communities where the needs of women and marginalized groups can be
identified and integrated into the final design and implementation of structural and non-
structural measures for GLOF risk reduction. A gender equality and social inclusion expert will
be part of the PMU to support the implementation of the gender action plan. The AE is
recommended to formulate an appropriate indicator for the gender action plan activity related
to providing technical training for women and marginalized groups to enhance their
participation in the construction and maintenance of risk reduction measures.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l project assessment (medium risk)
55.
The proposed adaptation project for Nepal will help to address climate change risk in
the country by promoting GLOF risk mitigation measures and EWS in four target high-risk
watersheds. The project will also support community protection and the restoration of 1,500
he ctares of mangrove forest.
56.
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 36,158,230. Together with co-financing of
USD 11,380,652 from the Government of Nepal, USD 2,143,869 from UNDP and USD 261,299
from IPPAN, the total project investment is USD 49,944,050. The co-financing ratio is 1:0.38 and
accounts for 27 per cent of the total financing. In addition, USD 60,606,661 in parallel financing
is expected from the Government of Nepal (USD 9,464,184), municipalities in the three target
watersheds (USD 50,180,000) and IPPAN (USD 962,477) for implementation and operation and
4 m .3 a .2 in . tenAacnccree cdoistetsd. entity/executing entity capability to execute the project (medium risk)
57.
The AE is UNDP, which has an extensive track record and global experience in
implementing climate adaptation and climate information projects and has technical expertise
in developing and managing adaptation projects related to natural resources and ecosystem
management. This funding proposal is expected to benefit from lessons learned in earlier GLOF
ris k management projects in Nepal supported by the Global Environment Facility.
58.
The executing entity is the Government of Nepal through its Ministry of Finance and
DHM under the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation. These ministries will work
with various other government entities, such as the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Authority and the Ministry of Forests and Environment and its departments,
including DoFSC and DNPWC, in coordinating and implementing project delivery, financial
management and reporting. The Government’s capacity and track record for implementing
donor projects, and GLOF risk mitigation projects in particular, is high, and this poses a low
implementation risk for the project’s investment.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 121
4.3.3. Project-specific execution risks (medium risk)
59.
The proposed project plans to deploy grey and green infrastructure consisting of
physical lake lowering infrastructure and ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction measures in
Nepal’s watersheds most at risk of GLOFs. One important risk to successful project
implementation has been identified as occupational and community health and safety risks
during construction and operation and maintenance of the lake lowering infrastructure, which
could result in loss of life/lives and may lead to reputational risks and implementation delays.
The AE plans to mitigate this risk by preparing and ensuring strict adherence to the
ESMF/ESMPs, which include health and safety plans, labour management plans, emergency
response plans and contractor medical emergency response plans. The occurrence of natural
hazards, such as GLOFs, earthquakes and extreme weather events, could result in higher
operational costs and damage to GLOF risk reduction and EWS infrastructure, potentially
reducing the project’s overall impact. This will be mitigated by ensuring resilient design of the
infrastructure, putting in place anticipatory action plans to ensure proper siting and
safeguarding of the infrastructure, and adhering to the strict safety protocols, policies and
procedures of the AE at all times of project implementation. Furthermore, lake lowering and
EWS challenges may arise during installation of the required infrastructure and technologies,
thereby reducing the effectiveness of the project’s intervention. This risk will be mitigated by
ensuring that only suitably experienced firms are selected to undertake the lake lowering and
EWS installation works and by ensuring that the selection and design of lake lowering and EWS
infrastructure and technologies to be adopted in the project take into account the potential
i 4 n .3 c .4 r . e asePsr ionj ehcatz avriadb frileiqtyu eanncdy caonndc seesvseiorintya.l ity
60.
The proposed project plans to implement good practices to enhance GLOF risk reduction
within three target watersheds in Nepal. The project also aims to improve GLOF early warning
and to protect and restore mountain ecosystems around the target watersheds. These types of
activity are generally viable and have been implemented in other comparable locations. The
proposed GCF grant will represent 73 per cent of the total programme size in a wholly grant-
funded project. The proposed concessionality level is justified given the low public resources
and income level of Nepal (the gross domestic product per capita is USD 1,136). The country’s
ability to raise private capital is also limited, and the programme is expected to generate
s
4
i
.3
g
.5
n
.
i ficaCnotm adpalpiatnatcieo nr ibsekn (emfitesd fiourm N erpisakl.)
61.
UNDP's due diligence process includes Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti-Money
Laundering/Counter-Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) checks for all partners. Public entities
involved in co-financing are evaluated based on their financial stability, project prioritization,
and long-term operational presence, which provides a strong level of confidence in their ability
to fulfill their commitments. For private entities like the Independent Power Producers’
Association, Nepal (IPPAN), while full financial transparency may not be available, the
relationship between UNDP, the Government of Nepal (GoN), and IPPAN is considered stable,
and IPPAN's compliance with local laws is regularly monitored. This reduces the inherent risk of
financial misconduct or illegal activities, but further monitoring is recommended due to the
pr ivate nature of IPPAN's finances.
62.
In addition, UNDP’s compliance with the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers
(HACT) ensures that financial transfers are conducted in accordance with predefined risk
management levels. Regular audits, financial oversight, and capacity assessments are integral
components of the program, minimizing the potential for financial crimes and ensuring that
funds are used in a manner consistent with the project’s goals and legal requirements.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 122
63.
Despite due diligence, KYC, and AML/CFT measures in place, some level of residual risk
remains. However, based on the due diligence in co-financing commitments conducted by
UNDP, and the existing integration of these commitments into the work plans of the respective
entities, UNDP has not identified any specific risks at this stage. Therefore, the final compliance
r 4 i .3 s . k 6. for GthCiFs pproorptofoslailo h caosn bceeennt arsasteiossne rdi saks M(loedwi urmis.k )
64.
In the event of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains
non-material and within the risk appetite in terms of results areas, single proposal or AE
c 4. o 3 n .7 c . entRraetcioonm. mendation
65. It is recommended that the BSuomarmd acroyn rsiisdke ra stshees asmboevnet factors in its decision.
Overall project Medium
Accredited entity/executing entity capability Medium
Project-specific execution Medium
Compliance Medium
Within the monitoring
GCF portfolio concentration
thresholds
4. 4 Fiduciary
66.
Following a comprehensive review of the funding proposal for the Nepal GLOF risk
reduction funding proposal, several key financial management aspects have been carefully
ex amined and evaluated.
67.
First, the funds flow structure and reflow mechanisms outlined in the proposal suggest
an appropriate implementation process, particularly regarding procurement, transport and
construction of lake lowering infrastructure and GLOF protection measures. The use of
implementation partners, responsible parties and appropriate instruments, such as letters of
agreement and responsible party agreements, signifies a structured approach to resource
allocation and accountability. Moreover, the involvement of UNDP through the National
Implementation arrangement, coupled with its oversight responsibilities, reinforces the
pr oject’s integrity and adherence to established standards.
68.
Second, the differentiation of responsibilities between the AE and executing entities is
clearly delineated, with UNDP serving as the implementing partner under the National
Implementation modality. The role of UNDP in project planning, coordination, financial
management and oversight underscores its commitment to effective execution while ensuring
alignment with GCF guidelines and regulations. Additionally, the inclusion of responsible
parties, government entities and civil society stakeholders enhances project ownership and
fos ters inclusive decision-making processes.
69.
Third, the financial instrument composition, including grants and co-financing, reflects a
strategic approach to resource mobilization, with contributions from various ministries,
departments and agencies of the Government of Nepal facilitating broader financial support for
project activities. The mechanisms for refunding taxes, as detailed in the project documentation,
ensure compliance with relevant taxation regulations, thereby mitigating financial risks and
optimizing resource utilization.

--- Table 1 on Page 122 ---
5. | It is recommended that the BSuomarmd acroyn rsiisdke ra stshees asmboevnet factors in its decision. |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
Overall project
Accredited entity/executing entity capability |  | Medium
Medium | 
Project-specific execution |  | Medium | 
Compliance |  | Medium | 

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 123
70.
Fourth, rigorous risk assessment and mitigation measures are embedded throughout
the proposal, encompassing procurement ethics, fraud prevention and internal audit
mechanisms. UNDP adherence to procurement policies and financial regulations, coupled with
its Enterprise Risk Management framework, enhances transparency, integrity and
acc ountability across the project implementation phases.
71.
The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP
financial rules and regulations. The project will be implemented following the national
implementation modality and in accordance with the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies
and Procedures guidelines. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing
partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following its Framework for Cash Transfers to
Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers). All projects will
be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit
gu idelines and policies.
72.
Moreover, the economic and financial analyses provide valuable insights into Nepal’s
vulnerability to climate change and the critical role of climate finance in fostering resilience-
building efforts. By addressing knowledge gaps and enhancing national capacities, the project
aims to facilitate informed decision-making and optimize resource allocation for sustainable
ad aptation measures.
73.
In conclusion, the comprehensive financial management assessment underscores the
robustness of the proposal’s financial framework, emphasizing accountability, transparency and
stakeholder engagement. Moving forward, continued adherence to established protocols,
effective oversight mechanisms and adaptive management practices will be essential for
realizing the project’s objectives and maximizing its impact on reducing GLOF risks and building
climate resilience in Nepal.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
74.
The funding proposal is an adaptation only project focusing on two adaptation results
areas of IRMF: most vulnerable people and communities; and ecosystems and ecosystem
services. The project aims to benefit a total of 2.37 million beneficiaries (0.38 million direct and
1.9 9 million indirect beneficiaries).
75.
The funding proposal has been found to use the templates and provide content in line
with the IRMF requirements. It contains all the elements of the logical framework in terms of
identification of results areas, indicators, means of verification, targets, assumptions, etc. They
were found to be adequate and are expected to allow smooth monitoring and reporting of
project results. The information provided in different sections of the logical framework is
relevant and the proper implementation of the plans laid out therein will help to deliver the
an ticipated climate impact.
76.
A methodology was developed to assess the adaptation benefits and the number of
beneficiaries. However, the methodology can be improved in various ways. The Secretariat
provided detailed guidance to strengthen the methodology for estimating the adaptation
benefits and the number of beneficiaries by enhancing the description of vulnerability,
identification of tangible adaptation benefits and subsequent mapping of the number of
beneficiaries. A revised methodology based on the guidance was prepared, which will allow
sys tematic monitoring and reporting of the adaptation impact during implementation.
77.
The implementation timetable was provided in the required structure and format. The
milestones and deliverables at different stages of project implementation were identified.
Adherence to the implementation timetable will facilitate smooth implementation of the project
and timely delivery of the results at planned intervals.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 124
4. 6 Legal assessment
78.
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 5 August
2016, and became effective on 23 November 2016, which was amended and restated pursuant
to a first amendment and restatement agreement dated 16 March 2023, and which became
eff ective on 3 May 2023 (the “AMA”).
79.
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has
ob tained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.
80.
The proposed project will be implemented in Nepal, a country in which GCF is not
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not
protected against litigation or expropriation in the country, which needs to be further assessed.
Moreover, the ability of GCF to undertake redress activities and/or investigations in such
countries may be hindered due to the absence of privileges and immunities for relevant GCF
pe rsonnel.
81.
Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are made only after the
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or
ha s been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities for GCF and its personnel.
82.
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and
(b)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 125
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP272
Proposal name: Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake
Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding
in glacial river basins of Nepal
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country: Nepal
Project size: Small
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1 .1 Overview
1.
The project entitled “Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst
Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal” is a
seven-year initiative targeting high-altitude catchments across the Arun, Dudhkoshi,
Marshyangdi, and Thulagi river basins. It aims to protect communities, infrastructure and
ecosystems from increasing GLOF risks caused by human-induced climate change. As a
public-sector project solely for adaptation, it seeks to reduce human and economic losses by
strengthening the anticipatory capacity of Nepal to manage GLOFs and related
h ydrometeorological hazards.
2.
The project’s two core outcomes are:
(a)
An integrated approach to planning and development that takes climate risks and
ha zard information into account is adopted by local and national-level institutions; and
(b)
Communities downstream of glacial lakes are less exposed to GLOFs and flash floods and
ha ve increased preparedness to respond to residual flood risk.
3.
To achieve these outcomes, the project will deliver three outputs:
(a)
Enhanced institutional and technical capacities for climate risk-informed development
pla nning, hazard modelling, and risk communication;
(b)
Improved hazard monitoring systems and early warning coverage, including expanded
hy drometeorological infrastructure in GLOF-prone basins; and
(c)
Implementation of structural and ecosystem-based flood mitigation interventions, such
as glacial lake lowering, vegetative gabions, slope stabilization and rehabilitation of degraded
ri parian areas.
4.
The project is categorized as environmental and social risk Category B, reflecting
moderate risks mitigated through targeted safeguards. It delivers environmental and social
co-benefits, including improved ecosystem services and carbon sequestration from over
4 million planted trees. Gender equity and social inclusion are integrated throughout the design,
with specific provisions for the participation and benefit of women, Indigenous Peoples, and
m arginalized groups.
5.
The total cost of the project is USD 49.94 million, of which USD 36.16 million is
requested from GCF as a grant. The remaining USD 13.79 million will be co-financed by national

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 126
institutions and private-sector stakeholders through in-kind contributions, cost-sharing, and
em bedded operation and maintenance commitments.
6.
Implementation will be led by the Government of Nepal, with the Department of
Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) serving as the primary executing entity under the Ministry
of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) is the accredited entity (AE) and will ensure fiduciary, technical, and gender oversight.
Key partners include the Department of Forest and Soil Conservation (DoFSC), the Ministry of
Finance, and participating local governments. A multi-tiered governance framework will
fa cilitate coordination and accountability across national, provincial and municipal levels.
7.
This project is of critical importance to the climate adaptation agenda of Nepal. By
shifting from reactive to proactive risk management, and embedding resilience in
infrastructure, institutions and communities, the initiative aligns with the National Adaptation
Plan of Nepal and supports the country’s commitments under the Paris Agreement and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Scale: Medium-High
1 .2 Impact potential
8.
The project is expected to directly benefit 385,956 people (55 per cent women and 45
per cent men), which represents approximately 1.3 per cent of the population of Nepal, through
glacial lake lowering, ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction (eco-DRR) measures, and
improved early warning systems. Indirectly, 1,986,980 people (6.6 per cent of the population) in
adjacent high-risk catchments will benefit from enhanced preparedness, climate information
services, and restored ecosystems. The direct beneficiaries are primarily concentrated in the
downstream flood-risk zones of the Arun, Dudhkoshi, and Marshyangdi Basins, delineated
through dam-breach modelling and population overlays. The project gives explicit attention to
the most vulnerable, with more than 50 per cent of beneficiaries identified as women and
specific measures in place to ensure the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples, Dalits, and remote
m ountain communities.
9.
To avoid maladaptive infrastructure, the project applies a hybrid approach combining
grey infrastructure (e.g. conservation ponds, flood walls) with nature-based solutions (e.g.
vegetative gabion walls, reforestation). These interventions reduce reliance on hard engineering
structures alone and are designed with climate projections (representative concentration
pathways 4.5 and 8.5) in mind to ensure functionality under increasing GLOF risks. Design
standards incorporate climate modelling and dam-breach simulations, with operation and
ma intenance (O&M) protocols and community training for long-term sustainability.
10.
The project enhances adaptive capacity at the household and ecosystem levels by (i)
reducing GLOF hazard magnitude through glacial lake lowering, (ii) expanding early warning
coverage, and (iii) rehabilitating 200 hectares (ha) of flood-buffering ecosystems. Estimated
benefits include the reduction of economic losses by USD 45–87 million and an expected
reduction in loss of 2,208 lives compared to a no-intervention scenario. Capacity-building for
local actors, including technical skills in watershed management, monitoring and emergency
pr eparedness, contributes to sustainable risk governance.
11.
Institutional systems are strengthened through support to DHM, enabling it to produce
tailored GLOF forecasts and risk information products. Additionally, the project aligns with
national disaster risk reduction (DRR) legislation and supports the mainstreaming of climate
risk into watershed, national park and municipal planning systems. It also facilitates multi-
sectoral coordination among hydropower, tourism and agriculture actors through formalized
ris k-sharing partnerships.
12.
Climate information use is significantly expanded through new high-altitude hydromet
stations, real-time monitoring networks, and standard operating procedures for community-

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 127
based dissemination. The project enhances early warning dissemination through both
centralized and decentralized channels, including Community Disaster Management
Committees and mobile alerts, ensuring timely communication to at-risk communities
do wnstream.
13.
While the project shows high potential for immediate adaptation benefits, three
lim itations should be noted:
(a)
Although the number of indirect beneficiaries is substantial, the depth of benefit for
these groups is more diffuse and may rely heavily on the sustainability of early warning and
kn owledge systems beyond project closure;
(b)
Although vulnerability targeting is strong theoretically, practical challenges in reaching
highly mobile or isolated Indigenous groups could limit impact unless safeguards and
mo nitoring are rigorously implemented; and
(c)
The dam-breach and glacial lake models do not incorporate freeze–thaw cycles, a driver
of lake instability acknowledged by the AE in response to a query from the independent
Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP). Excluding this mechanism may underestimate both the
fre quency and magnitude of GLOFs and therefore the full scale of avoided damages.
14.
The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the proposed project as medium to high.
Scale: Medium-High
1. 3 Paradigm shift potential
15.
The GLOF project catalyses a shift from a historically reactive, fragmented approach to
GLOF risk in Nepal towards a proactive, integrated model of anticipatory climate risk
management. It introduces a package of proven and emerging adaptation technologies,
including high-altitude, lake-lowering, eco-DRR infrastructure, and automated early warning
systems, tailored to the country's mountainous terrain. By combining grey and green
infrastructure and linking upstream risk mitigation to downstream early action, the project
represents a scalable innovation in flood-risk governance that aligns with the national strategies
an d regional Himalayan frameworks of Nepal.
16.
Based on its theory of change, the project presents a replicable and cost-efficient model
for reducing GLOF risks. Initial interventions at four high-risk glacial lakes serve as
demonstrative pilots for potential replication at 17 additional dangerous lakes in Nepal and in
comparable high-altitude regions across South Asia. The integration of capacity-building and
hazard zoning into subnational planInFi ng further facilitates replication. In response to a query
from iTAP regarding clarity and causal logic of the theory of change, the AE has proposed the
following streamlined formulation: the levels of the Thulag Ti,H LEoNw er Barun, Lumding Tsho and
Hongu 2 glacial lakes are reduced and nature-based flood mitigation measures and eBaErlCyA USE
warning systems are introduced in downstream catchments, the resilience, disaster
preparedness and adaptive capacity of downstream communities will be enhanced,
the likelihood of catastrophic breaches and intensity of glacial lake outburst floods will be
reduced and communities will be better prepared to avoid and recover from residual flood
risks. However, the absence of a fully elaborated and costed national replication plan,
particularly across provinces with unequal institutional readiness, may limit the pace and scale
of expansion post-project.
17.
The project incorporates long-term sustainability measures by embedding climate risk
governance within national systems and through public-private partnerships (PPPs) with the
hydropower, tourism and insurance sectors. These partnerships aim to generate market-based
incentives for sustaining early warning services and risk-information products. Nevertheless,
these PPPs remain at a preliminary stage, with few signed commitments or tested business
models to ensure continuity beyond GCF funding. Moreover, while the monitoring and

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 128
evaluation framework is robust, its current design is largely top-down; community-level
knowledge feedback loops and co-design mechanisms, particularly with Indigenous groups,
co uld be better articulated to strengthen local ownership of scaling pathways.
18.
Importantly, the project supports mainstreaming climate resilience by integrating
hazard mapping and GLOF risk reduction into sectoral policies, local governance and budgeting
processes. It contributes to removing systemic barriers by promoting institutional coordination
between DHM, the Ministry of Forests and Environment, and local authorities. Yet, while it
improves planning systems, the project does not directly address underlying disincentives, such
as risky land-use practices, unregulated infrastructure near glacial lakes, or lack of risk-sensitive
tourism guidelines, that continue to perpetuate exposure. These gaps highlight the need for
deeper policy reforms and stronger mechanisms to institutionalize local financing and long-
term technical support for early warning systems (EWS) and ecosystem restoration beyond the
life of the project.
19.
While the project takes commendable steps towards embedding climate risk governance
at multiple levels, the long-term sustainability of key interventions, particularly the automated
EWS and maintenance-intensive lake infrastructure, remains underdeveloped. There is limited
clarity on how recurring costs for sensor calibration, data transmission and risk communication
systems will be absorbed by government budgets or private actors after project closure.
Moreover, the decentralization of implementation to subnational authorities assumes uniform
capacity that does not reflect varying provincial institutional readiness in Nepal. Without
dedicated fiscal mechanisms, clear O&M mandates, and cross-sectoral financing frameworks,
there is a risk that transformational infrastructure and services may degrade over time,
un dermining the broader systemic shift the project aims to achieve.
20.
The iTAP considers the proposed paradigm shift potential of the proposed project to be
medium to high.
Scale: High
1. 4 Sustainable development potential
21.
The GLOF project in Nepal delivers significant environmental co-benefits through
extensive ecosystem restoration and hybrid eco-DRR interventions. Activities include planting
over 4.6 million trees, reforesting 153.3 ha and installing vegetative gabions, check dams and
revetments that reduce erosion, increase soil infiltration and stabilize degraded floodplains.
These interventions enhance soil quality, reduce sedimentation in tributaries, and strengthen
biodiversity conservation. The estimated carbon sequestration potential is 100,104 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO₂ eq) over the project’s lifespan (20 years), calculated using the
Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool of the Food and Agriculture Organization. This environmental
footprint aligns strongly with (SDGs) 13: climate action; 15: life on land; and 6: clean water and
sanitation. However, maintaining these benefits post-project will depend on the effectiveness of
local forest user groups and the sustainability of DoFSC-supported community-based
res toration systems.
22.
The project generates substantial social co-benefits by reducing water- and vector-
borne disease prevalence through flood mitigation, preserving public services and decreasing
recovery times after climate disasters. Enhanced EWS and flood preparedness will reduce loss
of life and financial distress, particularly among poor and remote populations. Furthermore, the
project strengthens community ownership by training residents in lake-lowering construction
techniques, thus improving their employability in future risk-reduction initiatives. Inclusion of
Indigenous Peoples through culturally tailored engagement, and preservation of traditional
knowledge systems for EWS, supports SDGs 3: good health and well-being; and 11: sustainable
cities and communities.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 129
23.
Economic co-benefits are expected through job creation in engineering, construction
and ecosystem restoration activities, as well as from the stimulation of ecotourism and
improved energy sector stability. Tourism benefits from reduced flood risk in glacial basins,
while downstream resilience protects infrastructure and hydropower installations, sectors that
are critical to the economy of Nepal. The anticipated increase in employment opportunities,
especially for local workers and women, and the economic security derived from uninterrupted
energy supply and transport systems contribute to SDGs 1: no poverty; 7: affordable and clean
en ergy; and 8: decent work and economic growth.
24.
Gender equality and social inclusion are core to the project’s design. The Gender
Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) Action Plan integrates tailored activities such as women-led
cooperatives, GESI-aware early warning products, and gender-sensitive training curricula.
Women’s groups are key implementers in community-based flood EWS. The project aims to
address systemic barriers to women’s participation and leadership, while also supporting
Indigenous and Dalit groups. These efforts align with SDGs 5: gender equality; and 10: reduced
inequalities. However, sustaining institutional and cultural change beyond project timelines will
req uire additional national policy integration and local government commitment.
25.
While the co-benefits are broad and well-structured, risks remain. The longevity of
environmental and social gains hinges on maintaining cross-sector collaboration, private sector
engagement, and decentralized implementation capacities. Currently, co-financing from the
Independent Power Producers’ Association of Nepal and Nepal Tourism Board is limited, and
the project relies heavily on the operational capacity of local governments and forest user
groups. Without stronger commitments to financial continuity and institutional mainstreaming,
there is a risk of declining impact post-project. To mitigate this, the project should formalize
long-term ecosystem service management mechanisms and develop a road map to integrate co-
be nefit tracking into national planning frameworks.
26.
The iTAP rates the sustainable development potential of the proposed project as high.
Scale: High
1. 5 Needs of the recipient
27.
Nepal is among the most climate-vulnerable countries globally, ranked as the most
economically impacted by glacial flood risks in the Himalayas alongside Bhutan. Since the
1970s, 26 GLOF events have occurred, severely damaging lives, livelihoods and infrastructure.
Future projections under representative concentration pathways 4.5 and 8.5 indicate rising
temperatures and monsoon variability, which will intensify glacial melt and increase GLOF
frequency. The steep terrain of the country’s river basins, combined with high poverty rates and
a reliance on fragile infrastructure, exacerbate these risks. The four glacial lakes targeted by the
project, Thulagi, Lower Barun, Lumding Tsho and Hongu 2, have been identified as the most
da ngerous, with potential economic losses from a breach reaching USD 109 million.
28.
The project targets over 2.3 million people, including 385,956 direct beneficiaries living
in the GLOF flood paths and an additional 1.9 million in surrounding municipalities. These
populations are highly exposed due to limited access to services and dependence on agriculture
and tourism. The project design prioritizes vulnerable and historically excluded groups,
including Indigenous Peoples, Dalits, and women-headed households. According to the GESI
assessment, these groups face systemic barriers to resilience, such as discrimination, mobility
res trictions and limited access to productive assets.
29.
Despite modest improvements in the human development index (current value0.602),
Nepal remains one of the poorest countries in South Asia, with 30 per cent of the population
living below the national poverty line and 80 per cent residing in rural areas. In the project’s
mountainous target areas, income levels are lower, service access is weaker, and vulnerability
to disaster shocks is higher. These areas have limited basic infrastructure, frequently experience

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 130
service disruptions after floods or landslides, and remain underserved by public investment and
cli mate finance.
30.
Financial barriers are acute. The ability to finance GLOF risk reduction in Nepal is
constrained by increasing public debt (41 per cent of gross domestic product in 2022), limited
fiscal space, and reliance on overseas remittances. Private investment in upstream risk
reduction is nearly absent due to high capital costs and long-time frames. The project addresses
these gaps by requesting USD 36.1 million in GCF grant financing and mobilizing USD 13.7
million in co-finance. However, private sector engagement, particularly from the hydropower
and tourism sectors, remains nascent and insufficiently institutionalized beyond the proposal
sta ge.
31.
The project strengthens institutional capacity at national and subnational levels,
especially within the DHM and forest authorities. It supports regulatory reforms, technical
training, and integrated watershed management plans. However, implementation risks persist.
Institutional mandates for long-term O&M, particularly for decentralized EWS, remain under-
defined. Coordination between ministries and local governments is still limited, with
ov erlapping responsibilities and variable capacity across provinces.
32.
While the project identifies highly vulnerable groups and seeks to integrate them,
meaningful participation, particularly of Indigenous Peoples and linguistically isolated
communities, could be constrained by social barriers and uneven local institutional readiness.
The Indigenous Peoples Engagement Framework and GESI Action Plan provide important
safeguards and participation mechanisms, but these require strong, sustained implementation
an d monitoring to ensure equity in benefit-sharing.
33.
The iTAP assesses the needs of the recipients of the proposed project as high.
Scale: High
1. 6 Country ownership
34.
The GLOF project in Nepal is strongly aligned with the country’s national climate change
priorities and frameworks, including the second nationally determined contribution (NDC), the
national adaptation plan (NAP 2021–2050), the national adaptation programme of action, the
Third National Communication, and the Climate Change Policy (2019). Each of these identifies
adaptation to climate-induced risks, including GLOFs, monsoon floods, and landslides, as a
national priority. The project directly contributes to NAP priorities related to glacial risk
reduction and EWS in high mountain areas and supports NDC targets around DRR as an
ad aptation priority.
35.
The project builds upon enabling institutional and legal frameworks in Nepal, including
the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act (2017), the DRR Strategic Plan of Action
(2018–2030), and the Fifteenth Plan. The proposal has been endorsed by the Ministry of
Finance (the national designated authority), and multiple key institutions—such as DHM,
DoFSC, and Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation), are listed as implementing or
coordinating partners. The project integrates its interventions into national watershed and park
management plans and aims to embed EWS, eco-DRR, and glacial monitoring into the
responsibilities of domestic institutions. However, challenges remain in ensuring that policy-
level commitments are translated into sustained institutional mandates, especially at
subnational levels. Budgetary absorption and institutional readiness vary widely across
pr ovinces.
36.
UNDP, the AE, has a proven track record in GLOF and DRR projects in Nepal, including
the Imja Lake lowering project, and in similar high-mountain contexts, such as Bhutan. The
Government of Nepal and UNDP have jointly implemented several adaptation and EWS
initiatives. The proposal builds on past lessons, including workforce mobilization in remote
areas and gender-sensitive approaches. While national capacity is being strengthened,

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 131
especially within DHM, the long-term risk remains that technical operations such as monitoring
and maintenance of EWS may continue to rely on UNDP oversight unless further integrated into
na tional budgeting and civil service structures.
37.
The proposal was developed through a comprehensive and inclusive stakeholder
engagement process involving over 450 individuals from government, civil society, Indigenous
Peoples' organizations, academia, and the private sector. Stakeholder consultations were held at
national and local levels, including gender-sensitive focus groups and Indigenous Peoples
workshops, in line with the principles of free, prior and informed consent. An Indigenous
Peoples Engagement Framework, Gender Action Plan, and Stakeholder Engagement Plan have
been established. The project includes a grievance redress mechanism aligned with national law
and GCF guidelines. However, sustained participatory governance structures post-project are
not fully defined; stakeholder platforms for ongoing co-management could be institutionalized
fur ther.
38.
Nepal has long-standing and globally recognized experience in community management
of state-owned forest land. This experience should be explicitly considered both in the co-design
of land-use related activities and in the promotion of community-based monitoring systems
wi thin the project.
39.
Furthermore, Nepal has been actively engaged in climate risk assessment and
adaptation efforts in mountain areas since the early 2000s. Therefore, it is crucial that the
inception phase includes a comprehensive stocktaking, not only for existing knowledge, but also
of tools and methodologies already developed and tested in the region through similar or
complementary initiatives. These can be leveraged, adapted, or scaled up through the project to
ma ximize impact.
40.
The iTAP assesses the country ownership of the proposed project as high.
Scale: Medium
1. 7 Efficiency and effectiveness
41.
The project requests a total of USD 36.16 million in GCF grant financing, complemented
by USD 13.79 million in co-financing (in-kind and grant-based), bringing the total to nearly USD
50 million. Given the status of Nepal as a least developed country, the public good nature of
GLOF risk reduction, and the lack of a viable commercial return, the full grant structure is
appropriate to enable the upfront investments and ongoing operations that private markets will
no t underwrite.
42.
The project demonstrates strong economic viability under two scenarios. The net
present value of the overall project is USD 86.9 million under a base-case annual GLOF
probability scenario (Scenario I) and USD 45.1 million under a more conservative return-period
probability (Scenario II). The benefit-cost ratios are 4.90 and 3.75 respectively, indicating cost-
effectiveness even under conservative assumptions. To strengthen robustness, the independent
interim evaluation (section E.7 of the funding proposal) provides for a mid-term economic
review, to retest the “annual decay in benefits” parameter from annex 03 (section 3.4.5: Decay
in benefits) and assess actual benefit erosion to date, which will ensure decay-rate assumptions
remain realistic and trigger any necessary adjustments in maintenance budgets or reinvestment
sch edules.
43.
The co-financing ratio is relatively modest at 1:0.38, with most co-financing from
domestic public institutions in the form of in-kind contributions or parallel O&M commitments.
Although these commitments total over USD 13 million, only USD 4 million is pledged for post-
project O&M, and there are few mechanisms to ensure durability of these commitments beyond
the GCF implementation period. The project's leverage of private capital is minimal and mostly
limited to letters of support from tourism and hydropower stakeholders, without binding co-
financing agreements.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 132
44.
The project builds on best practices from previous GLOF mitigation efforts in Nepal and
Bhutan, including the 2016 Imja Lake project. It integrates hydrological modelling, climate-
informed design standards, and stakeholder-specific disaster planning. The application
of Indigenous knowledge, particularly in EWS design and community disaster response
protocols, is noted. However, there is limited evidence of dynamic updating of practices based
on real-time climate data or changing glacial conditions. Moreover, while the AE has signalled
plans to integrate artificial intelligence/machine learning tools for improved forecasting, the
proposal provides no specifics on which algorithms or platforms will be used, nor any
budgetary or timeline allocation for these digital enhancements. Likewise, although local and
Indigenous knowledge is highlighted as a cornerstone of the approach, the proposal does not
detail the mechanisms for systematically capturing, validating and operationalizing that
tra ditional expertise within the technical design and implementation phases.
45.
The funding proposal outlines broad ambitions to engage private partners, through
PPPs for EWS operation, fee-based risk-information services and downstream DRR investments,
yet only offers high-level indications of private-sector involvement, without detailing specific
investment instruments, performance targets or dedicated budget allocations for roles in
monitoring, data services, EWS maintenance, downstream protection structures or eco-DRR
measures. Consequently, the mechanisms for mobilizing, incentivizing and holding private
act ors accountable remain insufficiently articulated.
46.
The iTAP considers the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project to be
medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
47.
The GLOF project in Nepal is well aligned with the country’s climate adaptation
priorities, directly supporting the NAP, NDC targets on disaster risk reduction, and sectoral
policies on watershed management, and marks a significant shift from reactive flood response
to proactive, integrated risk governance. By combining grey (lake-lowering, conservation ponds,
flood walls) and green (vegetative gabions, reforestation) infrastructure, expanding high-
altitude hydromet networks and EWS, and embedding institutional capacity-building across
national and subnational actors, the proposal lays out clear pathways to systemic resilience. It
also delivers substantial co-benefits: over 4 million trees planted, an estimated 100,104 t CO₂ eq
sequestered (over the project’s lifespan), enhanced ecosystem services, improved livelihoods
for nearly 2.3 million people (55 per cent women), and economic stability through preserved
hy dropower and ecotourism assets.
48.
To increase the project’s impact and sustainability, the iTAP recommends:
(a)
Clarify private-sector engagement: define and budget specific roles, instruments and
targets for private actors across monitoring, EWS maintenance, downstream protection and
eco -DRR;
(b)
Integrate local and Indigenous knowledge: conduct a comprehensive stocktaking during
the inception phase to include existing methods and tools for understanding climate risks and
prepare corresponding specific measures at the local level. Establish protocols and fund co-
development workshops and community monitoring to capture, validate and apply traditional
ex pertise;
(c)
Detail a replication strategy: outline a costed roll-out with sequencing, lead agencies,
res ources and co-finance options; and
(d)
Ensure long-term financial viability: formalize existing co-financing pledges and
institutional mandates into a consolidated O&M financing plan, detailing funding sources (GCF,
DHM, Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation, DoFSC), cost estimates (annual,

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 133
seasonal, major event) and scheduling, alongside mid-term financial reviews tied to observed
ass et performance and benefit erosion.
49.
Based on the analyses presented above, the iTAP recommends that the Board approve
this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 134
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP272)
Proposal name: Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake
Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change induced flooding in
glacial river basins of Nepal
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country: Nepal
Project size: Small
Impact potential
The Medium-High rating is noted.
Sustainability of benefits for indirect beneficiaries will be supported through long-term policy
and finance for the maintenance of EWS embedded in DHM and NDRRMA operations, with
added focus on private partnerships. Inclusive implementation strategies and robust
safeguards will be deployed to reach remote indigenous communities, with adaptive
monitoring in place. On the modelling concern, freeze–thaw processes will be considered in
field-based observations and real-time data from monitoring systems, supporting updated
GLOF risk assessments. While such processes may impact the magnitude of risk, this will likely
oPnalrya idnicgrmea sshe itfht ep boetenneftiitasl o f lake-lowering interventions.
The Medium-High rating is noted.
While iTAP notes the absence of a fully costed national replication plan, the project establishes
foundational capacities—technical, institutional, and financial—to enable scaling. It embeds
GLOF risk governance into national systems and strengthens PPP pathways, addressing
sustainability. iTAP’s concerns on the top-down nature of the monitoring system are well noted;
community-level knowledge feedback loops are considered critical to the long-term
sustainability of the project through adaptive management. Such feedback systems will be a key
component in the M&E framework that will be developed at project inception.
The potential challenges of underlying disincentives for downstream practices are well noted.
While future planning for downstream infrastructure is not a primary output of the project,
several of the project outputs will create an enabling environment for future development
planning. In particular, the preparation and regular updating of risk maps and risk information
products will provide tools needed for informed decision making.
Regarding concerns on the sustainability of key interventions — particularly the automated
EWS and maintenance-intensive lake infrastructure: these factors are well acknowledged, and
budget has already been committed by the GoN to cover these recurring costs. These have been
formally committed through co-finance letters and will be integrated into the annual budgets of
the relevant agencies (as outlined in the O&M plan). The development of PPPs will further seek
tSou mstoabinilaisbel ea dddeivtieolnoaplm, seunstta pinoatbelnet fiianlancing, particularly for the EWS systems.

--- Table 1 on Page 134 ---
Impact potential
The Medium-High rating is noted.
Sustainability of benefits for indirect beneficiaries will be supported through long-term policy
and finance for the maintenance of EWS embedded in DHM and NDRRMA operations, with
added focus on private partnerships. Inclusive implementation strategies and robust
safeguards will be deployed to reach remote indigenous communities, with adaptive
monitoring in place. On the modelling concern, freeze–thaw processes will be considered in
field-based observations and real-time data from monitoring systems, supporting updated
GLOF risk assessments. While such processes may impact the magnitude of risk, this will likely
oPnalrya idnicgrmea sshe itfht ep boetenneftiitasl o f lake-lowering interventions.
The Medium-High rating is noted.
While iTAP notes the absence of a fully costed national replication plan, the project establishes
foundational capacities—technical, institutional, and financial—to enable scaling. It embeds
GLOF risk governance into national systems and strengthens PPP pathways, addressing
sustainability. iTAP’s concerns on the top-down nature of the monitoring system are well noted;
community-level knowledge feedback loops are considered critical to the long-term
sustainability of the project through adaptive management. Such feedback systems will be a key
component in the M&E framework that will be developed at project inception.
The potential challenges of underlying disincentives for downstream practices are well noted.
While future planning for downstream infrastructure is not a primary output of the project,
several of the project outputs will create an enabling environment for future development
planning. In particular, the preparation and regular updating of risk maps and risk information
products will provide tools needed for informed decision making.
Regarding concerns on the sustainability of key interventions — particularly the automated
EWS and maintenance-intensive lake infrastructure: these factors are well acknowledged, and
budget has already been committed by the GoN to cover these recurring costs. These have been
formally committed through co-finance letters and will be integrated into the annual budgets of
the relevant agencies (as outlined in the O&M plan). The development of PPPs will further seek
tSou mstoabinilaisbel ea dddeivtieolnoaplm, seunstta pinoatbelnet fiianlancing, particularly for the EWS systems.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 135
The rating of High is noted.
Concerns for the longevity of environmental and social gains are well noted. While it is true that
these co-benefits are reliant on maintaining the collaboration and engagement of key
stakeholders in the long term, extensive efforts have been put in place to ensure that these
factors are fully integrated into the project design, minimising the risk of benefits not being
realised.
Initial commitments from IPPAN and NTB, although limited, represent the intension of these
entities to partner in the long term. Substantial upfront commitments from private partners are
challenging to secure upfront, but extensive engagements throughout the process have
indicated high confidence that long-term partnerships are feasible. IPPAN is also in the process
of finalizing its financial framework which will include mechanisms for fee collection from
hydropower companies to be used for development activities. Such arrangements will be
eNxepeldorse odf athnde fruerctihpeire ndetveloped through the PPP-linked activity.
The High rating is noted.
Regarding the limited discussion in the O&M plan on vertical coordination between national
entities and their decentralized sub-national entities: Although decentralization is relatively
new in Nepal, the Government of Nepal has already developed a streamlined and consistent
governance structure that ensures efficient decision-making and accountability. As part of the
institutional framework, the fund flow mechanisms to local level entities [Basin Offices (DHM),
Basin Management Centers (DoFSC)] are direct and reliable, minimizing bureaucratic delays
and enabling timely implementation of programs and activities. This integrated system
enhances coordination, resource management, and service delivery at the basin level. As part of
the established institutional setup, BMCs benefit from clear mandates, uniform operational
guidelines, and robust administrative support, which collectively enhance their capacity to
implement integrated watershed and basin-level conservation and management initiatives
effectively. NDRRMA similarly implements projects at the local level through a decentralized
and policy-aligned mechanism that ensures smooth fund flow and governance. Guided by the
DRRM Act and the National DRR Policy, NDRRMA works in close coordination with
municipalities, leveraging existing local disaster management committees and institutional
structures.
The need for strict implementation of the safeguard plans and deep engagement with
stakeholders is well acknowledged. The commitment to these systems is reinforced by the
inclusion of a dedicated safeguards officer on the PMU, who will be responsible for ensuring
tChoeuirn itmryp olewmneenrtsahtiiopn .
The High rating is well noted, as is the need for comprehensive stocktaking of climate risk
assessments and adaptation efforts at project inception. This will be a key first step in the
activities to introduce methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization as well as for
developing a methodology and SOPs for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in
vulnerable watersheds.
iTAP’s concern on varying budgetary absorption and institutional readiness of provinces is
well-noted. To address the concern, the project will support integration of project interventions
into existing mandates/responsibilities of institutions both at national and sub-national levels,
including through strengthened sub-national institutional capacity, enhanced fiscal and

--- Table 1 on Page 135 ---
The rating of High is noted.
Concerns for the longevity of environmental and social gains are well noted. While it is true that
these co-benefits are reliant on maintaining the collaboration and engagement of key
stakeholders in the long term, extensive efforts have been put in place to ensure that these
factors are fully integrated into the project design, minimising the risk of benefits not being
realised.
Initial commitments from IPPAN and NTB, although limited, represent the intension of these
entities to partner in the long term. Substantial upfront commitments from private partners are
challenging to secure upfront, but extensive engagements throughout the process have
indicated high confidence that long-term partnerships are feasible. IPPAN is also in the process
of finalizing its financial framework which will include mechanisms for fee collection from
hydropower companies to be used for development activities. Such arrangements will be
eNxepeldorse odf athnde fruerctihpeire ndetveloped through the PPP-linked activity.
The High rating is noted.
Regarding the limited discussion in the O&M plan on vertical coordination between national
entities and their decentralized sub-national entities: Although decentralization is relatively
new in Nepal, the Government of Nepal has already developed a streamlined and consistent
governance structure that ensures efficient decision-making and accountability. As part of the
institutional framework, the fund flow mechanisms to local level entities [Basin Offices (DHM),
Basin Management Centers (DoFSC)] are direct and reliable, minimizing bureaucratic delays
and enabling timely implementation of programs and activities. This integrated system
enhances coordination, resource management, and service delivery at the basin level. As part of
the established institutional setup, BMCs benefit from clear mandates, uniform operational
guidelines, and robust administrative support, which collectively enhance their capacity to
implement integrated watershed and basin-level conservation and management initiatives
effectively. NDRRMA similarly implements projects at the local level through a decentralized
and policy-aligned mechanism that ensures smooth fund flow and governance. Guided by the
DRRM Act and the National DRR Policy, NDRRMA works in close coordination with
municipalities, leveraging existing local disaster management committees and institutional
structures.
The need for strict implementation of the safeguard plans and deep engagement with
stakeholders is well acknowledged. The commitment to these systems is reinforced by the
inclusion of a dedicated safeguards officer on the PMU, who will be responsible for ensuring
tChoeuirn itmryp olewmneenrtsahtiiopn .
The High rating is well noted, as is the need for comprehensive stocktaking of climate risk
assessments and adaptation efforts at project inception. This will be a key first step in the
activities to introduce methods and tools for GLOF hazard prioritization as well as for
developing a methodology and SOPs for implementing integrated GLOF risk reduction in
vulnerable watersheds.
iTAP’s concern on varying budgetary absorption and institutional readiness of provinces is
well-noted. To address the concern, the project will support integration of project interventions

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 136
planning mechanism, institutionalization of climate mandates, vertical and horizontal
coordination and leveraging community-based approaches.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The Medium rating is noted.
iTAP’s concern on project’s ability to leverage private capital is well-noted. As noted in our
response under the section on “Sustainable Development Potential” there is expressed interest
of private sector entities to partner in the long term. The project will continue to engage with
these entities throughout implementation and explore opportunities for greater private sector
participation, including through further enhancement of the specific frameworks for PPPs
under sub-activity 1.2.3.
Regarding the point on indigenous knowledge, while there is no specific activity dedicated to
systematically capturing, validating and operationalizing knowledge, the close engagement with
indigenous communities and the organisations that represent them will create a platform for
indigenous knowledge to be captured in the project’s knowledge components. In particular, the
multi-hazard-based risk assessments that will inform local disaster risk management and will
be institutionalised include specific focus on community knowledge.
On AI/ML, while budget was not specifically set aside for this element in particular, the budget
for the EWS activities will be directed towards the most cost-efficient options. During
implementation, the capacity development support provided by technical EWS experts will
include consideration of AI/ML where it is deemed a feasible option. Budget under Activity 1.2
includes considerable consulting time from an EWS Expert, data specialists and a CTA to
support the development of EWS and related data systems, totalling over $760,000.
One caveat is that data scarcity in Nepal may well impact the extent of potential investments in
AI/ML in Nepal’s EWS at this time, with initial investments in improved observation and data
mOvaneargaelml reenmt carrekatsi nfgr oam pl atthfoer imn dfoerp AeIn adpepnrota Tcheecsh onviecra tli mAde.v isory Panel:
iTAPs recommendation of the project is greatly appreciated. The comments presented are all
well noted and will be accounted for by the AE and EE during implementation.
Regarding the final recommendations:
1. Private Sector engagement is a key element of the project’s scaling and sustainably
strategy. To this end, the need to identify, define and budget specific roles, instruments
and targets for private actors is fully acknowledged, with actions under Activity 1.2
specifically designed to fulfil this role. In particular, sub-activity 1.2.3 will formalise and
institutionalise long-term agreements to support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk
reduction in Nepal — with such agreements including details on the roles and financial
commitments of private actors across various investment strategies, including for the
maintenance and scaling of EWS and risk reduction measures.
2. As noted in the response above (Country Ownership), a comprehensive stocktaking
exercise is already intended under the actions to institutionalise GLOF EWS and risk
assessment processes. This approach includes the integration of community knowledge
and science-based assessments – to be done both through an initial stocktaking, as well
as through annual training and outreach programmes. Moreover, the activity includes
establishment and mobilising of youth groups as well as volunteer’s corps, increasing
community involvement in the early warning processes. The narrative for this activity
has been adjusted to more clearly articulate the inclusion of a stocktaking exercise and

--- Table 1 on Page 136 ---
planning mechanism, institutionalization of climate mandates, vertical and horizontal
coordination and leveraging community-based approaches.
Efficiency and effectiveness
The Medium rating is noted.
iTAP’s concern on project’s ability to leverage private capital is well-noted. As noted in our
response under the section on “Sustainable Development Potential” there is expressed interest
of private sector entities to partner in the long term. The project will continue to engage with
these entities throughout implementation and explore opportunities for greater private sector
participation, including through further enhancement of the specific frameworks for PPPs
under sub-activity 1.2.3.
Regarding the point on indigenous knowledge, while there is no specific activity dedicated to
systematically capturing, validating and operationalizing knowledge, the close engagement with
indigenous communities and the organisations that represent them will create a platform for
indigenous knowledge to be captured in the project’s knowledge components. In particular, the
multi-hazard-based risk assessments that will inform local disaster risk management and will
be institutionalised include specific focus on community knowledge.
On AI/ML, while budget was not specifically set aside for this element in particular, the budget
for the EWS activities will be directed towards the most cost-efficient options. During
implementation, the capacity development support provided by technical EWS experts will
include consideration of AI/ML where it is deemed a feasible option. Budget under Activity 1.2
includes considerable consulting time from an EWS Expert, data specialists and a CTA to
support the development of EWS and related data systems, totalling over $760,000.
One caveat is that data scarcity in Nepal may well impact the extent of potential investments in
AI/ML in Nepal’s EWS at this time, with initial investments in improved observation and data
mOvaneargaelml reenmt carrekatsi nfgr oam pl atthfoer imn dfoerp AeIn adpepnrota Tcheecsh onviecra tli mAde.v isory Panel:
iTAPs recommendation of the project is greatly appreciated. The comments presented are all
well noted and will be accounted for by the AE and EE during implementation.
Regarding the final recommendations:
1. Private Sector engagement is a key element of the project’s scaling and sustainably
strategy. To this end, the need to identify, define and budget specific roles, instruments
and targets for private actors is fully acknowledged, with actions under Activity 1.2
specifically designed to fulfil this role. In particular, sub-activity 1.2.3 will formalise and
institutionalise long-term agreements to support the sustainable uptake of GLOF risk
reduction in Nepal — with such agreements including details on the roles and financial
commitments of private actors across various investment strategies, including for the
maintenance and scaling of EWS and risk reduction measures.
2. As noted in the response above (Country Ownership), a comprehensive stocktaking
exercise is already intended under the actions to institutionalise GLOF EWS and risk
assessment processes. This approach includes the integration of community knowledge
and science-based assessments – to be done both through an initial stocktaking, as well
as through annual training and outreach programmes. Moreover, the activity includes
establishment and mobilising of youth groups as well as volunteer’s corps, increasing

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.14
Page 137
to clarify the how the community involvement in EW processes should include the
application of traditional knowledge.
3. The need for a detailed replication strategy is well noted. The key element of the project
design that has been envisioned to fulfil this role is the developminveenstt omf emnte tshtroadtse gaynd
tools for ongoing GLOF hazard prioritization. The definition of this activity has been
revised (para 53) to specifically include the development of an in
the prioritisation process, which will include defining the sequencing, lead agencies
roles and responsibilities, resource requirements and finance strategy for prioritised
lakes.
4. Consolidation of the O&M financing plan will be done at project inception. Led by the
PMU, with support from the CTA and other technical experts hired to support project
implementation, the O&M plan will be further refined to ensure that all parties are fully
aligned on the roles, responsibilities, scheduling and financial commitments to O&M, as
well as formalise the co-finance pledges. This will be further enhanced following the
finalisation of Activity 1.2 through the integration of PPPs into the O&M framework.

=== PAGE 138 ===
Gender documentation for FP272
Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion (GEDSI) Action Plan
Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial
river basins of Nepal
A Seven-year project proposal prepared for submission to Green Climate Fund
September 2021
Acronyms
CBO Community Based Organisation IDE International Development Enterprise
CC Climate Change IP Indigenous People
CF Community Forestry KU Kathmandu University
CFUG Community Forestry User Group LRPs Local Resource Persons
DHM Department of Hydrology and Meteorology MEDPA Micro-enterprise Development for Poverty Alleviation
DoFSC Department of Forests and Soil Conservation MoFE Ministry of Forests and Environment
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction MoEWRI Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
DSCWM Department of Soil Conservation and Watershed Management NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
DNPWC Department of National Park and Wildlife Conservation NTFP Non-Timber Forest Products
EWS Early Warning System SOP Standard Operating Procedure
GEDSI Gender Equality and Social Inclusion ToR Terms of Reference
GLOF Glacial Lake Outburst Floods ToT Training of Trainers
Page 1 of 14

=== PAGE 139 ===
Project’s expected results
• Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions.
GEDSI outcome statements of the project
a) Institutional level
• Climate Change induced disaster, watershed related government institutions at federal, provincial and municipality and ward levels1
and local level non-governmental organisations in the project areas have integrated GEDSI in their working strategies,
GLOF/DRR/CC tools and methods, and in provincial and municipality, ward level planning cycles, and monitored regularly.
b) Community level
• Poor and marginalized women and men are leading and managing at least 35% of the GLOF/DRR, Integrated Watershed
Management and Eco-system based related committees in the project areas
• Poor and marginalized women and men have increased resilience to climate change through improvement of their capacities and
accessed early warning system for climate smart agriculture, nature-based solutions, integrated watershed management, alternative
energy technologies and agroforestry-based tourism.
Risks:
• Costs of adopting or learning new Climate/DRR knowledge and technologies for women and marginalized groups – in terms of
increased labor, time, language.
• Commitment issues from the project and partners (priority - budget, quality of training and inputs - GESI might not be high priority)
1 Government Institutions: Mainly MoFE, MoEWRI , DHM, DoFSC, DNPWC, local governments.
Page 2 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 139 ---
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | Project’s expected results | 
 |  | 
 | • Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions. | 
 |  | 
 |  | 
 | GEDSI outcome statements of the project | 
 |  | 
 | a) Institutional level | 
 |  | 
 | • Climate Change induced disaster, watershed related government institutions at federal, provincial and municipality and ward levels1 | 
 | and local level non-governmental organisations in the project areas have integrated GEDSI in their working strategies, | 
 | GLOF/DRR/CC tools and methods, and in provincial and municipality, ward level planning cycles, and monitored regularly. | 
 |  | 
 | b) Community level | 
 |  | 
 | • Poor and marginalized women and men are leading and managing at least 35% of the GLOF/DRR, Integrated Watershed | 
 | Management and Eco-system based related committees in the project areas | 
 |  | 
 | • Poor and marginalized women and men have increased resilience to climate change through improvement of their capacities and | 
 | accessed early warning system for climate smart agriculture, nature-based solutions, integrated watershed management, alternative | 
 | energy technologies and agroforestry-based tourism. | 
 |  | 
 | Risks: | 
 | • Costs of adopting or learning new Climate/DRR knowledge and technologies for women and marginalized groups – in terms of | 
 | increased labor, time, language. | 
 | • Commitment issues from the project and partners (priority - budget, quality of training and inputs - GESI might not be high priority) | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 140 ===
Project’s expected outputs (1): Institutional and technical capacity strengthened to develop and integrate climate risk
and hazard information into planning and development.
Project GEDSI activities Baseline Target2 GEDSI indicators Timeline Responsible Estimated
activities budget for
GEDSI (USD)
Activity 1.1 i) Develop Practical • GEDSI working i.a) GEDSI Working i.a) GEDSI I – ii. Year Executing entity with 60,000
Strengthen GEDSI Working strategies in new strategy, developed integration, GBV, and 1 - 2 support from GESI
the Strategy for the rural for: the Project and 5 GRM-related training Expert and
knowledge proposed project municipalities rural municipalities conducted across 5 mandated ministries/
base and (Arun & Dudhkoshi and wards and 10 wards; municipalities (10 partners.
technical watersheds for 5 absent. No/ wards);
capacities Selected limited GEDSI i.b) Orientation
for Municipalities and budget and training on GEDSI i.b) GEDSI working
improved 10 wards) with skilled staffs in strategy and strategies and a
climate mandatory • GEDSI related integration, together Grievance Redress
research provisions for participatory tools with GBV and GRM Mechanism (GRM)
and risk training, policies, and methods. training for project are in place and
reduction monitoring Limited levels of staff and 5 functioning in at least
strategies. mechanism to participation of municipalities, 10 50% of the targeted
address gender- women and wards. wards and
based violence socially excluded municipalities, with a
(GBV); and groups in climate In Project areas: dedicated GRM Focal
establish grievance change decision • 40% women Point and grievance
redress making members in reporting/response
mechanisms committees CC/DRR- related mechanism
developed in committees established.
accordance with • 25% from socially
UNDP’s Social and excluded groups i.c) Increased
Environmental (i.e. highly participation of
Standards - marginalized IPs women (40%) and
2021(SES) Toolkit and Dalits); socially excluded
and Guidance • Women hold 40% groups (25%) in
Note. key decision-making climate change key
In the first year, prior to project implementation, GEDSI baseline data will collected and reviewed in the 3rd and final year of the project (mid-term and final
evaluation
2
Page 3 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 140 ---
 | Project’s expected outputs (1): Institutional and technical capacity strengthened to develop and integrate climate risk |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and hazard information into planning and development. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project
activities | Project | GEDSI activities | Baseline | Target2 | GEDSI indicators | Timeline | Responsible |  | Estimated | 
 | activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | budget for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | GEDSI (USD) | 
Activity 1.1
Strengthen
the
knowledge
base and
technical
capacities
for
improved
climate
research
and risk
reduction
strategies. |  | i) Develop Practical
GEDSI Working
Strategy for the
proposed project
(Arun & Dudhkoshi
watersheds for 5
Selected
Municipalities and
10 wards) with
mandatory
provisions for
training, policies,
monitoring
mechanism to
address gender-
based violence
(GBV); and
establish grievance
redress
mechanisms
developed in
accordance with
UNDP’s Social and
Environmental
Standards -
2021(SES) Toolkit
and Guidance
Note. | • GEDSI working
strategies in new
rural
municipalities
and wards
absent. No/
limited GEDSI
budget and
skilled staffs in
• GEDSI related
participatory tools
and methods.
Limited levels of
participation of
women and
socially excluded
groups in climate
change decision
making
committees | i.a) GEDSI Working
strategy, developed
for: the Project and 5
rural municipalities
and 10 wards;
i.b) Orientation
training on GEDSI
strategy and
integration, together
with GBV and GRM
training for project
staff and 5
municipalities, 10
wards.
In Project areas:
• 40% women
members in
CC/DRR- related
committees
• 25% from socially
excluded groups
(i.e. highly
marginalized IPs
and Dalits);
• Women hold 40%
key decision-making | i.a) GEDSI
integration, GBV, and
GRM-related training
conducted across 5
municipalities (10
wards);
i.b) GEDSI working
strategies and a
Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM)
are in place and
functioning in at least
50% of the targeted
wards and
municipalities, with a
dedicated GRM Focal
Point and grievance
reporting/response
mechanism
established.
i.c) Increased
participation of
women (40%) and
socially excluded
groups (25%) in
climate change key | I – ii. Year
1 - 2 | Executing entity with
support from GESI
Expert and
mandated ministries/
partners. | 60,000 |  | 

=== PAGE 141 ===
positions/or vital decision making
posts in committees. positions.
ii) Review from • Current Climate ii.a) Review at least 5 ii.a) Indicator: GEDSI ii) Year 1 - ii) Executing entity 20,000
GEDSI and DRR related key climate-Induced lens integrated into 2 with support from
perspectives, at assessment disaster-related key climate induced GESI Expert and
least 5 key climate methods, documents (e.g. disaster related mandated ministries/
risk reduction approaches, SOP; climate risk guidelines, partners.
related methods, guidelines, tools4 information products; training/extension
tools, guidelines, are not GEDSI climate-induced materials and
documents etc.3 responsive. No or hazard recording and documents
very limited management
dedicated budget database systems) ii.b) Indicator: at least
line for GEDSI. from GEDSI 15% of poor and
perspectives. marginalized women’s
groups in watershed
ii.b) ensure that at last areas leading and
10% of poor and implementing project’s
marginalized women’s and local
groups in 5 watershed government's multi-
areas lead and hazard risk reduction
implement the initiatives.
project’s and local
government's multi-
hazard risk reduction
initiatives.
Iii.a) ) Integrate • Technical and iii.a) GEDSI integrated iii.a) Project’s key iii) Year 1, iii) Executing entity 5 x 35,000
GEDSI into climate extension staffs; in project’s and government partners 2, 3, 4, 5 with support from = 175000
change Local resource government’s training at federal (4), and 5 GESI Expert and
disaster/hazard persons have very manuals and municipality, have mandated ministries/
3 Example: Review GLOF risk assessment and management approaches; watershed based multi-hazard methods and guidelines; risk and vulnerability
assessment methods and tools; C limate-induced hazard recording and management database system in DHM and other agencies, SOP for implementing
integrated GLOF risk reduction in vulnerable watersheds; climate risk information products etc.
Above mentioned document.
4
Page 4 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 141 ---
 |  |  | positions/or vital
posts in committees. | decision making
positions. |  |  | 
 | ii) Review from
GEDSI
perspectives, at
least 5 key climate
risk reduction
related methods,
tools, guidelines,
documents etc.3 | • Current Climate
and DRR related
assessment
methods,
approaches,
guidelines, tools4
are not GEDSI
responsive. No or
very limited
dedicated budget
line for GEDSI. | ii.a) Review at least 5
key climate-Induced
disaster-related
documents (e.g.
SOP; climate risk
information products;
climate-induced
hazard recording and
management
database systems)
from GEDSI
perspectives.
ii.b) ensure that at last
10% of poor and
marginalized women’s
groups in 5 watershed
areas lead and
implement the
project’s and local
government's multi-
hazard risk reduction
initiatives. | ii.a) Indicator: GEDSI
lens integrated into
key climate induced
disaster related
guidelines,
training/extension
materials and
documents
ii.b) Indicator: at least
15% of poor and
marginalized women’s
groups in watershed
areas leading and
implementing project’s
and local
government's multi-
hazard risk reduction
initiatives. | ii) Year 1 -
2 | ii) Executing entity
with support from
GESI Expert and
mandated ministries/
partners. | 20,000
 | Iii.a) ) Integrate
GEDSI into climate
change
disaster/hazard | • Technical and
extension staffs;
Local resource
persons have very | iii.a) GEDSI integrated
in project’s and
government’s training
manuals and | iii.a) Project’s key
government partners
at federal (4), and 5
municipality, have | iii) Year 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 | iii) Executing entity
with support from
GESI Expert and
mandated ministries/ | 5 x 35,000
= 175000

=== PAGE 142 ===
training manuals limited skills and trainings. integrated GEDSI in local government,
and organize knowledge annual work-plans local CSO/CBO/
participatory social/participatory Iii.b) 15 participatory with dedicated LRPs partners.
training for govt. methods and GEDSI awareness budgets, included
CSOs on approaches and trainings/orientations GEDSI results/
incorporating on integrating on integration in CC/ achievements in
GEDSI in CC, GEDSI in DRR and GLOF risk annual reports.
DRR, and GLOF CC/DRR. management and
risk management coaching for about 50
for key technical • Project’s and government and CSO Project level senior
staff from 4 government’s key partners in project GEDSI advisor hired.
ministries, 5 climate risk areas;
partner reduction methods,
organizations, and tools, guidelines Iii.c) Training for 20
20 male 'gender are not GEDSI male gender
champions' at responsive. champions;
provincial,
municipal, or ward
levels.5 Iii.d) Senior GEDSI
advisor for the project
recruited (NPSA 9).6
iv.a) )Conduct 3 • Limited social and iv.a) 3 ToTs, 5 days iv) A pool of trained iv) Year Executing entity with 50,000
ToT (5 days each) technical skills and each for 30 potential GEDSI-DRR/CC 1, 2, 3, 4, support from GESI
for 30 Local methods of federal, provincial and resource persons 5 Expert and
Resource extension staff and municipality level (75% women, 25% mandated ministries/
persons (LRPs) partners. trainers/ LRPs men, including at least local government,
/extension staff on • Limited awareness 50 marginalized IPs local CSO/CBO/
GEDSI awareness and understanding iv.b) 30-one day each and Dalits) is LRPs partners.
and integration in of the training for selected developed and
CC, DRR and CC/DRR/GLOF communities in Kosi demonstrates skill
GLOF: issues and their Basin (vulnerable application at local
Conduct 30 (I days roles in managing ward – targeting levels and within
each awareness it.
5 Male Gender Champions: invest in men to engage them in understating and promoting women’s leadership. Example: DHM, DoFSC, DNPWC, KU, local
DRR committees, municipalities/w ards etc.).
The GESI Expert will provide both strategic and implementation support to the project by reviewing, developing, and integrating GEDSI actions into the
project’s workplan. This role also includes periodic monitoring, coaching, and mentoring support to the project and government partners, as well as assisting
6
w ith GEDSI data collection, management, and its integration into planning processes.
Page 5 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 142 ---
 | training manuals
and organize
participatory
training for govt.
CSOs on
incorporating
GEDSI in CC,
DRR, and GLOF
risk management
for key technical
staff from 4
ministries, 5
partner
organizations, and
20 male 'gender
champions' at
provincial,
municipal, or ward
levels.5 | limited skills and
knowledge
social/participatory
methods and
approaches and
on integrating
GEDSI in
CC/DRR.
• Project’s and
government’s key
climate risk
reduction methods,
tools, guidelines
are not GEDSI
responsive. | trainings.
Iii.b) 15 participatory
GEDSI awareness
trainings/orientations
on integration in CC/
DRR and GLOF risk
management and
coaching for about 50
government and CSO
partners in project
areas;
Iii.c) Training for 20
male gender
champions;
Iii.d) Senior GEDSI
advisor for the project
recruited (NPSA 9).6 | integrated GEDSI in
annual work-plans
with dedicated
budgets, included
GEDSI results/
achievements in
annual reports.
Project level senior
GEDSI advisor hired. |  | local government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 
 | iv.a) )Conduct 3
ToT (5 days each)
for 30 Local
Resource
persons (LRPs)
/extension staff on
GEDSI awareness
and integration in
CC, DRR and
GLOF:
Conduct 30 (I days
each awareness | • Limited social and
technical skills and
methods of
extension staff and
partners.
• Limited awareness
and understanding
of the
CC/DRR/GLOF
issues and their
roles in managing
it. | iv.a) 3 ToTs, 5 days
each for 30 potential
federal, provincial and
municipality level
trainers/ LRPs
iv.b) 30-one day each
training for selected
communities in Kosi
Basin (vulnerable
ward – targeting | iv) A pool of trained
GEDSI-DRR/CC
resource persons
(75% women, 25%
men, including at least
50 marginalized IPs
and Dalits) is
developed and
demonstrates skill
application at local
levels and within | iv) Year
1, 2, 3, 4,
5 | Executing entity with
support from GESI
Expert and
mandated ministries/
local government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 50,000

=== PAGE 143 ===
trainings) for local vulnerable women, project/partner
communities in men in project area). organizations.
Koshi basin area.
v) Establish a • No coaching and v).Training/coaching, v.a) a structured and Year 1, 2, Executing entity with 32,500
regular and mentoring system recognition and budgeted coaching 3, 4, 5 support from GESI
systematic in place to support incentives for male and mentoring system Expert and
coaching/monitorin GEDSI trainings, gender champions to on GEDSI is mandated ministries/
g system on which limits their promote women’s established within the local government,
GEDSI within effectiveness and leadership in GLOF, project. local CSO/CBO/
project through impact. DRR, CC. LRPs partners.
recruitment of Coaching and v.b) Number of
senior level GEDSI mentoring provided to events/actions
advisor for the the project, supported by male
project; government staffs and GEDSI champions to
Provision for LRPs (4 times a year) promote women’s
incentives, leadership.
recognition for v.c) Climate/
male leadership to DRR/GLOF budget
promote women’s and resources
leadership/ roles. mobilized by women
leaders and
marginalized groups.
iv) Organize iv) Women, poor, iv. Organize a 3-day • % of highly Year Executing entity with 5*25*1500
Exposure visit for IPs, and in-country exposure marginalized 1,2,3,4,5. support from GESI =187,500
women and marginalized group visit on Climate Risk women, IPs and Expert and
marginalized lack exposure and Management annually Dalits who mandated ministries/
groups for learning excluded from climte for women, with at participate in the local government,
and sharing on change and DRR- least 60% from exposure visit local CSO/CBO/
Climate Risk related incentives marginalized, each year. LRPs partners.
Management and initiatives. vulnerable groups, • % of women, IPs
and Indigenous and Dalits who
Peoples (IPs), actively participate
engaging 25 in climate risk
participants/ year over management
a five-year period. initiatives and
influence
Page 6 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 143 ---
 | trainings) for local
communities in
Koshi basin area. |  | vulnerable women,
men in project area). | project/partner
organizations. |  |  | 
 | v) Establish a
regular and
systematic
coaching/monitorin
g system on
GEDSI within
project through
recruitment of
senior level GEDSI
advisor for the
project;
Provision for
incentives,
recognition for
male leadership to
promote women’s
leadership/ roles. | • No coaching and
mentoring system
in place to support
GEDSI trainings,
which limits their
effectiveness and
impact. | v).Training/coaching,
recognition and
incentives for male
gender champions to
promote women’s
leadership in GLOF,
DRR, CC.
Coaching and
mentoring provided to
the project,
government staffs and
LRPs (4 times a year) | v.a) a structured and
budgeted coaching
and mentoring system
on GEDSI is
established within the
project.
v.b) Number of
events/actions
supported by male
GEDSI champions to
promote women’s
leadership.
v.c) Climate/
DRR/GLOF budget
and resources
mobilized by women
leaders and
marginalized groups. | Year 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 | Executing entity with
support from GESI
Expert and
mandated ministries/
local government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 32,500
 | iv) Organize
Exposure visit for
women and
marginalized
groups for learning
and sharing on
Climate Risk
Management | iv) Women, poor,
IPs, and
marginalized group
lack exposure and
excluded from climte
change and DRR-
related incentives
and initiatives. | iv. Organize a 3-day
in-country exposure
visit on Climate Risk
Management annually
for women, with at
least 60% from
marginalized,
vulnerable groups,
and Indigenous
Peoples (IPs),
engaging 25
participants/ year over
a five-year period. | • % of highly
marginalized
women, IPs and
Dalits who
participate in the
exposure visit
each year.
• % of women, IPs
and Dalits who
actively participate
in climate risk
management
initiatives and
influence | Year
1,2,3,4,5. | Executing entity with
support from GESI
Expert and
mandated ministries/
local government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 5*25*1500
=187,500

=== PAGE 144 ===
decisions to
benefit them.
Activity 1.2 i)Integrate GEDSI I) New baseline - I)) 4 of glacial I)) number of i)) Year 2 - i)) Executing entity 4*20,000
Develop in a) Sector- GEDSI action plan watershed glaciated watersheds 6 with support from =80,000
policy and specific climate risk for GLOF/climate management plans (Arun and Dudhkosi) GESI Expert and
financial management change induced have integrated management mandated ministries/
mechanisms plans; and disasters absent. GEDSI. strategies and plans local government,
for ii) Development of have specific GEDSI local CSO/CBO/
sustainable long-term actions and budgets. LRPs partners.
GLOF and integrated
flood risk watershed
information management
services. strategy for
managing CC
induced disaster
risks for proposed
watersheds.
vi) Review vi) New baseline – vi) 5 institutional vi) Number of federal vi) Year 1 vi) Executing entity 5*8000
institutional institutional assessments carried and provincial - 3 with support from =40,000
arrangements and assessment from out and results agencies with GESI Expert and
capacity for GLOF GEDSI perspectives integrated in planning dedicated GEDSI Mandated Ministries/
from GEDSI absent. and budgeting, with focal points and Local Government.
perspectives. dedicated GEDSI gender
focal points at federal responsiveness
and provincial levels; integrated into
System of collecting, planning and
recording, using budgeting processes.
disaggregated GEDSI
data established
within sector in
selected wards and
municipalities.
Sub- Total (Output 1) 645,000
Page 7 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
 |  |  |  | decisions to
benefit them. |  |  | 
Activity 1.2
Develop
policy and
financial
mechanisms
for
sustainable
GLOF and
flood risk
information
services. | i)Integrate GEDSI
in a) Sector-
specific climate risk
management
plans; and
ii) Development of
long-term
integrated
watershed
management
strategy for
managing CC
induced disaster
risks for proposed
watersheds. | I) New baseline -
GEDSI action plan
for GLOF/climate
change induced
disasters absent. | I)) 4 of glacial
watershed
management plans
have integrated
GEDSI. | I)) number of
glaciated watersheds
(Arun and Dudhkosi)
management
strategies and plans
have specific GEDSI
actions and budgets. | i)) Year 2 -
6 | i)) Executing entity
with support from
GESI Expert and
mandated ministries/
local government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 4*20,000
=80,000
 | vi) Review
institutional
arrangements and
capacity for GLOF
from GEDSI
perspectives. | vi) New baseline –
institutional
assessment from
GEDSI perspectives
absent. | vi) 5 institutional
assessments carried
out and results
integrated in planning
and budgeting, with
dedicated GEDSI
focal points at federal
and provincial levels;
System of collecting,
recording, using
disaggregated GEDSI
data established
within sector in
selected wards and
municipalities. | vi) Number of federal
and provincial
agencies with
dedicated GEDSI
focal points and
gender
responsiveness
integrated into
planning and
budgeting processes. | vi) Year 1
- 3 | vi) Executing entity
with support from
GESI Expert and
Mandated Ministries/
Local Government. | 5*8000
=40,000
Sub- Total (Output 1) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 645,000

=== PAGE 145 ===
Project’s expected output 2: Improved hazard monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warning to
local communities and important economic sectors.
Project GEDSI activities Baseline Target GEDSI outcome Timeline Responsible Estimated
activities indicators budget
exclusively for
GEDSI (USD)
Activity 2.1 NOTE: GEDSI
Improve working
observation strategies/guidelines
network , capacity building
density in activities etc.
GLOF proposed for Output
watersheds to 1 will also address
strengthen the or cover Output 2
technical Activities 2.1
capacity of
DHM for the
monitoring of
climate hazard
and risk.
Activity 2.2 i) Improve EWS to i) Limited 60% of women, % of of women, i) Year 1 - 2 i) Executing 5*6000
Improve early strengthen adaptive awareness marginalized groups, marginalized entity with =30,000
warning capacity and among women, and PWDs in project groups, Indigenous support from
systems to response to GLOF marginalized areas demonstrate Peoples (IPs), and GESI Expert
strengthen and other climate groups, persons improved PWDs from GLOF- and Mandated
adaptive hazards, with focus with disabilities understanding of vulnerable areas Ministries/ Local
capacity and on GEDSI (PWD) regarding EWS take on leadership Government,
response to integration. EWS and their roles in Local
GLOFs and roles in At least 40 % community-based CSO/CBO/
other climate responding to representation of EWS committees, LRPs partners.
hazards. climate hazards. these groups from are LRPs; and
ii) Little or no GLOF-vulnerable have mobilized
representation of areas lead and CC/DRR
women, manage community - resources.
marginalized based EWS
groups IPs, committees, serve as
PWDs in the Local Resource
Page 8 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 145 ---
Project’s expected output 2: Improved hazard monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warning to
local communities and important economic sectors. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project
activities | GEDSI activities | Baseline | Target | GEDSI outcome
indicators | Timeline | Responsible |  | Estimated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | budget | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | exclusively for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | GEDSI (USD) | 
Activity 2.1
Improve
observation
network
density in
GLOF
watersheds to
strengthen the
technical
capacity of
DHM for the
monitoring of
climate hazard
and risk. | NOTE: GEDSI
working
strategies/guidelines
, capacity building
activities etc.
proposed for Output
1 will also address
or cover Output 2
Activities 2.1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 2.2
Improve early
warning
systems to
strengthen
adaptive
capacity and
response to
GLOFs and
other climate
hazards. | i) Improve EWS to
strengthen adaptive
capacity and
response to GLOF
and other climate
hazards, with focus
on GEDSI
integration. | i) Limited
awareness
among women,
marginalized
groups, persons
with disabilities
(PWD) regarding
EWS and their
roles in
responding to
climate hazards.
ii) Little or no
representation of
women,
marginalized
groups IPs,
PWDs in the | 60% of women,
marginalized groups,
and PWDs in project
areas demonstrate
improved
understanding of
EWS
At least 40 %
representation of
these groups from
GLOF-vulnerable
areas lead and
manage community -
based EWS
committees, serve as
Local Resource | % of of women,
marginalized
groups, Indigenous
Peoples (IPs), and
PWDs from GLOF-
vulnerable areas
take on leadership
roles in
community-based
EWS committees,
are LRPs; and
have mobilized
CC/DRR
resources. | i) Year 1 - 2 | i) Executing
entity with
support from
GESI Expert
and Mandated
Ministries/ Local
Government,
Local
CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 5*6000
=30,000 |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 145 ---
Project’s expected output 2: Improved hazard monitoring and the generation and dissemination of early warning to
local communities and important economic sectors.

--- Table 3 on Page 145 ---
Project
activities

--- Table 4 on Page 145 ---
GEDSI outcome
indicators

--- Table 5 on Page 145 ---
Responsible


=== PAGE 146 ===
design, Persons (LRPs)
implementation, training others, and
or monitoring of mobilize CC/DRR-
EWS. related resources and
equipment from the
project and local
government.
ii) Conduct site- ii) Baseline to be ii) Risk and ii) List of most ii) Year 1 - 3 ii) Executing 2*25,000
specific risk and established at vulnerability consider vulnerable entity with = 50,000
vulnerability project inception both historical, locations, families support from
assessments, situational and climate identified, shared GESI Expert
focusing on risks and within project and and mandated
historical vulnerabilities 10 with respective ministries/ local
discrimination + selected DRR committees government,
situational + climate municipalities in the of wards and local CSO/CBO/
vulnerabilities7 to two glaciated basins municipalities. LRPs partners.
identify most critical (i. e. Arun &
locations and Dudhkoshi).
populations for
targeted
interventions and
outreach.
iii) Organise and iii) New baseline iii) List of 31 women’s iii) iii) Year 2 - 6 iii) Executing 31*5000
strengthen local – no data and groups and highly Identification and entity GESI =155,000
interest groups in 10 most of the marginalized groups mapping of groups focal points,
municipality of the existing interest participating in including: women’s LRPs
project areas. groups, women’s project’s and groups, highly
Women’s groups groups are non- government’s marginalized,
and poor and highly functional. DRR/GLOF and CC indigenous
marginalized related programmes. peoples, people
indigenous, people with disabilities
with disability and and Dalit groups.
Dalit groups.
iv) Strengthen and iv) Government’s iv) At least 16 iv) Increase in iv) Year 2 - 6 iv) Executing 16*5000
collaborate with Pakhribas women’s groups and municipalities and entity - GESI =80,000
7 Historical discrimination and situational vulnerability mean communities who have been historically discriminated and disadvantaged due to religious, social, caste, laws and other reasons
resulting their vulnerable situations.
Page 9 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 146 ---
 |  | design,
implementation,
or monitoring of
EWS. | Persons (LRPs)
training others, and
mobilize CC/DRR-
related resources and
equipment from the
project and local
government. |  |  |  | 
 | ii) Conduct site-
specific risk and
vulnerability
assessments,
focusing on
historical
discrimination +
situational + climate
vulnerabilities7 to
identify most critical
locations and
populations for
targeted
interventions and
outreach. | ii) Baseline to be
established at
project inception | ii) Risk and
vulnerability consider
both historical,
situational and climate
risks and
vulnerabilities 10
selected
municipalities in the
two glaciated basins
(i. e. Arun &
Dudhkoshi). | ii) List of most
vulnerable
locations, families
identified, shared
within project and
with respective
DRR committees
of wards and
municipalities. | ii) Year 1 - 3 | ii) Executing
entity with
support from
GESI Expert
and mandated
ministries/ local
government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners. | 2*25,000
= 50,000
 | iii) Organise and
strengthen local
interest groups in 10
municipality of the
project areas.
Women’s groups
and poor and highly
marginalized
indigenous, people
with disability and
Dalit groups. | iii) New baseline
– no data and
most of the
existing interest
groups, women’s
groups are non-
functional. | iii) List of 31 women’s
groups and highly
marginalized groups
participating in
project’s and
government’s
DRR/GLOF and CC
related programmes. | iii)
Identification and
mapping of groups
including: women’s
groups, highly
marginalized,
indigenous
peoples, people
with disabilities
and Dalit groups. | iii) Year 2 - 6 | iii) Executing
entity GESI
focal points,
LRPs | 31*5000
=155,000
 | iv) Strengthen and
collaborate with | iv) Government’s
Pakhribas | iv) At least 16
women’s groups and | iv) Increase in
municipalities and | iv) Year 2 - 6 | iv) Executing
entity - GESI | 16*5000
=80,000

=== PAGE 147 ===
partner agencies in Agriculture highly marginalized cooperatives, Expert and
GEDSI and climate Research Centre groups leading women’s groups technical staffs
resilient livelihood has agriculture, agro/nature-based promoting of project and
expertise such as horticulture and tourism product women’s local DHM, DNPWC,
local chapters of livestock developed and products, including DOF; LRPs.
HIMAWANTI Nepal8, programmes with marketed. with support and
women led tested products e.g. 15 homestays run dedicated budget.
cooperatives etc. in which has by trained women and
the project areas. established serving/ selling
market; women organic products9; 15
led cooperatives women lead farmers
and HIMAWANTI or 16 nos. of women’s
have expertise groups collaborated
and networks on with expert agencies
organising such as Pakhribas
women and Agriculture Centre;
marginalized MEDEP, HELVATAS,
groups in IDE etc. practicing,
livelihoods and promoting/marketing
natural resource organic farming and
management. NTFPs; 31 of poor
women and
marginalized groups
that have mobilized
wards and project’s
resources (e.g.
equipment for
irrigation ponds; drip
irrigation, organic
fertilizers;
technologies for
spring water
conservation).
v) Invest in and v) Makalu v) 31 municipality and v) Number of v) Year 2 - 6 v) Executing v) Refer above.
collaborate with, municipality has a 8 marginalized municipalities or entity with
women lead programme to led/owned/ operated cooperatives support from
8 HIMAWANTI: Himalayan Grassroots Women’s Natural Resource Management Association, with grassroots women's networks in more than 40 districts.
9 Example: super-health foods; X X products branded as women’s organic products.
Page 10 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 147 ---
 | partner agencies in
GEDSI and climate
resilient livelihood
expertise such as
local chapters of
HIMAWANTI Nepal8,
women led
cooperatives etc. in
the project areas. | Agriculture
Research Centre
has agriculture,
horticulture and
livestock
programmes with
tested products
which has
established
market; women
led cooperatives
and HIMAWANTI
have expertise
and networks on
organising
women and
marginalized
groups in
livelihoods and
natural resource
management. | highly marginalized
groups leading
agro/nature-based
tourism product
developed and
marketed.
e.g. 15 homestays run
by trained women and
serving/ selling
organic products9; 15
women lead farmers
or 16 nos. of women’s
groups collaborated
with expert agencies
such as Pakhribas
Agriculture Centre;
MEDEP, HELVATAS,
IDE etc. practicing,
promoting/marketing
organic farming and
NTFPs; 31 of poor
women and
marginalized groups
that have mobilized
wards and project’s
resources (e.g.
equipment for
irrigation ponds; drip
irrigation, organic
fertilizers;
technologies for
spring water
conservation). | cooperatives,
women’s groups
promoting
women’s local
products, including
with support and
dedicated budget. |  | Expert and
technical staffs
of project and
DHM, DNPWC,
DOF; LRPs. | 
 | v) Invest in and
collaborate with,
women lead | v) Makalu
municipality has a
programme to | v) 31 municipality and
8 marginalized
led/owned/ operated | v) Number of
municipalities or
cooperatives | v) Year 2 - 6 | v) Executing
entity with
support from | v) Refer above.

=== PAGE 148 ===
cooperatives, promote agro- agroforestry/nature- collaborating with GESI Expert
partner institutions tourism with based tourism the Project and and mandated
with expertise to advisors. products. allocated ministries/ local
support GEDSI resources and Government,
responsive and 10% women and 5% provided training LRPs.
climate resilient highly marginalized on women’s
agroforestry/nature- people received leadership for
based tourism, employment agroforestry-based
alternative energy opportunity and or tourism skills
technologies, water income from enterprises.
management in 16 agroforestry/ nature-
potential municipality based tourism. Percentage of
(mountain, mid-hill women and highly
and tarai areas). marginalized
(Annex 1):10 people receiving
employment
opportunity or
income from
agroforestry/nature
-based tourism.
vi) Conduct vi) Poor/absent vi) 60% women vi) Outcome vi) Year 3-6 vi) GESI Expert, 6*25000
outcomes mapping outcome level leaders from highly oriented planning project and =150,000
to measure changes indicators and marginalized groups and monitoring sectoral
a) leadership monitoring have action plans and and system ministry’s
practices of women system to capture mobilized project & established. dedicated staffs
and discriminated immediate and other financial % of women and local
groups b) application intermediate level resources; leaders with action government;
of GEDSI knowledge outcomes. SMs, Municipality and plans, project & CSO partners.
and skills by SMs, c) their Partner other financial
application of institutions have a resources
GEDSI skills and robust GEDSI- mobilized;
10 Ideas for climate resilient technologies, practices, products and expert agencies for collaboration: Promote tested climate resilient technologies and
practices that reduce women’s w orkload and save time e.g. high-head drip irrigation; light -weight hand tillers, drought and flood resistant veg./crop seeds;
home gardens, etc. Identify local forest, wetland, agri-products and brand as local women’s niche products: e.g. Akbare chillies; NTFPs such as mountain
incense; pepper (Timur); bamboo straws; grass mats etc. Women owned and run Homestays serving healthy organic foods and products etc. Identify and
promote stall-fed livestock, horticulture and vegetable farming (Tested and promoted by Pakhribas Agriculture Centre and other agencies). Collaborate with
expert agencies to promote tested alternative energy and adaptation technologies and practices such as– solar cold stores, cook stoves; rain water
harvesting; spring water conservation etc.
Page 11 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 148 ---
 | cooperatives,
partner institutions
with expertise to
support GEDSI
responsive and
climate resilient
agroforestry/nature-
based tourism,
alternative energy
technologies, water
management in 16
potential municipality
(mountain, mid-hill
and tarai areas).
(Annex 1):10 | promote agro-
tourism with
advisors. | agroforestry/nature-
based tourism
products.
10% women and 5%
highly marginalized
people received
employment
opportunity and
income from
agroforestry/ nature-
based tourism. | collaborating with
the Project and
allocated
resources and
provided training
on women’s
leadership for
agroforestry-based
or tourism skills
enterprises.
Percentage of
women and highly
marginalized
people receiving
employment
opportunity or
income from
agroforestry/nature
-based tourism. |  | GESI Expert
and mandated
ministries/ local
Government,
LRPs. | 
 | vi) Conduct
outcomes mapping
to measure changes
a) leadership
practices of women
and discriminated
groups b) application
of GEDSI knowledge
and skills by SMs, c)
application of
GEDSI skills and | vi) Poor/absent
outcome level
indicators and
monitoring
system to capture
immediate and
intermediate level
outcomes. | vi) 60% women
leaders from highly
marginalized groups
have action plans and
mobilized project &
other financial
resources;
SMs, Municipality and
their Partner
institutions have a
robust GEDSI- | vi) Outcome
oriented planning
and monitoring
and system
established.
% of women
leaders with action
plans, project &
other financial
resources
mobilized; | vi) Year 3-6 | vi) GESI Expert,
project and
sectoral
ministry’s
dedicated staffs
and local
government;
CSO partners. | 6*25000
=150,000

=== PAGE 149 ===
knowledge by responsive M&E Gender expert
municipality and its system for their hired to support
partners institutions, respective institutions. the project.
and capture SMs.
intended and
unintended GEDSI
outcomes (mid term
and final).11
Sub-total (Output 2) 465,000
Project’s Expected Output 3: GLOF and flash flood risk and impact reduction measures implemented in priority
glacial lake watersheds.
Estimated
Project GEDSI outcome Responsible budget
GEDSI activities Baseline Target Timeline
Activities indicators exclusively for
GEDSI (USD)
Construction h) Organize inclusive Limited women, More than 40% Percentage of Year 2-6 Implementing 12,000
structural and community marginalized groups, women women, including Partner (DHM )
non structural consultations and IPs and PWDs particularly from from highly and RPs-
measures participatory currently highly marginalized DOFSC and
( Civil and Nbs/ workshops to participating in marginalized groups actively NDRRMA
Bioengineering engage women, community groups engaged participating in
) for the risk marginalized consukltations and and benefitted. community
reduction of groups, IPs and decision -making consulktations and
GLOF and PWDs to ensure proceses related to workshops on
flash flood. their needs, climate risk climate risk
vulnerabilities, and reduction. reduction.
local knowledge
are incorporated Number of
into the design activities based on
and the needs of
implementation of women and
marginalized
11 Outcome mapping for a) GEDSI knowledge and skills gained and applied by poor and marginalized women and men leaders on GLOF/EWS
management, Climate Risk/DRR etc.; Leadership practiced in DRR/CFUG/agroforestry-based tourism; and Income earned by poor and marginalized women
and men; b) confidence levels of, and application of GEDSI skills and knowledge by SMs; c) confidence level of, and application of GEDSI skills and
knowledge of targeted municipalities and their partner organizations.
Page 12 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
 | knowledge by
municipality and its
partners institutions,
and capture
intended and
unintended GEDSI
outcomes (mid term
and final).11 |  | responsive M&E
system for their
respective institutions. | Gender expert
hired to support
the project.
SMs. |  |  | 
Sub-total (Output 2) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 465,000

--- Table 2 on Page 149 ---
 | Project’s Expected Output 3: GLOF and flash flood risk and impact reduction measures implemented in priority |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | glacial lake watersheds. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project
Activities |  | GEDSI activities | Baseline | Target | GEDSI outcome
indicators | Timeline | Responsible |  | Estimated | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | budget | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | exclusively for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | GEDSI (USD) | 
Construction
structural and
non structural
measures
( Civil and Nbs/
Bioengineering
) for the risk
reduction of
GLOF and
flash flood. |  | h) Organize inclusive
community
consultations and
participatory
workshops to
engage women,
marginalized
groups, IPs and
PWDs to ensure
their needs,
vulnerabilities, and
local knowledge
are incorporated
into the design
and
implementation of | Limited women,
marginalized groups,
IPs and PWDs
currently
participating in
community
consukltations and
decision -making
proceses related to
climate risk
reduction. | More than 40%
women
particularly from
highly
marginalized
groups engaged
and benefitted. | Percentage of
women, including
from highly
marginalized
groups actively
participating in
community
consulktations and
workshops on
climate risk
reduction.
Number of
activities based on
the needs of
women and
marginalized | Year 2-6 | Implementing
Partner (DHM )
and RPs-
DOFSC and
NDRRMA | 12,000 |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 149 ---
Project
Activities

--- Table 4 on Page 149 ---
GEDSI outcome
indicators

--- Table 5 on Page 149 ---
Responsible


=== PAGE 150 ===
risk reduction groups integrated
measures. into the final
design and
implementation of
risk reduction
measures.
ii) Provide GEDSI- i) EWS related i) six group of i) Relevant i) Year 2 - 5 i) Executing 12*8000
responsive technical technical trainings women and poor government entity with =96,000
training for women, and initiatives do not Dalits, elderly, agencies (e.g., support from
marginalized grouos consider women and people with DHM, DoFSC, GESI Expert
and PWDS to marginalized groups disability, DNPWC, Local and mandated
enhance their as their primary marginalized and Government) have ministries/ local
participation in the stakeholder. poor and highly established government,
construction and marginalized IPs GEDSI-segregated local CSO/CBO/
maintenance of risk are trained in recording systems LRPs partners
reduction measures. EWS. And Six to track and report
GLOF risk data from gender,
management social, IPs, and
committees PWD perspectives.
iii) Conduct women ii) Marginalized ii) women and Number of ii) Year 2 - 5 ii) GESI Expert 6*13,000
leadership training women and men do men from both opportunities for and technical =78,000
for both not have access to advantaged and marginalized staffs of project
advantaged, and leadership training marginalized women and men to and DHM,
poor and highly programs in the groups each in participate in DSCWM, DoF,
marginalized GLOF-affected Arun and climate change - LRPs.
women and men areas. Dudhkosi basin related-decision
receive making in Arun
leadership and Dudhkosi
training and basin,
regular coaching .
ii) In project
areas:
40% members of
CC induced
disaster related
committees are
women;
Page 13 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 150 ---
 | risk reduction
measures. |  |  | groups integrated
into the final
design and
implementation of
risk reduction
measures. |  |  | 
 | ii) Provide GEDSI-
responsive technical
training for women,
marginalized grouos
and PWDS to
enhance their
participation in the
construction and
maintenance of risk
reduction measures. | i) EWS related
technical trainings
and initiatives do not
consider women and
marginalized groups
as their primary
stakeholder. | i) six group of
women and poor
Dalits, elderly,
people with
disability,
marginalized and
poor and highly
marginalized IPs
are trained in
EWS. And Six
GLOF risk
management
committees | i) Relevant
government
agencies (e.g.,
DHM, DoFSC,
DNPWC, Local
Government) have
established
GEDSI-segregated
recording systems
to track and report
data from gender,
social, IPs, and
PWD perspectives. | i) Year 2 - 5 | i) Executing
entity with
support from
GESI Expert
and mandated
ministries/ local
government,
local CSO/CBO/
LRPs partners | 12*8000
=96,000
 | iii) Conduct women
leadership training
for both
advantaged, and
poor and highly
marginalized
women and men | ii) Marginalized
women and men do
not have access to
leadership training
programs in the
GLOF-affected
areas. | ii) women and
men from both
advantaged and
marginalized
groups each in
Arun and
Dudhkosi basin
receive
leadership
training and
regular coaching .
ii) In project
areas:
40% members of
CC induced
disaster related
committees are
women; | Number of
opportunities for
marginalized
women and men to
participate in
climate change -
related-decision
making in Arun
and Dudhkosi
basin, | ii) Year 2 - 5 | ii) GESI Expert
and technical
staffs of project
and DHM,
DSCWM, DoF,
LRPs. | 6*13,000
=78,000

=== PAGE 151 ===
25% from socially
excluded groups
(i.e. highly
marginalized IPs
and Dalits); and
Women hold 40%
key decision-
making
positions/or vital
posts in
committees.
(Note:
Complements
activity 1.1.)
iv) Strengthen and iii) GEDSI iii) GEDSI % of municipality iii) Year 2 - 6 iii) Executing 15*4000=
collaborate with at desegregated data desegregated and ward-level entity - GESI 60,000
least 40% of collection system of data collection climate-induced Expert and
municipality and municipalities and system of 40% of disaster-related technical staffs
ward- level CC- CC induced disaster the total project’s committees that of project and
induced disaster- related committees, municipalities and have successfully DHM, DNPWC,
related committees CFUGs poor/ CC induced established DOF.
across the project absent. disaster related GEDSI-
to establish GEDSI committees disaggregated
desegregated data established. data collection
collection system iii) 15 system within the
in the Bipad Portal, municipalities and Bipad Portal,
enhancing 15 CFUGs have improving
reporting and adopted GEDSI reporting and
programming. desegregation programming.
data collection
and reporting
system.
Sub-total (Output 3) 246,000
Total Budget (Outputs 1, 2 and 3) 1,356,000
Human Resource (Regular) and Consulting Firm/ Consultants 417,462
Grand Total 1,773,462
Page 14 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
 |  |  |  | 25% from socially
excluded groups
(i.e. highly
marginalized IPs
and Dalits); and
Women hold 40%
key decision-
making
positions/or vital
posts in
committees.
(Note:
Complements
activity 1.1.) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | iv) Strengthen and
collaborate with at
least 40% of
municipality and
ward- level CC-
induced disaster-
related committees
across the project
to establish GEDSI
desegregated data
collection system
in the Bipad Portal,
enhancing
reporting and
programming. | iii) GEDSI
desegregated data
collection system of
municipalities and
CC induced disaster
related committees,
CFUGs poor/
absent. | iii) GEDSI
desegregated
data collection
system of 40% of
the total project’s
municipalities and
CC induced
disaster related
committees
established.
iii) 15
municipalities and
15 CFUGs have
adopted GEDSI
desegregation
data collection
and reporting
system. | % of municipality
and ward-level
climate-induced
disaster-related
committees that
have successfully
established
GEDSI-
disaggregated
data collection
system within the
Bipad Portal,
improving
reporting and
programming. | iii) Year 2 - 6 | iii) Executing
entity - GESI
Expert and
technical staffs
of project and
DHM, DNPWC,
DOF. |  | 15*4000=
60,000 |  | 
Sub-total (Output 3) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 246,000 |  | 
 | Total Budget (Outputs 1, 2 and 3) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,356,000 | 
 | Human Resource (Regular) and Consulting Firm/ Consultants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 417,462 | 
 | Grand Total |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,773,462 | 

=== PAGE 152 ===
Annex 1. Examples of organisations with GEDSI sensitive climate resilient best practices
Name of organisation Expertise and best practices
• AEPC (https://www.aepc.gov.np) • Alternative energy technologies – e.g. tested and highly subsidized
alternative energy technologies e/g/ improved cook stoves, biogas, solar etc.
• HELVETAS-Nepal (https://www.helvetas.org/en/switzerland/what-we- • Spring water conservation (recharge); Climate Smart Agriculture; agro-based
do/where-we-work/partner-countries/nepal) and ICIMOD enterprises etc.
(www.icimod.org)
• IDE (https://idenepal.org) • Alternative Technologies – water harvesting; climate smart agriculture etc.
• HVAP/IFAD; USAID • HVAP: Financial Literacy (package) for highly marginalized groups and
(https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/064716fc-003d-42fa- women (livestock and agro-forestry). Pro-poor Value Chains (e.g. Goat,
b837-e3521573f53f) Vegetable Farming; Cash Crops etc.); Seed funds/loans for the very poor.
• ASHA/IFAD (Adaptation for Small Holders in Hilly Areas Project) • ASHA: Adaptive/participatory Planning; Climate Resilient Livelihoods; natural
https://asha.gov.np resource and risk management;
• LIBIRD (www.libird.org) • Home Garden, seed banks, Climate Smart Agriculture
• MEDEP/MEDPA (https://medpa.moics.gov.np) • Trainings with skilled human resources/networks at local level – on small and
micro-enterprises
• NTNC (https://ntnc.org.np); Hariyoban/WWF/USAID • Nature-based, agro-tourism and alternative energy and agriculture
(https://www.wwfnepal.org//hariyobanprogram/) technologies and practices.
• Pakhribas Agriculture Center, Dhankuta • For tested agricultural, horticulture and livestock technologies, approaches
and seeds.
• PANI Project/USAID (https://www.usaid.gov/nepal/fact-sheets/paani- • Water Conservation technologies, practices
program)
• People (Energy and Environment Development Association PEEDA) • Climate smart alternative energy technologies – improved cook stoves; solar
(https://peeda.net) cold store.
• SAHAS (https://www.sahasnepal.org.np) • Climate Change related social mobilization methods and tools.
• UNDP/CDRMP (Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management • Community based risk management methods, approaches and tools; gender
Programme) responsive emergency preparedness and response; early recovery.
• USAID Nepal funded Hariyo Ban Project, Nepal. • Alternative energy technologies; landscape level community based
(https://www.wwfnepal.org//hariyobanprogram/) adaptation etc.
• Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource • Participatory GEDSI integration training, leadership training, GEDSI
Management (WOCAN) www.wocan.org assessments and W+ Standard to measure empowerment of women from
climate adaptation programmes/projects.
Page 15 of 14

--- Table 1 on Page 152 ---
Name of organisation | Expertise and best practices
• AEPC (https://www.aepc.gov.np) | • Alternative energy technologies – e.g. tested and highly subsidized
alternative energy technologies e/g/ improved cook stoves, biogas, solar etc.
• HELVETAS-Nepal (https://www.helvetas.org/en/switzerland/what-we-
do/where-we-work/partner-countries/nepal) and ICIMOD
(www.icimod.org) | • Spring water conservation (recharge); Climate Smart Agriculture; agro-based
enterprises etc.
• IDE (https://idenepal.org) | • Alternative Technologies – water harvesting; climate smart agriculture etc.
• HVAP/IFAD; USAID
(https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/064716fc-003d-42fa-
b837-e3521573f53f)
• ASHA/IFAD (Adaptation for Small Holders in Hilly Areas Project)
https://asha.gov.np | • HVAP: Financial Literacy (package) for highly marginalized groups and
women (livestock and agro-forestry). Pro-poor Value Chains (e.g. Goat,
Vegetable Farming; Cash Crops etc.); Seed funds/loans for the very poor.
• ASHA: Adaptive/participatory Planning; Climate Resilient Livelihoods; natural
resource and risk management;
• LIBIRD (www.libird.org) | • Home Garden, seed banks, Climate Smart Agriculture
• MEDEP/MEDPA (https://medpa.moics.gov.np) | • Trainings with skilled human resources/networks at local level – on small and
micro-enterprises
• NTNC (https://ntnc.org.np); Hariyoban/WWF/USAID
(https://www.wwfnepal.org//hariyobanprogram/) | • Nature-based, agro-tourism and alternative energy and agriculture
technologies and practices.
• Pakhribas Agriculture Center, Dhankuta | • For tested agricultural, horticulture and livestock technologies, approaches
and seeds.
• PANI Project/USAID (https://www.usaid.gov/nepal/fact-sheets/paani-
program) | • Water Conservation technologies, practices
• People (Energy and Environment Development Association PEEDA)
(https://peeda.net) | • Climate smart alternative energy technologies – improved cook stoves; solar
cold store.
• SAHAS (https://www.sahasnepal.org.np) | • Climate Change related social mobilization methods and tools.
• UNDP/CDRMP (Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management
Programme) | • Community based risk management methods, approaches and tools; gender
responsive emergency preparedness and response; early recovery.
• USAID Nepal funded Hariyo Ban Project, Nepal.
(https://www.wwfnepal.org//hariyobanprogram/) | • Alternative energy technologies; landscape level community based
adaptation etc.
• Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource
Management (WOCAN) www.wocan.org | • Participatory GEDSI integration training, leadership training, GEDSI
assessments and W+ Standard to measure empowerment of women from
climate adaptation programmes/projects.

=== PAGE 153 ===
Protecting Livelihoods and Assets at Risk from Climate Change
Induced Flooding in Glacial River Basins of Nepal
A five-year project proposal prepared for submission to the Green Climate Fund
Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion
Assessment
FINAL DRAFT REPORT
Submitted to
UNDP Country Office, Nepal
Submitted by
Dibya Devi Gurung
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Consultant

=== PAGE 154 ===
Kathmandu, Nepal
April 2020
Table of content
Acronyms .............................................................................................................................. 2
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 4
1. Background ...................................................................................................................... 10
2. Approaches and methodology .......................................................................................... 11
2.1 Analytical framework .............................................................................................................. 11
2.2 Data collection and analysis methods ..................................................................................... 13
2.3 Desk reviews ............................................................................................................................ 14
2.4 Field Data Collection ............................................................................................................... 15
2.5 Data analysis, drafting and report finalization ........................................................................ 16
3. Findings from desk reviews .............................................................................................. 18
3.1. Status of women in Nepal ...................................................................................................... 18
3.2 Gender and inclusion disaggregated data on climate change induced disaster .................... 19
3.3 Disaster, gender and inclusion ................................................................................................ 21
3.4 Importance of gender and inclusion in disaster ..................................................................... 23
3.5 National gender and inclusion policies/plans/DRM reports ................................................... 24
3.6 GCF gender frameworks and policies...................................................................................... 25
3.7 Reports on consultations for project formulation .................................................................. 26
4. Findings from fieldwork ................................................................................................... 28
4.1 Community level findings ........................................................................................................ 28
4.2 Institutional level findings ....................................................................................................... 35
5. Key Recommendations ..................................................................................................... 39
References ........................................................................................................................... 43
Appendices .......................................................................................................................... 46
Annex 1: Checklist for data collection ........................................................................................... 46
Annex 2: List of People Consulted (KIIs/IDIs, FGDs and consultations) ........................................ 47
2A. List of KIIs/IDIs ......................................................................................................................... 47
2B. FGDs and sharing workshop .................................................................................................... 50
2B1. Aggregated and disaggregated data on FGD participants .................................................... 50
2B2. List of participants in FGDs and sharing workshop (separately)........................................... 50
Annex 3: Sample of International and National Policies from GESI Perspectives ........................ 51
Page 1 of 51

=== PAGE 155 ===
Acronyms
ADS Agriculture Development Strategy
AEPC Alternative Energy Promotion Centre
ARC Agriculture Research Center, Pakhribas
CAPA Community Adaptation Plan of Action
CBOs Community Based Organizations
CC Climate Change
CEAPRED Center for Environmental and Agricultural Policy Research, Extension and
Development
CFUG Community Forest User Group
CRT Center for Rural Technology
CSO Civil Society Organization
DADO District Agriculture Development Office
DEOC District Emergency Operating Centre
DHM Department of Hydrology and Meteorology
DNF Dalit NGO Federation
DNPWC Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation
DoFSC Department of Forests and Soil Conservation
DoI Department of Irrigation
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
DSCWM Department of Soil Conservation and Watershed Management
DWSSO District Water Supply and Sanitation Office
EWS Early Warning System
FECOFUN Federation of Community Forestry User Groups
FGD Focused Group Discussion
GCF Green Climate Fund
GEF Global Environment Facility
GEDSI Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion
GESI Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
GLOF Glacial Lake Outbursts Floods
GoN Government of Nepal
HDI Human Development Index
HIMAWANTI The Himalayan Grassroots Women’s Natural Resource
Management Association
I/NGO International/Non-governmental Organization
ICIMOD International Center for Integrated Mountain Development
iDE International Development Enterprise
IP Indigenous People
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature
KCAP Kanchanjunga Conservation Area Project
KII Key Informant Interview
LAPA Local Adaptation Plans for Action
Page 2 of 51

=== PAGE 156 ===
LDRMP Local Disaster Risk Management Plan
LIBIRD Local Initiative for Biodiversity, Research, and Development
LRP Local Resource Person
MEDPA Micro-enterprise Development for Poverty Alleviation
MoEWRI Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
MoFE Ministry of Forest and Environment
NARC Nepal Agriculture Research Council
NEFIN Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities
NIWF National Indigenous Women’s Federation
PDGL Potentially Dangerous Glacial Lakes
PDNA Post Disaster Needs Assessment
PEEDA People Energy and Environment Development Association
PWD Persons with Disability
RRN Rural Reconstruction Nepal
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SFDRR Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
SGP Small Grants Programme
UNDP United National Development Programme
UNFCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
VDC Village Development Committee
WWF World Wide Fund For Nature
YAF Youth Alliance Forum
Page 3 of 51

=== PAGE 157 ===
Executive Summary
On the request of the Government of Nepal (GoN) a five-year project proposal on 'Protecting
Livelihoods and Assets at Risk from Climate Change Induced Flooding in Glacial River Basins of
Nepal' is being formulated by UNDP Nepal in collaboration with Ministry of Finance with
support from several other related ministries such as DHM/MoEWRI, MoFE/DoFSC, and
DNPWC for submission to the Green Climate Fund (GCF).
In this regard, a GCF proposal on glacial lake outburst flood (GLOF) and flood risk management
on protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from climate change induced flooding in glacial river
basins of Nepal is being prepared by bringing on board a technical team, organising
consultations with concerned ministries, CSO, NGOs, Private Sectors, local government,
indigenous peoples (IPs), local communities and networks, women groups, youth groups,
people with disabilities and highly marginalized groups directly affected by glacier/snow related
events, flooding and climate induced disasters in the glaciated basins. An inventory1 of Glacial
Lakes in the Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali River basins of Nepal has been prepared with technical
support from ICIMOD outlining 47 potentially dangerous glacial lakes (PDGL). As part of the
proposal preparation, two consultation reports have been prepared: "Indigenous Peoples
consultation to understand potential glacial lake outburst floods risks for safeguarding lives and
livelihoods (February 2018)" and "NGOs, CSOs, Private Sectors and Government consultation to
understand potential glacial lake outburst floods risks for safeguarding lives and livelihoods
(March 2018)."
The detailed scope of the project being formulated will vary in each watersheds or districts or
municipalities or wards in the three basins (Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali). Tentative interventions
envisioned are: Lake Lowering (selected lakes); Monitoring Stations for Hydro-met/climate
data/information; Early Warning System; and Community Based Climate Risk-Management
Initiatives including flood mitigation/risk reduction activities. As per the requirement of the
GCF, a Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion (GEDSI) Assessment and Action Plan were
to be prepared to have a well-articulated gender and inclusion components that build the
gender-responsive adaptation measures, incorporate gender related concerns in the context of
changing climate into a gender action plan, outlines a detailed gender-responsive results-based
management and plan to communicate the gender goals and results adequately. In this regard
the GESI assessments were carried out of: overall differential impact of climate change and
disaster risks and existing coping mechanisms and adaptive capacity on men and women in
general, children, elderly, persons with disabilities, the vulnerable and marginalized groups;
impact of the climate resilient development interventions and community-based adaptation
measures on the lives and livelihood of men and women, with particular emphasis on most
vulnerable and marginalized groups; role of women and marginalized groups in contributing
towards gender and inclusion responsive planning and building resilience at the community
level; policy gaps that need to be addressed to strengthen and foster mainstreaming gender
and inclusion into climate and disaster risk management interventions; and the
traditional/indigenous knowledge, if any, that makes them resilient to the climate change.
The analytical framework for the assessment took into consideration the critical GESI related
barriers and opportunities in climate change induced disaster risks such as GLOF identified from
1 Terms of Reference
Page 4 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 157 ---
The detailed scope of the project being formulated will vary in each watersheds or districts or
municipalities or wards in the three basins (Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali). Tentative interventions
envisioned are:

--- Table 2 on Page 157 ---
gender-responsive adaptation measures, incorporate gender related concerns in the context of
changing climate into a gender action plan, outlines a detailed gender-responsive results-based
management and plan to communicate the gender goals and results adequately

=== PAGE 158 ===
literature reviews of various studies in Nepal and elsewhere such as in Pakistan2 and Bhutan.3
A two-pronged approach was adopted to collect and analyze the data at the: i) Institutional
level (supply side), and ii) Community level (demand side) and from two dimensions: a)
Historical discrimination/exclusion and b) Situational vulnerability dimensions.
This framework guided the data collection, analysis, report writing, and development of the
GEDSI Action Plan.
The Kosi River Basin was selected for the field level primary data collection. In total 30 key
informant interviews (KIIs) and 9 focus group discussions (FGDs) participated by 148 people
were conducted. In addition, two multi-stakeholder national level workshops: a) sharing the
findings of the literature review and the field works was organised soliciting comments on the
GESI assessment report and generate inputs for the action plan; and b) validation workshop to
finalize the GESI assessment report and the action plan.
Key findings
The findings from desk reviews reveal that though there has been a trend observed in
managing GEDSI data post the 2015 Earthquake in Nepal, there is a lack of GEDSI disaggregated
data not only in terms of GLOF but in general climate change induced disasters.
Floods and landslides that occur every year cause highest loss of human lives and properties in
Nepal after fire. According to official data available in 2017-2018 disaster and loss of human
lives related to GLOF indicate that after fire, floods and landslides cause the highest loss of lives
in Nepal.4 Assessments and studies carried out in terms of earthquakes and floods in Nepal
indicate that women were among the most vulnerable of those affected by Nepal’s earthquake,
lack of gender sensitivity in post-disaster relief, improved understanding of the existing flood
early warning systems in Nepal, and needs to make early warning systems more effective and
responsive to the needs of vulnerable groups, and poor and highly marginalized women in
particular. In the case of differential impacts of floods or landslides socially, though there is a
lack of disaggregated data, after women and children, studies have indicated and as National
Federation of Disabled - Nepal (NFDN) also claims that people with disabilities are the most
vulnerable in disasters including CC induced disasters like GLOF.
Findings from field studies
Community level findings
1. Who are the most vulnerable to Climate Change Induced Disasters? Findings from the field
studies in the Kosin basin areas which can be genenralised as applicable to other basins of
the project indicated that poor Tarai and Hill Dalits who are both historically excluded and
situationally vulnerable are considered to be the most excluded and vulnerable people
followed by the poor and highly marginalized indigenous people (Adivasi Janajatis),
2 UNDP, June 2017.Gender assessment FP018: Scaling-up of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) risk reduction in
Northern Pakistan. Pakistan | UNDP | B.14/07
3 Choden, Tshering, 28 September 2017. Gender Assessment, FP050: Bhutan for life, Bhutan, WWF, B.18/04. Green
Climate Fund.
4 Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of Nepal, June 2019. Nepal Disaster Report 2019.
Page 5 of 51

=== PAGE 159 ===
particularly living along the river beds such as Majhi, Kumal, Botes, etc. The poor from the
indigenous peoples such as the Rais, Bhotes living in drought and disaster prone and
remote areas were also found to be extremely vulnerable and excluded from the disaster
and development resources and services. Within these different marginalized groups, their
women, single women, elderly, persons with disabilities (PWD), pregnant and lactating
mothers and children were considered to be even more vulnerable from climate and
natural disasters. The other climate and natural disaster related vulnerable groups are the
poor women, elderly people, people living with disabilities across all caste and ethnic
groups particularly living in geographically remote, disaster and drought prone areas.
2. Women’s “Time Poverty” has been since long identified, as an issue but is still not
recognized as a critical area for intervention in the context of development and climate
change. The changing climate and increases in the magnitude and frequency of natural
disasters have caused problems in water availability, agriculture, forest resources and
increased male outmigration. This has substantially increased poor and marginalized
women’s already high household workload and drudgery, food insecurity and loss of
income. The progress made by women in terms of their material conditions (well-being) and
social positions or status (leadership and decision-making) in society also seemed to be
declining, as women do not have the time to invest in their personal growth and
development. Due to the shortage of labour force, situation of single women is even more
critical.
3. Poor and historically excluded women and men particularly living in geographically remote
and disaster prone areas, mainly between 25 to 50 meters from the glacial lakes have
limited access, and benefits the least from development and climate change related
resources and opportunities. The poor outreach mechanisms, exclusive and centralized
planning systems, the near absence of functional platforms or forums to organise and
empower poor women and marginalized groups, together with the domination by local
politics and power have made accessing and benefiting from these resources challenging.
For example even if the local groups are strong, ultimately the politics and power decides
and authorises on who should be selected or represented or whose skills are recognized
etc.
4. The participation of women and men in local development planning, disaster risk
management and climate change related activities and decision-making are highly exclusive
and gendered. Their gender, political affiliation, geographic location, caste ethnicity, age,
economic status, literacy and ability plays a major role on, who participates, where or which
level they participate and how they participate.
5. Though the local planning process is required to include participation of and consultation
with the various stakeholders including the women, Dalit and indigenous peoples ,
knowledge, experiences and roles of poor and marginalized women, particularly indigenous
and Dalit women are not recognized and taken into account by the local political
representatives and planning and decision-making authorities. Their roles and contributions
thus remain largely invisible.
6. Disaster response mechanisms often fail to address the specific needs of women, children,
marginalized caste groups, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, and sexual
minorities, leaving them more vulnerable to violence and further marginalization. The
Page 6 of 51

=== PAGE 160 ===
capacity of disaster-related government and frontline workers to effectively incorporate
gender equality, disability and social inclusion (GEDSI) concerns into their recovery,
response and rehabilitation efforts is either absent or severely limited. Displacement,
disruption of family structures, and the breakdown of community protections create
conditions where these vulnerable groups are at an increased risk of sexual violence,
exploitation, trafficking, and harassment. Inadequate shelter, sanitation, and security in
disaster settings further expose these groups to abuse, while social stigma and
discrimination hinder survivors, particularly poor women and highly marginalized groups ,
from accessing critical support services.
Institutional level findings
7. The planning and decision-making processes seem to be largely controlled by the local
politics and power, side lining the participatory and inclusive processes and structures
established and promoted by the government and development agencies.
8. The impact of changing climate together with the transition from the past governance
system to the new federal system has brought both opportunities and challenges in
women’s leadership and empowerment processes. A large number of women have come
into leadership positions. However, women’s leadership and ability to voice and influence
decisions has been affected due to reasons such as decrease in dedicated human resources
and sectors/units, one-door policy for development interventions, and near absence of
active and organized platforms in the provinces and wards to mobilize and support women.
9. There seem to be awareness among the national and local level institutions about the need
to address GESI. However, knowledge and skills on social methods and approaches,
dedicated resources and investments on how to integrate GESI in the design and planning
cycle is limited.
10. The stakeholders and beneficiaries, particularly in disaster risk related planning, committees
and activities are largely considered as a monolithic group, with the notion that disasters
and hazards do not discriminate people. The historical exclusion and situational
vulnerabilities of the poor women and marginalized groups are not specifically considered,
which has made it difficult for them to compete for resources with the advantaged groups.
Recommendations
1. Establish a working definition of the primary stakeholders (women, marginalized and highly
groups, and vulnerable groups) for the project area, by contextualizing and categorising
according to their different and overlapping exclusions, vulnerabilities, roles/contributions
and intersectionality.5 For example: Historically Excluded + Situationally Vulnerable +
5 Means the interconnected nature of social categorizations such as race, class, and gender as they apply to a given
individual or group, regarded as creating overlapping and interdependent systems of discrimination or
disadvantage. Through an awareness of intersectionality and differences or discriminations can be acknowledged
and addressed.
Page 7 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 160 ---
individual or group, regarded as creating overlapping and interdependent systems of discrimination or
disadvantage. Through an awareness of intersectionality and differences or discriminations can be acknowledged
and addressed.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Climate Vulnerable = Most/Highly Vulnerable Group.
2. Identify and promote tested women-friendly and climate smart technologies and practices
both at household and farm levels, by developing partnership with specialized government
and non-governmental institutions/local resource persons, cooperatives, preferably
women-led cooperatives to reduce poor and marginalized women’s time poverty.
3. Strengthen existing or form new women and marginalized people’s groups (e.g. women, IPs
and highly marginalized IPs, Dalits, PWDs), and networks at local/community levels, and
organize them to participate, practice leadership, market forest/agricultural/eco-tourism
products, influence planning and decision-making processes, mobilize both project and local
development resources. Ensure systematic and formal linkages of these groups with the
local wards and municipalities and DRR/CC related committees' planning structures.
4. Increase poor and marginalized women and men’s6 income and employability by tapping
and linking with those institutions with experience, and with Value Chains (VCs), local
cooperatives, particularly women run cooperatives and Micro-enterprises (MEs) that are
already tested, established and successful in the Koshi Basin areas (e.g. link with MEDPA7
and Agriculture Research Centre (ARC)-Pakhribas and their groups and networks.
5. Ensure timely, transparent/complete, and easy to understand communication and
information to the poor women and highly marginalized groups on the project’s and local
government’s financial and technical resources related to development, disasters and
climate change.
6. Support the Monitoring Information System (MIS) of the project to capture gender and
inclusion outcomes and pilot the same in selected ward(s) to upscale it. GEDSI related
challenges and learning should feed back into the project’s annual planning and budgeting
process, and disseminated through publications and other knowledge-sharing events at
international, national, provincial and community levels.
7. Develop a simple working GEDSI in Climate Change strategy or a guideline for the project to
ensure systematic integration of GESI in the project cycle and pilot the same in selected
ward(s) to upscale it. The working strategy could be based on the findings and
recommendations of the three different studies conducted by UNDP for the preparation of
the proposal, such as the GESI assessment (2019), Indigenous People’s consultation report,
baseline study (2020) and the GoN’s Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) Strategy for
different sectors (Forestry, Agriculture, Ministry of Local Development).
6 Poor and Marginalized people/ groups should particularly include: historically marginalized groups e.g. Kumals,
Majhi, Bote, hill Dalits etc.); situationally vulnerable such as PWD, elderly, pregnant women, economically poor
families etc.
7 MEDPA (Micro-enterprise Development Programme for Poverty Alleviation) : MEDPA is the government
programme under the ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies with the objective of poverty alleviation in
Nepal through the micro enterprise development and employment generation. MEDPA mobilizes Micro Enterprise
Development Service Providers (MEDSPs) through the outsourcing from private sectors. The enterprise
development facilitators (EDF) are the pillar of this programme who provide MED services in the beneficiary’s
level.
Page 8 of 51

=== PAGE 162 ===
8. Develop a comprehensive capacity building package with adequate financial and human
resources/expertise, for the project’s staffs and its key and direct partners, both
government and CSOs at all three levels (federal, provincial, municipality/ward levels) to
enhance GESI integration in the regular planning, implementation and monitoring.
Page 9 of 51

=== PAGE 163 ===
1. Background
A five-year project proposal on 'Protecting Livelihoods and Assets at Risk from Climate Change
Induced Flooding in Glacial River Basins of Nepal' is being formulated by UNDP Nepal in
collaboration with Ministry of Finance - the National Designated Authority (NDA) for Green
Climate Fund (GCF), Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM)/Ministry of Water
Resources, Energy and Irrigation. UNDP as an Accredited Entity (AE) and the NDA was officially
requested by the Government of Nepal to assist in preparing the project proposal. Department
of Forests and Soil Conservation (DoFSC)/Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE),
Department of National Park and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC) and other relevant ministries
and departments are to also provide support in preparing and implementing the project.
In this regard, a project proposal has been submitted to GCF on glacial lake outburst flood
(GLOF) and flood risk management on protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from climate
change induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal. A technical team is working under the
guidance of UNDP and GCF Project Formulation Guiding Committee, led by Department of
Hydrology and Meteorology. Consultations have been carried out with sectoral ministries, CSO,
NGOs, Private Sectors, local government, indigenous peoples (IPs), local communities, women
groups, youth groups, persons with disabilities and other groups directly affected by
glacier/snow related events, flooding and climate induced disasters in the glaciated basins. The
detail dam breach modelling of 47 glacial lakes (from Nepal and neighbouring countries) have
been also carried out. In addition, two consultations have been conducted on "Indigenous
Peoples consultation to understand potential glacial lake outburst floods risks for safeguarding
lives and livelihoods (February 2018)" and "NGOs, CSOs, Private Sectors and Government
consultation to understand potential glacial lake outburst floods risks for safeguarding lives
and livelihoods
(March 2018)."
Similarly, Inventory of Glacial Lakes in the Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali River basins of Nepal has
been prepared by UNDP with technical support from ICIMOD. The report outlines, out of 47
potentially dangerous glacial lakes (PDGL), 42 lakes are in the Koshi basin, 3 are in the Gandaki
basin and 2 are in the Karnali basin. In addition, UNDP has undertaken dam breach modelling
of the selected PDGLs in Nepal and developed flood inundation hazards maps showing the
likely impacted areas. The project formulation has also developed a risk model, which
calculates the socio-economic impact of the glacial flooding for all selected PDGLs.
The detailed scope of the project will vary in each watershed/district/municipality/ward in
three basins of Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali. Tentative interventions envisioned are: GLOF Risk
Reduction such as Lake Lowering (selected lakes); Monitoring Stations for Hydro-met/climate
data/information; Early Warning System; and Community Based Climate Risk-Management
Initiatives including flood mitigation/risk reduction and climate resilient livelihood promotion
activities.
The GCF recognizes the importance of gender considerations in terms of project impacts and
access to climate funding, taking a gender-sensitive approach and encouraging involvement of
relevant stakeholders, including vulnerable groups and addressing gender aspects. In this
regard, further to the project formulation process UNDP sought inputs of a GESI Expert to
ensure that the project has well-articulated gender and inclusion components which build the
Page 10 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 163 ---
The detailed scope of the project will vary in each watershed/district/municipality/ward in
three basins of Koshi, Gandaki and Karnali. Tentative interventions envisioned are: GLOF Risk
Reduction such as

=== PAGE 164 ===
gender-responsive adaptation measures, outlines a detailed gender-responsive results-based
management and plan to communicate the gender goals and results adequately.
In order to input to the preparation of the gender and inclusion components, assessments were
carried out of:
• Overall differential impact of climate change and disaster risks and existing coping
mechanisms and adaptive capacity on men and women in general, children, elderly,
persons with disabilities, the vulnerable and marginalized groups;
• Impact of the climate resilient development interventions and community-based
adaptation measures on the lives and livelihood of men and women and with particular
emphasis of most vulnerable and marginalized groups;
• Role of women and marginalized groups in contributing towards gender and inclusion
responsive planning and building resilience at the community level; d) policy gaps that need
to be addressed to strengthen and foster mainstreaming gender and inclusion into climate
and disaster risk management interventions; and
• Of the traditional/indigenous knowledge if any that makes them resilient to the climate
change.
2. Approaches and methodology
2.1 Analytical framework
The analytical framework for the assessment took into consideration some of the critical GESI
related barriers and opportunities in GLOF and Climate Change identified from literature
reviews of various studies in Nepal8 and elsewhere, such as in India9 and Bhutan10. Within this
context, the following parameters of the analytical frameworks guided the data collection,
analysis, report writing, and development of the GESI Action Plan.
A two-pronged approach was adopted to collect and analyze the data.
A. Institutional level (supply side): At the institutional level, the focus was on understanding
the capacities (GEDSI-GLOF/CC induced disaster related knowledge, skills), commitments and
accountability (budget/plans, policies/strategies, human resources, attitudes etc.) of various CC
induced disaster and GLOF risk reduction and management -related institutions viz.
government and non-government institutions at federal, district and local levels and local
private service providers and local committees.
8 Gurung DD, Bisht S (2014). Women’s empowerment at the frontline of adaptation: Emerging issues, adaptive
practices, and priorities in Nepal. ICIMOD Working paper 2014/3. Kathmandu: ICIMOD.
9 UNDP India, January 2019. Gender Action Plan, Funding Proposal, FP084: Enhancing climate resilience of India’s
coastal communities, B.21/15.
10 Choden, Tshering, September 2017. Gender Assessment, FP050: Bhutan for life, Bhutan, WWF, B.18/04. Green
Climate Fund.
Page 11 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 164 ---
gender-responsive adaptation measures, outlines a detailed gender-responsive results-based
management and plan to communicate the gender goals and results adequately

=== PAGE 165 ===
B. Community level (demand side): At the community level, the focus was on assessing the
engagement/participation, access to, and control over resources and decision-making of
women and men of diverse socio-economic groups. Their engagement (or non-engagement)
and access were assessed in five livelihoods dimensions viz. social capital, financial capital,
human capital, physical capital, and natural capital. The analysis also included an assessment of
the material conditions11 and social positions12 of different groups of women and men to
generate their GESI/CC induced disaster such as GLOF related needs, priorities and as well as
their capacities to deal with the impacts of climate change, hazards and disasters. The
community level assessment included categorization and disaggregation of the community
based on their gender, including considerations of intersecting categories of identity such as
their social status, caste, ethnicity, marital status, age, disability, geographical locations etc.).
These categorisation and disaggregation of the community were analysed from two
dimensions, viz, a) historical discrimination/exclusion; and b) situational vulnerability. Women
and men who are impacted from both these dimensions were considered the most vulnerable.
See Table 1 below.
Table 1: Analytical Framework - Two Pronged Approach
A. Institutional Level B. Community Level
• Capacity – e.g. GEDSI integration in • 13Historically excluded + Situational vulnerability +
climate change induced disaster such Climate Vulnerable = Most/Highly Vulnerable group
as GLOF risk reduction and
management related knowledge and • Engagement/Participation or non-
skills. participation/engagement:
- Which level (federal, district and local
• Institutional Commitments for GEDSI levels/household levels – particularly roles and
– e.g. GEDSI related provisions in - responsibilities in decision-making, leadership,
policies, strategies, guidelines, human planning, household work/decisions etc.).
resources/expertise, budget. - Which areas/types (e.g. valuable, non-
valuable/or voluntary – livelihoods activities;
• Accountability for GEDSI – e.g. GEDSI technical).
in planning and M&E with specific
- Needs and priorities.
change related indicators etc.
• Access to and control over resources/ decision-
making: Who have or do not have access and
control (particularly focusing on vulnerable and
marginalized women and men across different
socio-economic groups):
11 Material Conditions are the conditions and needs related to the roles women and men play in society.
Examples of activities that address the material conditions include reducing household workload of women;
increasing income from forest products; improving technical knowledge and skills in forest management; etc.
Material conditions do not address the subordinate position of women in the society.
12 Social Positions are the needs that question the traditional roles that women and men play in society. It is a
response to the inequalities in decision-making position and long-term benefits (Moser, C: 1989). Activities that
address and enhance the social positions include improving access to productive/valuable forest resources; taking
up leadership roles by women and vulnerable groups, acquiring equal opportunities in forest employment, gaining
rights to participate in decisions about forest management etc.
13 Historical excluded – based on gender, caste, ethnicity, LGBT language or location that is transmitted from
generations; Situational Vulnerability – these groups can be vulnerable but not necessarily excluded – based on
age (elderly), PWD, HIV, Children, earthquake affected etc.
Page 12 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 165 ---
 | A. Institutional Level |  |  | B. Community Level | 
• Capacity – e.g. GEDSI integration in
climate change induced disaster such
as GLOF risk reduction and
management related knowledge and
skills.
• Institutional Commitments for GEDSI
– e.g. GEDSI related provisions in -
policies, strategies, guidelines, human
resources/expertise, budget.
• Accountability for GEDSI – e.g. GEDSI
in planning and M&E with specific
change related indicators etc. |  |  | • 13Historically excluded + Situational vulnerability +
Climate Vulnerable = Most/Highly Vulnerable group
• Engagement/Participation or non-
participation/engagement:
- Which level (federal, district and local
levels/household levels – particularly roles and
responsibilities in decision-making, leadership,
planning, household work/decisions etc.).
- Which areas/types (e.g. valuable, non-
valuable/or voluntary – livelihoods activities;
technical).
- Needs and priorities.
• Access to and control over resources/ decision-
making: Who have or do not have access and
control (particularly focusing on vulnerable and
marginalized women and men across different
socio-economic groups): |  | 

=== PAGE 166 ===
- Networks, groups, representations etc. (Social
Capital).
- Access to finance/financial institutions, groups,
grants/seed money etc. (Financial Capital).
- Trainings (technical and social), information
etc. (Human Capital).
- Communication, equipment, infrastructure etc.
(Physical Capital).
- Agriculture, community based forestry mgt.
resources etc. (Natural Capital).
- Needs and priorities.
• CC and DRR-related Local knowledge and
Capacities:
- Indigenous/traditional knowledge of women
and men to be resilient to CC induced hazards/
disaster.
2.2 Data collection and analysis methods
Consultative and participatory approaches were used to engage a wide and inclusive14 range of
cross-sectoral constituencies and stakeholders at federal, district and local levels. The
assessments combined several participatory methods, such as activity profile, access and
control profile, and elements of the 9-box framework for institutional analysis etc. to capture
the community and institutional level GESI/ GEDSI-related gaps and opportunities.
9 Box - Organizational framework
TECHNICAL Policies and Actions Tasks and Expertise
Responsibilities
DIMENSION The guiding policy/ Acts
and its operationalization The way people are The number of staff and
in action plans, positioned and the way the requirements and
strategies/approaches, and tasks and responsibilities conditions to allow them
M&E systems for gender are allocated and related to work, such as job
and climate change to each other through description, appraisal,
induced disaster risk procedures, information facilities, training etc.
reduction and and gender and climate
management. coordinating systems for change induced disaster
gender and climate change risk reduction and
induced disaster risk management
reduction and
management
14 Inclusive: Attention was given in selecting interviewees from: a) different socio-economic groups of women and
men at the community level (project area) and different geographical locations; b) at the institutional level,
women and men from concerned govt., non-governmental sectors and agencies at federal, district and local levels
and local private service providers and local committees will be interviewed.
Page 13 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 166 ---
 | - Networks, groups, representations etc. (Social
Capital).
- Access to finance/financial institutions, groups,
grants/seed money etc. (Financial Capital).
- Trainings (technical and social), information
etc. (Human Capital).
- Communication, equipment, infrastructure etc.
(Physical Capital).
- Agriculture, community based forestry mgt.
resources etc. (Natural Capital).
- Needs and priorities.
• CC and DRR-related Local knowledge and
Capacities:
- Indigenous/traditional knowledge of women
and men to be resilient to CC induced hazards/
disaster.

--- Table 2 on Page 166 ---
TECHNICAL
DIMENSION | Policies and Actions
The guiding policy/ Acts
and its operationalization
in action plans,
strategies/approaches, and
M&E systems for gender
and climate change
induced disaster risk
reduction and
management. | Tasks and
Responsibilities
The way people are
positioned and the way
tasks and responsibilities
are allocated and related
to each other through
procedures, information
and
coordinating systems for
gender and climate change
induced disaster risk
reduction and
management | Expertise
The number of staff and
the requirements and
conditions to allow them
to work, such as job
description, appraisal,
facilities, training etc.
gender and climate
change induced disaster
risk reduction and
management

--- Table 3 on Page 166 ---
TECHNICAL

DIMENSION



=== PAGE 167 ===
POLITICAL Policy Influence Decision Making Room for Innovation
DIMENSION
The way and extent The patterns of formal and The space and incentives
management, people from informal decision making provided to staff to give
within the organization and processes. The way shape to their work, such
people from outside the diversity and conflicts are as rewards, career
organization influence dealt with. possibilities, variety in
policy and the running of working styles
the organization
CULTURAL Norms/Values Cooperation Attitudes
DIMENSION
The symbols, rituals and The way the work relations The way staff feels and
traditions. The norms and between staff and with thinks about their work,
values underlying the outsiders are organized, the working environment
running of the organization such as working in teams, and about other
and the behaviour of the networking. The norms and (categories of)
staff. The social and values underlying these employees. The extent to
economic standards set arrangements which staff stereotype
other staff. The extent to
which staff identifies
him/herself with the
culture of the
organization
The field site for data collection was in the Koshi river basin area. The main reasons for
selecting and proposing the Koshi river basin was because as per the ICIMOD study out of 47
PDGLs, 42 lakes were in the Koshi glacial lakes; the proposed project’s all the three key
interventions (Livelihoods, Early Warning System and Monitoring Stations) were concentrated
in the Koshi basin; and other GCF accredited entities such as the IUCN were not located in Koshi
basin but in the Gandaki river basin and UNDP project can avoid duplication. The specific sites
for data collection within the Koshi basin were selected in consultation with UNDP and its
government partners. The two main criteria for selecting the sites within the Koshi river basin
were: 1) Up to 100 kilometres downstream from the critical glacial lakes and other critical
areas down-steam; and 2) Highly vulnerable (critical) areas with high population density where
it is possible to capture information from diverse groups of people that are critically affected.
2.3 Desk reviews
Desk reviews of various documents were carried out, which broadly included the following.
• Concept Note (submitted to GCF);
• GESI strategies of various related ministries;
• Government of Nepal's Climate Change Policy 2019;
• Approved GCF-Gender Assessment and Action Plans of other countries such as India,
Bhutan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Tajikstan, Cambodia, Kenya, Gautemala and Zimbabwe.
• Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan (2020 - 2023);
• Gender Policy for Green Climate Fund (Annex XIII);
• GCF/UN-Women's practical manual to support the integration of gender equality in climate
change interventions and climate finance;
Page 14 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 167 ---
POLITICAL
DIMENSION | Policy Influence
The way and extent
management, people from
within the organization and
people from outside the
organization influence
policy and the running of
the organization | Decision Making
The patterns of formal and
informal decision making
processes. The way
diversity and conflicts are
dealt with. | Room for Innovation
The space and incentives
provided to staff to give
shape to their work, such
as rewards, career
possibilities, variety in
working styles
CULTURAL
DIMENSION | Norms/Values
The symbols, rituals and
traditions. The norms and
values underlying the
running of the organization
and the behaviour of the
staff. The social and
economic standards set | Cooperation
The way the work relations
between staff and with
outsiders are organized,
such as working in teams,
networking. The norms and
values underlying these
arrangements | Attitudes
The way staff feels and
thinks about their work,
the working environment
and about other
(categories of)
employees. The extent to
which staff stereotype
other staff. The extent to
which staff identifies
him/herself with the
culture of the
organization

--- Table 2 on Page 167 ---
POLITICAL
DIMENSION



--- Table 3 on Page 167 ---
CULTURAL
DIMENSION



=== PAGE 168 ===
• Nepal Disaster Report 2019
• Other GESI-related assessment and mainstreaming reports, studies to identify good
practices and lessons learned as well as to identify organizations, partners and stakeholders
(government, CSOs, NGOs, and private sector organizations) that have supported socially
inclusive and gender-responsive national policy processes, consultations and engagement
efforts.
For details see the References section.
2.4 Field Data Collection
Following steps were followed to conduct the field data collection.
• Preparatory/consultative meetings were held with UNDP CO-Nepal, their government
partners, UNDP Asia Regional Office and with the proposal development team members
(through Skype and face-to face meetings). This resulted in agreement on the analytical
framework, methods, key activities and timelines for the fieldwork, and to identify
fieldwork sites and stakeholders for federal, district and local level institutions and
community level interviews.
• Data collection was done through key informant interviews (KIIs), Focus Group Discussions
(FGDs), and observations with key GLOF/CC/DRR-related personnel/members, partners and
community people (government, NGOs, federations/networks/groups, diverse community
people) at federal, district and local community levels. See Annex 1 for the checklist used.
A total of 30 KIIs/ IDIs were conducted. Gender equality and social inclusion disaggregated
data of the KIIs/ IDIs were: 19 (63%) male; 11 (37%) female; 11 (37%) Brhaman/ Chettri; 3
(50%) Dalits, 15 (50%) Janajati; and 1 (3%) Others. And in the FGDs and sharing workshops
the participants were 208. Of the total male wa 97 (46%) and female 111 (54%). Social
inclusion wise Brahman/Chettri were 44 (21%); Dalit 31 (15%); Janajati 100 (48%); and
—
Others 6 (3%). See Annex 2A for the number of KIIs/DDIs and Annex 2B1 for aggregated
and disaggregated data on FGDs and Annex 2B2 for the complete list of people consulted.
Women organisations and organisations representing women included in the data
collection at the national, district and local levels were:
1. HIMAWANTI – national and district level
2. Simale FUG – local municipality level
3. Khandbar District Forest Office – local level
4. Makalu Rural Municiplaity – local ward level
5. Arund Rural Municipality – local ward level
6. Pakhribash Agriculture Research Center - district level
7. ICIMOD, RUPANTARAN, Practical Action, IUCN, FECOFUN, Forest Action – national level
8. DNPWC, DHM, DoFSC, MoFE, MoFAGA – national level (these are government
organization and as per the constitution – GESI is a key component).
See Annex 2A, Annex 2B1 and 2B2 for details.
• Federal level: Interviews and workshops with GLOF/CC/DRR-related key
members/personnel from GoN, viz. GCF Project Formulation Technical-Advisory Committee
”members from DHM, MoFE, DNPWC, DoFSC, UNDP and UNDP Projects with their
respective gender focal points; IPs, Women and Dalit-related networks and federations;
Page 15 of 51

=== PAGE 169 ===
concerned I/NGOs. See Annex 2A and 2B2.
• District level: Interviews/workshops with GLOF/CC/DRR-related key members/personnel
from government and non-government agencies from the districts, including local
government officials from concerned line agencies/sectors local representatives (women
and men), federations and networks of women, Dalits, youth, IP/Adivasi-Janajati; Sectoral
networks (e.g. Forestry, Agriculture; Water; energy etc.). See Annex 2B1 and 2B2.
• Community level: Field level consultations were carried out with women and men from
diverse groups (caste/ethnicity, marital status, disability, geographical location etc.). Efforts
were made to interview women and men who are either non-members of the local groups
or do not participate in any of the committee meetings and initiatives. See Annex 2B1 and
2B2.
Methods of data collection were as follows. See Annex 2A, 2B1 and 2B2.
• National/Federal level: National level interviews and two participatory workshops were
conducted after the fieldwork, after sharing highlights from the field analysis, to generate
additional information and recommendations for the GESI Action Plan.
• KIIs and DDIs were conducted with selected individuals that represented various interest
groups (based on gender, caste-ethnicity, marital status, disability, geographic locations,
different positions/levels in the committees/groups etc.). The purpose of these interviews
was to conduct “deep-dives” that would focus on generating clearer understanding of the
specific gaps and opportunities of the different groups of women and men which otherwise
may not be revealed in a group setting.
• FGDs were conducted with different stakeholder interest groups based on gender,
caste/ethnicity, marital status, disability, geographic location (within the village). Women’s
groups, community forestry group, youth groups, mixed groups (men and women of all age
groups, castes/ethnicity) were also consulted. Different participatory tools, such as the
Situation Analysis, which includes an Activity Profile, Access and Control Profile, and
Influencing Factors were used to facilitate the discussions.
• Participatory observations were conducted by the consultant by either staying in the
respective villages or by spending substantial amount of time in the villages during the
fieldwork.
2.5 Data analysis, drafting and report finalization
The consultant developed the final GESI assessment report based on the analysis of the
information and knowledge stemming from the desk reviews, field data collections, workshops
and other consultations. The finalization of the report was based on the following deliverables.
1) First Draft Report: A detailed draft report was drafted for reviews by the consultant.
2) Participatory GESI-Action Plan development workshop: One-day workshop was conducted
with the concerned UNDP staffs, government, and non-governmental partners (30
Page 16 of 51

=== PAGE 170 ===
participants. See Annex 2B2 Page 37. The main purpose of the workshop was to develop a
draft GESI Action Plan based on the key problems and opportunities generated from the
field assessments and other consultations.
3) Second Draft Report: A second draft report incorporated and addressed comments
received from the UNDP Nepal, UNDP Regional Office, and government partners.
4) Validation Workshop: A validation workshop will be organized with UNDP and key
government partners and other organizations and stakeholders working on GESI/Climate
Change Induced Disasters. The purpose of the workshop will be to share the draft GESI
assessment report and the action plan and obtain comments and inputs to finalize these
reports.
5) Finalization of the Report and GESI Action Plan: After the validation workshop the second
draft report was revised based on the feedback received.
Page 17 of 51

=== PAGE 171 ===
3. Findings from desk reviews
3.1. Status of women in Nepal
With the Human Development Index (HDI) ranking of 147, Nepal falls in middle human
development group, with the Gender Development Index value of 0.897. The HDI of women is
0.549. Life expectancy of women at birth is 71.9 years. Estimated gross national income per
capita of women is US$ 2113.15
According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal16, of the total national
population of 26,494,504 women's population was 51.5% in the national census 2011.
Socio-economic wise, the female literacy rate in 2011 was 57.4 % and it increased to 62% in
2014. Of the economically active population 45.5% were women in 2011. In total in formal and
informal sectors 78.5% of women were employed. In agriculture and non-agriculture sectors
respectively 84.3% and 15.7% women were employed. Health wise, according to the
demographic health survey 201617, percentage of women who were pregnant when they were
18 years old was 5.8%. Contraceptive prevalence rate and unmet need for family planning were
respectively 52.6% and 23.7% respectively. Access to antenatal care (more than four visits)
increased from 59.5% in 2014 to 69.4% in 2016. There has been only slight increase in
institutional delivery from 55.2% in 2014 to 57.4 in 2016. Gender violence cases reported in 15-
sample service centres indicated increase from 1308 in 2012 to 6,230 in 2015. Similarly, of the
280 cases of reported human trafficking 87.1% were women.18
As far as socio-political empowerment of Nepal women is concerned women headed 27.4%
households in 2011. However, households by women ownership on fixed assets such as house
and land was only 10.8%.19 In other words, percentage of women without ownership of house
and land was 80.1%. In 2015 percentage of women in National Planning commission was
12.5%; in Public Service Commission was 14,3%; in National Election Commission was 33.3%;
and in the Commission for Investigation of Abuse of Authority it was 14.3%. Overall women
participation in civil service was 11.8% and in gazetted positions only 9%.20
According to UN Women as of February 2019, in Nepal 32.7% of parliament seats are
held by women. However, work still needs to be done in Nepal to achieve gender
equality. The proportion of women aged 20-24 years old who were married or in
union before age 18 is 39.5%. The adolescent birth rate is 88.2 per 1000 population as
of 2015, up from 71 per 1000 population in 2013. In 2016, 11% of women aged 15-49
years reported that they had been subject to physical and/or sexual violence by a
current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months. Moreover, women of
15 UNDP Human Development Reports, 2019, Gender Development Index Data
(http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-development-index-gdi)
16 Women in Nepal, Statistical Highlights 2018, Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal, 2018
(https://cbs.gov.np/gender-statistics-booklet-2018/)
17 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2016, Ministry of Health and Population, GoN
(https://www.dropbox.com/s/27q3i7c5221o47j/2016%20Nepal%20DHS%20Key%20Findings_Nepali.pdf?dl=0)
18 Women in Nepal, Statistical Highlights 2018, Central Bureau of Statistics, Government of Nepal, 2018
(https://cbs.gov.np/gender-statistics-booklet-2018/)
19 Ibid
20 Ibid
Page 18 of 51

=== PAGE 172 ===
reproductive age (aged 15-49 years) often face barriers with respect to their sexual
and reproductive health and rights: despite progress, the proportion of women who
have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods in 2014 year stood
at 56%. In Nepal, only 31.5% of indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender
perspective are available, with gaps in key areas such as Unpaid Care and Domestic
Work, Key Labor Market indicators such as Gender Pay Gap and Skills in Information
and Communication Technology (ICT). In addition, many areas such as gender and
poverty, women’s access to assets including land, physical and sexual harassment,
and gender and the environment currently lack comparable methodologies for
comprehensive and periodic monitoring. Addressing these gender data gaps is a
prerequisite for understanding the situation of women and girls in Nepal and for
achieving the gender-related SDGs commitments.21
3.2 Gender and inclusion disaggregated data on climate change induced disaster
There is a dearth of quantitative data on vulnerabilities to climate change and its impacts on
climate change induced disasters. However, qualitative studies like the National Climate
Change Impact Survey 201622 has reported that households are observing different climate
induced disasters including flooding, landslides, drought, hailstorm, and disease/insects in last
25 years. About 99% of the survey respondents observed the ascending incidences of drought
in the last 25 years, followed by disease/insects (97.69%), landslide (78.12%), and inundation
(51.47%). The survey further showed that households were observing impacts of different
types of disasters in last 25 years. The results depicted that 38.3% households were impacted
by dry wind wave followed by landslides (35.2%), fire (in settlements) (31.8%), and flood
(31.7%).23
To understand and assess the differential gender and social group impacts of the Climate
Change Induced Disasters such as GLOF, with the dearth of direct data on the impact of climate
change induced disasters, it can be best discussed in terms of the data available from other
disasters, such as the recent 2015 Earthquake in Nepal. Further, the impact of climate change
in Nepal or vulnerabilities to climate change can be most coherently discussed in terms of the
data available on disasters like floods and landslides, that are related to and caused by climate
change induced disasters like GLOF.24
Floods and landslides that occur every year cause highest loss of human lives and properties in
Nepal after fire. According to official data available in 2017-2018 disaster and loss of human
lives related to GLOF indicate that after fire, floods and landslides cause the highest loss of lives
21 https://data.unwomen.org/country/nepal
22 The National Climate Change Impact Survey 2016, A Statistical Report, Central Bureau of Statistics, Government
of Nepal, April 2017
(http://old.cbs.gov.np/image/data/2017/National%20Climate%20Change%20Impact%20Survey%202016%20Repo
rt_final.pdf)
23 The National Climate Change Impact Survey 2016, A Statistical Report, Central Bureau of Statistics, Government
of Nepal, April 2017
(http://old.cbs.gov.np/image/data/2017/National%20Climate%20Change%20Impact%20Survey%202016%20Repo
rt_final.pdf)
24 It is however to be noted that climate change is not always the cause of GLOF. In a recent paper published by
Alton Byers et al in 2019, a GLOF in Barun Valley in Nepal in 2017 was induced by a rockfall. For details see
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10346-018-1079-9
Page 19 of 51

=== PAGE 173 ===
in Nepal.25 See the figures below. Assessments and studies carried out in terms of earthquakes
and floods in Nepal indicate that women were among the most vulnerable of those affected by
Nepal’s earthquake, lack of gender sensitivity in post-disaster relief, improved understanding of
the existing flood early warning systems in Nepal, and needs to make early warning systems
more effective and responsive to the needs of vulnerable groups, and poor and highly
marginalized women in particular. In the case of differential impacts of floods or landslides
socially, though there is a lack of disaggregated data, after women and children, studies have
indicated and as National Federation of Disabled - Nepal (NFDN) also claims that people with
disabilities are the most vulnerable in disasters including CC induced disasters like GLOF.
Source: Nepal Disaster Report 2019, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of Nepal, June 2019
It is only after the Nepal Earthquake 2015 trends in disaggregating disaster loss data gender
and inclusion wise is observed. Post 2015 Earthquake the Government of Nepal reported that
of the 8,891 people who died 55% were women (0.01%, 2011 national population). UN Women
estimated in the 14 most affected districts it included approximately 2,710,239 women (50.5%
of population) 327,000 female-headed households (26.5% of households), 40,000 women with
disabilities, 163,000 women over the age of 65 years (6% of female population), 764,000 girls
aged 14 or under (28% of female population), and 795,000 women and girls who were illiterate
(29% of female population). The Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) also recognized that
women are among the most vulnerable of those affected by Nepal’s earthquake.
Besides the post earthquake GESI disaggregated data provided by Common Feedback Project
and UN agencies like UNFPA and UN Women, there are hardly any qualitative or quantitative
study that can provide data or evidences with regard to GLOF and its differential impacts on
gender and social group wise in Nepal.
25 Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of Nepal, June 2019. Nepal Disaster Report 2019.
Page 20 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 173 ---

Besides the post earthquake GESI disaggregated data provided by Common Feedback Project
and UN agencies like UNFPA and UN Women, there are hardly any qualitative or quantitative
study that can provide data or evidences with regard to GLOF and its differential impacts on
gender and social group wise in Nepal.

=== PAGE 174 ===
One of the three studies in preparation of the GCF project commissioned to ICIMOD by UNDP
has produced an inventory of the PDGL with estimates based on the population census of 2011
which estimates that the number of people likely to be affected by a potential GLOF varies
between 10,000 in Sun Koshi and 19,000 in Dudh Koshi. The remaining population could suffer
a loss of environmental resources and service infrastructure. The maximum number who could
be indirectly affected through infrastructural damage and loss of goods and services ranges
from 51,000 for Tama Koshi to 62,500 for Sun Koshi. Gender wise household and population
downstream the Koshi river valley (basins include Tamor, Arun, Dudh Koshi, Tama Koshi, and
Sun Koshi) that could be affected includes a total of 14,744 households; of 62,493 population,
which 29,968 are male (48%) and 32,524 are female (52%).26
3.3 Disaster, gender and inclusion
According to a joint study by London School of Economics and Political Science, University of
Essex and Max-Planck Institute of Economics on disasters and gender, disasters lower women’s
life expectancy more than men’s according to data from 141 countries affected by disaster
between 1981 and 2002. Women, boys and girls are 14 times more likely than men to die
during a disaster.27 It is to be noted in the context of Nepal also, during the 2008 Koshi floods in
Eastern Nepal, 18% of the affected populations were Dalits and the community focus group
discussions found that children, women, elderly and the ultra poor were most affected by the
flood and in immediate need of assistance.28
Following a disaster, it is more likely that women will be victims of domestic and sexual
violence; many even avoid using shelters for fear of being sexually assaulted. There is enough
evidence that in any disasters, disproportionately large numbers of women particularly from
poor and socially excluded groups are affected more severely relative to men. Worldwide, it
has generally been established that when gender issues are not addressed fully and sufficiently
in both development and disaster contexts, they perpetuate and in many cases augment
existing gender-based inequities. Women are particularly exposed to disaster risks — they are
likely to suffer higher rates of mortality, morbidity and post-disaster ruin to their livelihoods.
Several underlying factors exacerbate women’s vulnerability to the impacts of disasters,
including limited livelihood options, restricted access to education and basic services and
discriminatory social, cultural and legal practices. However, women are also key agents of
change. Their unique knowledge is essential to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of
disaster adaptation. Hence, their full and effective participation is essential.29
Besides women/girls, persons with disabilities (PWDs) are also more vulnerable in CC Induced
26 ICIMOD Report submitted to UNDP, May 2018
27 London School of Economics and Political Science, University of Essex and Max-Planck Institute of Economics -
The Gendered Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact of Catastrophic Events on the Gender Gap in Life
Expectancy, 1981–2002.
(http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/3040/1/Gendered_nature_of_natural_disasters_%28LSERO%29.pdf)
28 The Multi-Agency Flood Impact Assessment Koshi River Flood – Nepal
Response Cluster System, September 2008, Preliminary Results
IASC Emergency Preparedness and
(http://neksap.org.np/uploaded/resources/Publications-and-
Research/Reports/Multi%20Agency%20Flood%20Impact%20Assessmenet,%20Koshi%20River%20Flood%20Nepal.
pdf)
29 Ibid
Page 21 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 174 ---

One of the three studies in preparation of the GCF project commissioned to ICIMOD by UNDP
has produced an inventory of the PDGL with estimates based on the population census of 2011
which estimates that the number of people likely to be affected by a potential GLOF varies
between 10,000 in Sun Koshi and 19,000 in Dudh Koshi. The remaining population could suffer
a loss of environmental resources and service infrastructure. The maximum number who could
be indirectly affected through infrastructural damage and loss of goods and services ranges
from 51,000 for Tama Koshi to 62,500 for Sun Koshi. Gender wise household and population
downstream the Koshi river valley (basins include Tamor, Arun, Dudh Koshi, Tama Koshi, and
Sun Koshi) that could be affected includes a total of 14,744 households; of 62,493 population,
which 29,968 are male (48%) and 32,524 are female (52%).26


=== PAGE 175 ===
disasters (such as GLOF) due to their impairment, existing barriers and their socio-economic
situation. On the other hand, disasters create impairments, disability. PWDs tend to be invisible
in disasters. Aid often focuses on people that became impaired through the disaster, neglecting
people already impaired previous to it. Not including PWDs in DRR means putting new barriers
for them and not letting them participate in development processes.30 Disaster risk reduction
needs to address the underlying factors causing gender-based vulnerability and exposure to
disasters, such as economic or poverty, social, cultural and political exclusion (intersectionality).
Women must be empowered to meaningfully participate in decision-making processes related
to disaster risk reduction across scales and sectors.31
An ICIMOD Working Paper32 published in 2014 identifies there is a lack of gender sensitivity in
post-disaster relief. In the study, Koshi Victim Society, Saptari district, Koshi basin area in Nepal,
an organization working on disaster relief and rehabilitation, had drawn attention to the post-
disaster risks for women. With the disruption of social support networks and displacement,
women in post-disaster scenarios are vulnerable to rape and other forms of violence and can
even be forced into sex work. They can also suffer from nutritional deficiencies. In post-disaster
relief work, the practical and medical needs of women including pregnant and lactating
women, such as for safe toilets, a clean environment, access to health services, and accessible
food distribution systems, are often ignored.
In another Flood Early Warning Systems in Nepal study from gendered perspective by
ICIMOD,33 it found that it had improved understanding of the existing flood early warning
systems in Nepal. It suggested ways to make early warning systems more effective and
responsive to the needs of vulnerable groups, and women in particular. In view of the diversity
of development issues and livelihood challenges that communities face on a day-to-day basis,
the study suggested it is important to tune early warning systems according to the local
context. Early warning system infrastructure at the local level should be developed with the
active involvement of local men and women as part of the development process. Early warning
systems should be seen as a social and development activity rather than an exclusive domain of
engineers and technicians.
This simplification and democratization of early warning systems requires bridging the gap
between technical departments and communities, building local capacity, recognizing the stake
of the local community in contributing to and benefiting from early warning systems processes,
and most importantly creating multiple uses of early warning systems technology and not just
for a ‘one time disaster’. The early warning systems should be used with advanced applications
to disseminate key messages that will also be useful for local livelihood needs, such as daily
weather trends to support crop related decisions, market related decisions, and storage and
transport related decisions.
Further, it is important to recognize that women play an active role in family livelihood security
and efforts must be made to involve women and men equally in creating and receiving early
30 Mainstreaming Disability into Disaster Risk Reduction, A Training Manual, Nepal 2009, Handicap International
and European Commission Humanitarian Aid (ECHO)
31 UNDP, Gender and Climate Change, Capacity Development Series, Disaster risk reduction, Training Module 3
32 ICIMOD Working Paper 2014/3, Women’s Empowerment at the Frontline of Adaptation: Emerging issues,
adaptive practices, and priorities in Nepal (http://lib.icimod.org/record/29811/files/WE_14.pdf)
33 Flood Early Warning Systems in Nepal, A Gendered Perspective, ICIMOD Working Paper, 2014/4
(http://lib.icimod.org/record/29959/files/Flood_EWS.pdf)
Page 22 of 51

=== PAGE 176 ===
warnings and alerts. Women should be involved in local early warning system infrastructure
management teams and be provided with mobile phones or portable radios to receive early
warning messages.34
In this regard GESI should be ensured in all the people-centered four pillars of the early warning
system processes, viz, (i) Risk Knowledge; (ii) Monitoring and Warning Service; (iii)
Dissemination and Communication; and (iv) Response Capability.35
3.4 Importance of gender and inclusion in disaster
The importance of integrating GESI in climate change induced disaster is recognized nationally
and internationally.
International agreements/ treaty/ commitments, such as Sendai Framework for DRR 2015 -
2030 (SFDRR), Paris Agreement and Agenda 2030 Sustainable Development Goals all uphold
the imporatnce of GESI in CC and DRR. The UN SFDRR under Priority 4: Enhancing disaster
preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and
reconstruction, specifically mentions "Empowering women and persons with disabilities to
publicly lead and promote gender equitable and universally accessible response, recovery,
rehabilitation and reconstruction approaches is key."36
Aligned to the international context, nationally in Nepal importance of GESI is mentioned in
disaster, climate change related national plans and policies in Nepal, such as National Climate
Change Policy 2019, National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to Climate Change
Policy 2019 and Local Government Operational Act 2017. Most of the directly disaster related
plans and polices in Nepal such as the National Strategy for Disaster Risk Management
(NSDRM) 2008, Guidelines: Disaster Preparedness and Response Plan (DPRP) 2011, Local
Disaster Risk Management Planning Guidelines 2012, District Disaster Management Planning
Guidelines 2012 and National Disaster Response Framework 2013 (updated 2019) also
mentions the need for integration of GESI in disaster management. See Annex 3 for list of
samples of international and national policies from GESI perspectives related to climate change
and disasters.
However, there is limited understanding and analysis of what the linkages are between GESI
and climate change induced disaster and how to integrate GESI in disaster and climate risk
management (DRM).
34 Ibid
35 https://www.preventionweb.net/publications/view/42369
36 SFDRR 2015-2030 (https://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf)
Page 23 of 51

=== PAGE 177 ===
3.5 National gender and inclusion policies/plans/DRM reports
Regarding national gender and inclusion policies and practices in general for Nepal, the
Constitution of Nepal, 2015, guarantees a right-based approach regarding gender equality and
inclusion. The constitution stipulates a non-discrimination principle that reinforces the equality
of all citizens before the law. Special provisions are made for the protection, empowerment or
advancement of economically poor, socially or culturally backward social groups. Women are
guaranteed the right to participate in all state mechanisms. Dalits have specific rights for
participation in all bodies of the state on the basis of proportional inclusion; there is free
education with scholarships from primary to higher education with special provisions for health
and social security.
In ensuring the constitutional rights, the Civil Service Act 2007 has legalized the principle of
positive discrimination by ensuring reservation for certain sections of the community in the civil
service. In the 14th Three Year Plan (2016/17-2018/19), the GoN emphasized the meaningful
participation of all citizens for Nepal’s inclusive development and aims to improve the human
development and empowerment index of those who have been economically and socially left
behind. The Budget for 2018/19 incorporates issues regarding gender, poverty and
marginalization under objectives and priorities. The federal government had allocated Rs.
135.51 billion (about US$ 1.18 billion) as an equalization grant to the province and local levels
to spend on human development indicators. Provisions for capital, skill and entrepreneurship
trainings have been ensured for small businesses and self-employment activities in
proprietorship of women. The 15th Three Year Plan (2019/20-2023/24), recently released,
acknowledges that though progress has been made since the last plan, inequality and exclusion
have not been eradicated. Not much progress has happened in terms of female participation,
and women managed cooperatives. The strategy for long-term vision mentions that criteria for
socially progressive economic arrangements will be made to ensure women, Dalits, and other
marginalized groups have all the required protection and rights.
Numerous GoN policies and guidelines recognize the need to address GESI issues
programmatically and institutionally in order to achieve sector objectives. All these sectoral
GESI strategies and guidelines emphasize participation of women, Dalits, Adivasi/Janajatis,
Madhesis, Muslims, PWDs and excluded communities in the formulation, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of sectoral policies, plans and programs. They recognize the need to
identify the specific barriers faced by women, the poor, the vulnerable and the excluded in the
sector concerned. All these guidelines demand disaggregated data and evidence.
Regarding legislations or guidelines to promote GESI in local governance bodies the Ministry of
Federal Affairs and General Administration (MoFAGA) governs local bodies, including the
municipalities and has developed a GESI policy in 2010 that provides directives for
incorporating GESI into the functions of local bodies. Social development units or community
development sections of the municipalities are responsible for facilitating GESI mainstreaming
in planning, budgeting, and monitoring. Similarly, the Disadvantaged Group (DAG) mapping at
the ward level helps identify poverty pockets and settlements by using the set criteria.
The legal framework for local governance elaborated in the Local Governance Operational Act
2017, requires local bodies to prepare periodic plans – prioritizing women, marginalized groups,
poor and children through participatory planning processes – and describe mandatory
provisions for the participation of women, children and disadvantaged groups in the planning
Page 24 of 51

=== PAGE 178 ===
and budgeting process. The local governance regulation ensures 20% women and at least one
Dalit member representation in ward level elected bodies. The Minimum Conditions and
Performance Measures (MCPM) 2009 require municipalities to adopt a participatory and
inclusive planning including pro-poor budgets to ensure the flow of central grant. Gender
Responsive Budgeting (GRB) (since 2007/08) requires all line ministries to follow the guideline
and prepare gender responsive budgets. As a result, the percentage of the total government
budget that was gender responsive was 21% in FY 2015/16.
Recently promulgated Government of Nepal's National Policy For Disaster Risk Reduction
201837 regarding gender equality and inclusion ensures access, representation and meaningful
participation of women, children, senior citizen, people with disabilities and the people from
economically and socially marginalized communities in all steps and structures of disaster risk
reduction based on inclusive disaster management concept. Further, as per the concept of
disaster sensitivity, public physical infrastructure (government offices, educational institutions,
health institutions, community buildings and shelters etc.) will be made senior citizen, gender,
persons with disability and children friendly. It further provisions an inclusive mechanism to
establish at federal, provincial and local levels effective monitoring and evaluation of the
activities related to disaster risk reduction and management.
3.6 GCF gender frameworks and policies
The GCF has a standard framework for developing a gender equality and inclusion component
of a country project and action plan. The GCF project formulation is required to align to the
Fund's gender frameworks, polices and action plans. In this regard the GCF's Gender Policy and
Action Plan (March 2015) states that:
• Women, as well as men significantly contribute to combating climate change. Shifting the
paradigm towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways, which is the
Fund’s mandate, requires a large number of individual and collective decisions by women
and men. A gender-sensitive approach is therefore part of a paradigm shift;
• Climate change impacts women and men differently, to the detriment of women, and
existing gender inequalities are likely to be exacerbated by climate change; and
• Gender inequality, exacerbated by climate change, is linked, as are other development
areas, to vulnerability and risks. The greater vulnerability of women to climate change
stems from gender norms and discrimination that result in the imbalanced division of
labour, lower incomes, and lesser livelihood opportunities; less access and control over land
and other productive assets; fewer legal rights; lesser mobility and lesser political and
professional representation.
The GCF’s commitment to gender equality centres on gender-responsive country programs and
initiatives that benefit everyone, women and men. This requires gender analysis to understand
the social, economic and political factors underlying climate change-exacerbated gender
inequalities, and the potential contributions of women and men to mitigating and adapting to
climate change, and building climate resilience. It further entails adopting methods and tools to
promote gender equality and reduce gender disparities in climate funding by mainstreaming
37 Available online at http://drrportal.gov.np/uploads/document/1476.pdf
Page 25 of 51

=== PAGE 179 ===
gender in the project cycle. Finally, it means measuring the outcomes and impacts of project
activities on women and men’s resilience to climate change through gender-responsive
monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Gender mainstreaming should shape the entire project cycle,
from project identification to M&E.38
3.7 Reports on consultations for project formulation
In line with the GCF environmental and social policy that elaborates the commitment of GCF to
integrate environmental and social issues into its decision-making and outcomes, and as part of
engagement of various stakeholders during project formulation, Nepal Federation of
Indigenous Nationalities (NEFIN) undertook a detail Indigenous Peoples’ engagement study.
The study identified that the underlying impact of climate change and the issues and concerns
of indigenous people ( IPs) s across the sectors includes impacts of climate change on
agriculture, water resources, other natural resources . IPs in the proposed project areas still
practice subsistence farming. Agriculture is the lifeline for their livelihoods. Unfortunately,
indigenous peoples are encountering challenges in continuing their traditional livelihoods and
practices. Their ways of farming and cultivation is facing problems posed by the growing
changes in climatic conditions.
In forest and biodiversity, indigenous peoples are nature worshippers. Indigenous peoples’
livelihood and their cosmo-vision are intrinsically embedded with forests, flora and fauna, and
with the whole ecosystem they live in. Their interrelationship with forests and biodiversity at
large goes beyond sustenance of their lives and livelihood to a more emotional, cultural and
essential unified accord with nature. The intensity of changing environment, including climate
change, natural calamities are threatening indigenous peoples' lands and forests among other
natural resources.
Regarding impact of climate change on water resources, for indigenous people water is sacred.
It is vital to life, essential to agriculture and a valuable energy source. Indigenous peoples value
water as an important element and property of life. Water is considered not only for its
consumptive value and its use in general, but it means more than a natural resource.
Indigenous people’s relationship with water and its resources are crucial to cultural vitality and
resilience. Indigenous peoples believe the calamities related to water, such as flood and GLOF
are related with the God/Ancestors. Over the years, with changes in climatic condition,
indigenous peoples are facing water scarcity in their villages; apart from their traditional
sources such as stone spouts, springs, wells and ponds, their rivers and streams are also drying
up. It is important to note that indigenous peoples have their own ways and practices of
identifying natural hazards. It is important to respect and utilize the knowledge of indigenous
peoples to enhance or least gain acceptance of any project intervention in IP's areas.39
Consultation with the NGOs/CSOs, Private Sectors and Government informed that the
stakeholders are aware of the issues on climate change induced disasters such as and GLOF, but
have uneven potential risks from the GLOF; stakeholders have willingness to contribute,
ensuring the sustainability of the interventions; stakeholders need capacity development
program; and stakeholders need scientific knowledge, instrumentation and monitoring,
38 https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines_-
_GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pdf/860d1d03-877d-4c64-9a49-c0160c794ca7
39 Indigenous Peoples consultation to understand potential glacial lake outbursts floods risks for safeguarding lives
and livelihood, Final Report submitted to UNDP-Nepal, February 26, 2018, NEFIN
Page 26 of 51

=== PAGE 180 ===
structural design (e.g., EWS), and institutional arrangements for addressing the potential risks
of GLOFs and safeguarding the lives and livelihoods.40
40 NGOs/CSOs, Private Sectors and Government Consultation to Understand Potential Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
Risks for Safeguarding Lives and Livelihoods, Final Report submitted to UNDP-Nepal, Youth Alliance for
Environment, March 2018
Page 27 of 51

=== PAGE 181 ===
4. Findings from fieldwork
4.1 Community level findings
1. Who are the most vulnerable to Climate Change Induced Disasters and hazards?
Poor Tarai and Hill Dalits who are both historically excluded and situationally vulnerable
are the most affected by climate change induced disasters and hazards and considered to
be the most excluded and vulnerable people followed by the poor and highly
marginalized indigenous groups, particularly living along the river beds and drought prone
areas (Adivasi/Janajatis) such as Majhi, Kumal, Botes, etc.
• Terai and Hill Dalits: Majority of Hill and Terai Dalits residing in remote areas and degraded
lands have been historically discriminated in terms of access to resources such as
education, employment and other socio-economical opportunities and services, making
them socially, economically, politically and culturally the most discriminated. As compared
to the Hill Dalits, Tarai Dalits (e.g. Sardar-Bantar, Khang-Khatwe; Chamar, Dom, Musahar,)
are considered to be the most discriminated and vulnerable. These multiple layers of
discrimination have affected both their material conditions and social status in society
hindering them from accessing resources, understanding the values of participating in
community initiatives and networking. Due to their limited physical and social assets
climate change and disaster risks have further exacerbated their conditions thus increasing
their vulnerabilities.
“When the Koshi barrage was flooded, help came from the government and several
organisations. Truckloads of soaps, mattresses and foods were provided. The agencies handed
over these supplies to the village leaders for distribution, but these leaders distributed these
supplies only after few days and rationed it. I have a large family and had asked for 5
mattresses but was given only 2. Similarly they budgeted and requested for 75 feet deep tube
well for us but constructed only a 25 feet deep well.” - A single woman, Sardar community,
Kushaha, Ward No.4, Koshi Tappu ( Downstream community)
• Poor and highly marginalized Adivasi Janajatis (Indigenous Peoples ): Similar to the Hill
and Tarai Dalits, poor and highly marginalized Adivasi Janajatis, such as Majhis, Kumals,
Botes etc. living near and along the river banks, in landslide, flood and drought prone areas,
seemed to be highly affected by the changing climate and disaster risks. These groups were
found to be living in clusters usually in the outskirts or far from the main villages, making it
difficult for them to participate and easily access disaster and development resources and
opportunities.
“Water availability both for drinking and pottery is our biggest problem and it has become very
severe since the past 8-9 years. Our village brought the water source from the neighboring
village, but we could not get this water as we live far from the main village and it requires extra
costs and labour.” - A Kumal man, Hattuwagadi 6, Bhojpur
• Poor Adivasi Janajatis (Indigenous Peoples ) from the hill and mountain areas, particularly
living in disaster prone and remote areas such as the Rais, Bhotes etc. due to the
geographical remoteness, these groups were found to be isolated from the development
interventions, networks, and opportunities. Most of the interventions such as trainings,
Page 28 of 51

=== PAGE 182 ===
information, infrastructure development etc. were centered on the ward headquarters and
they could not participate nor access it easily.
• Women: As compared to men, women across all social and economic groups seem to be
more excluded from accessing climate change and development resources and
opportunities. However, the degree of exclusion and vulnerability is highest among the
poor single women, Tarai Dalit women (as described above) living in remote and disaster
prone areas followed by Hill Dalit women (e.g. Gandarvas), poor and marginalized
indigenous women (Rais), single women and poor women from advantaged caste groups
(Chettri, Brahmins).
• Single women, elderly, persons with disability and pregnant and lactating women: These
groups, particularly women have problems related to getting timely and complete
information, participation and access to resources. Mechanisms or platforms to understand
and discuss their special needs and contributions are almost non-existent. Hence, they
usually tend to get excluded from participating in meetings, consultations, trainings, and
group memberships, such as the ward level planning and budgeting meetings, trainings or
exposure visits etc.
2. Women's“Time Poverty" is still not recognized as a critical issue and addressed in the
context of development and climate change.
• The changing climate and increases in the magnitude and frequency of natural disasters has
caused problems in water availability, agriculture, forest resources and increased male
outmigration. This has substantially increased poor and marginalized women’s already high
household workload, food security and loss of income. The progress made by women in
terms of their material conditions (well-being) and social positions or status (leadership,
decision-making) in society also seemed to be declining. Due to the shortage of labour
force, situation of single women is even more critical.
• Water scarcity has hit poor and marginalized women the hardest: The increasingly
unpredictable rainfall patterns, which are more intense and shorter in duration, and the
long periods of droughts have resulted in drying of wells and small springs. Water scarcity
has become a serious problem. This has increased women’s time needed for managing
water for household use, irrigation and conserving water sources.
“Since the past 11-12 years, availability of water has been one of the most pressing issues for us
women. The spring water in our ward has dried and the ‘bulldozer roads’ and earthquake has
made it worse. Fourty-five households in our ward collected around 18.5 hundred thousand
rupees (approximately USD 1700) and gave 100 days of labour from each household to buy and
bring the piped water from the neighbouring village. We did not get any support from the ward
office. This piped water is still not adequate to irrigate our farms and for household use. The
Kumal (marginalized IPs) and some Dalit households living in the periphery of the main village
could not be included in this scheme as it is takes additional resources to join the pipes to their
houses. Besides they cannot afford to pay for the water.” - Chandrakala Rai, Hattwagadi 6,
Bhojpur
• Hardening of soil in farms has doubled women’s farm work: In agriculture too the soil
quality is becoming degraded and hardened, making it difficult to break and fertilise. The
Page 29 of 51

=== PAGE 183 ===
hardened soils have doubled the time for ploughing, requiring more labour, water and
manure, making women work for longer hours in the hot sun.
“The long spells of hot weather make the soil very hard and requires additional breaking
even after ploughing to make it suitable for sowing. In our village we have a system of
compensating the ploughing services either by paying in cash or by providing double the
number of days of labour to the plougher, which is usually done by women. This means our
workload is further increased. These soils also need more water, manure and long hours of
physical labour in the hot sun to break the soil and carry the manure to the field.” - Ram
Maya Rai, Hattuwagadi 6, Pipal Dada, Bhojpur
• Increase and emergence of aggressive pests and further increasing women’s time
poverty and food insecurity: Farming of vegetables, crops and horticulture has become
very challenging due to the emergence of new and aggressive varieties of weeds and
pests. It has affected farms and storage, increasing women’s workload, as they are the
ones responsible for these tasks. Since these new and aggressive varieties of pests and
weeds (mainly large snails, soil larvae, white moths or butterflies etc.) are outside the
realms of traditional knowledge, their local methods and approaches are not affective in
addressing the problem. Women were found to be using their hands to sprinkle the
strong chemical herbicides and did not have knowledge about the dangers of using it.
• The unpredictable weather patterns have caused huge loss in farming. In Hatuwagadi
this year 85% of their maize got destroyed with untimely rainfall followed by drought
after the plantations. This resulted in having maize with no seeds and increase in
seeking loans to buy food.
• Decrease in forest products due to droughts, forest fires causing increased workloads
of women: Long spells of dry weather and increase in invasive species have degraded
the quality of forests causing frequent forest fires, and reduction in the yield of fodder,
fuel wood and important non-timber forest products (NTFPs). This has also contributed
in increasing women’s time in collection of the forest products, as these are almost
exclusively women’s traditional work.
• Male outmigration: The trend of male outmigration seemed to have increased due to
the decrease in agricultural production and food insecurity, also increasing women’s
workload, mental stress and risk of physical violence. Male outmigration has also caused
young wives to leave the village to the nearby cities to educate their children leaving
behind elderly parents and further increasing the workloads for the women who are left
behind.
• Decrease in women’s mobility and engagement in income generating, community
activities and decision-making processes: Due to increased workload, women’s
mobility, participation in community initiatives, committees, decision-making processes,
and accessing timely and complete information has decreased. Even if the opportunities
are in their doorsteps, they do not have the time and interests to grab these
opportunities. As traditionally, the caring or household work has been exclusively
women’s work, even for women in position such as elected ward members, Community
Forestry Executive members, Female Community Health Volunteers (FCHV) etc. are
required to finish their household duties and only then can they participate.
Page 30 of 51

=== PAGE 184 ===
3. Poor and highly marginalized women and men particularly living in geographically remote
and disaster prone areas41, mainly between 25 to 50 kilometres from the glacial lakes
have limited access, and benefits the least from development and climate change related
resources and opportunities.
• Near absence of platforms and invited spaces42 for reaching, mobilizing and engaging
women and marginalized groups: The poor outreach mechanisms, exclusive and
centralized planning systems, the near absence of functional platforms or forums to
organise and empower poor women and marginalized groups, together with the
domination by local politics and power have made accessing and benefiting from these
resources challenging. For example even if the local groups are strong, ultimately the
politics and power decides and authorises on who should be selected or represented or
whose skills are recognized etc. For example women’s groups, farmers groups, ward
citizen forum, CBOs, NGOs etc., particularly in the hilly areas (25 to 50 kilometres away
from the glacial lakes) has made it difficult for these groups to organize and collectively
voice their opinions, advices, and make demands. The absence of these dedicated
gender related platforms and institutions such as the Women’s Development Office,
wards social mobilizers are felt by the women elected members and staffs of the wards
and rural municipalities.
“Our women used to get a lot of support from the Women Development Office and social
mobilizers to help organise, plan, make demands etc. However, due to their absence, women
have not been able to organise themselves and hence we miss out on mobilizing resources and
funds. In the first year women did not submit proposals to spend the small budget (NRs.
800,000) dedicated for gender issues and in the end the budget got shifted to other budget
heads. Similarly, last year too we did not receive any proposal. I feel presence of a separate local
level institutions and social mobilizers dedicated for gender and social issues is very important.”
- Women ward member, Num, Ward 5, Makalu Rural Municipality
• The poor roads, scattered nature of the settlements, and limited human resources and
budgets have forced these local level development organisations to limit its outreach
around the ward or municipality headquarters. This automatically excludes the poor and
the marginalized people living in remote areas from receiving timely and complete
information, participating in meetings and training opportunities, representing in local
level decision making committees etc. Even if they participate, they are unable to fully
reap the benefits.
For example, computer training for youths (2 months) and tailoring training (3 months) for Dalit
women were organised by the ward office in Num, in its headquarters of Ward 5, Makalu Rural
Municipality. The training opportunities were for all the wards, however due to the long
duration of the training, the participants from outside the Num bazar (ward headquarters)
could not participate. They could not afford the time and costs of leaving their village to stay in
Num bazar. Further, most of the women and girls from the remote and distant wards had not
41 Highly vulnerable villages and cluster areas:
42 Invited Spaces: Forums/user groups/women groups/Dalits groups etc. for organising and mobilizing women and
marginalized groups to engage participate and benefit from development resources and opportunities.
Page 31 of 51

=== PAGE 185 ===
received information about these trainings and neither were they consulted during the planning
of the activities for them.
• Majority of the saving and credit groups, cooperatives and micro-finance institutions
seem to be regularly meeting but these meetings are strictly limited to transacting
money for saving and loans. However, in areas where the external agencies are active,
cooperatives were found to be contributing to the local livelihoods and income
generative activities. Further, the unclear steps and mechanisms of the local
governments and institutions to engage women’s and marginalized communities and
address their needs, interests and priorities in designing and planning climate change
and disaster risk reduction related plans and programs, have made inclusion even more
challenging.
4. The participation of women and men in local development planning, disaster risk
management and climate change related activities and decision-making are highly
exclusive and gendered.
• The gender, political affiliation, geographic location, caste ethnicity, age, economic
status, literacy and ability of the local women and men plays a major role on, who
participates, where or which level they participate and how they participate. The types
and quality of participation can be categorised as follows (also, see Table 3):
• Majority of poor and highly marginalized women, particularly from remote and disaster-
prone locations are not members of local interest groups or decision-making bodies or
committees and are isolated. This is mainly due to women's time poverty and their
historical discrimination that makes them invisible when it comes to resource
distribution and benefit sharing. They also do have the confidence and networks to
mobilize these resources. These categories of women together with the poor and
marginalized men (elderly, Dalits, marginalized indigenous men – Kumals, Botes, Mahjis
etc.) are mostly engaged in community activities that entails voluntary participation or
consultations or labour contribution.
• Women in the leadership positions are members of key committees, but they are
usually engaged and responsible for women-centred programmes, and committees e.g.
health, agriculture (seeds distribution), conflict resolution – violence against women etc.
They do not have substantial roles in their ward's main planning processes. All these
women-centred activities do not require large financial transactions. Further, in most
cases strong women leaders were found to be excluded from key technical and local
development related committees and from planning and decision-making process as
they were perceived as a threat to the local power centres. A trend of selecting or
nominating women with limited exposure and experience in leadership was observed,
making their participation mere token with no influence in the planning processes and
decisions.
• Mostly Advantaged Men43 are engaged in the activities and committees related to large
and small infrastructure development and technical activities. Only very few women
43 Advantaged Men: in the context of Koshi Basin, they are mostly men in leadership position affiliated to political
parties in power, who are usually literate, economically rich, from higher caste groups (Chettri Brahmins) or
dominant indigenous peoples (such as Rais and Chaudharies).
Page 32 of 51

=== PAGE 186 ===
leaders were found to be engaged in these domains. During the entire fieldwork, only
one women ward vice-chair from Num, Makalu was actively engaged in the ward’s
planning processes.
“Women like us, who can speak, make demands and question the forums are not the preferred
lot by the local governments and their technical committees (such as road, irrigation, electricity).
We are side lined and obviously our issues and proposals receive least or no priority. If you assess,
it's the same all over the region except in some exceptional cases.” - A women leader, Khadbari,
Sankhuwasabha
• Decision-making still remains men’s domain. Advantaged men occupy almost all key
leadership positions, and likewise decisions related to local level planning and disaster
risk reduction are also made by them.
“It is really sad to say that most of the current elected or nominated women members44 and
women leaders at the local levels are mere rubber stamps to the decisions made and the need
to turn this problem into an opportunity is crucial.” - Member, HIMAWANTI,45 Central
Committee
Table 2: Quality of Participation and Engagement (Who is engaged where and how?)*
Daily engagement at Community Community Community Decision-
Household/ Activities Activities – Activities: Making;
Farm levels: (Voluntary labour): (Gender, Social (Infrastructure; Leadership:
related): technical related):
Example: Example: Example: Example: Example:
Farm, forest, water, Clearing for water Representation Representation in Ward/municipal
energy management pipe construction; in committees; committees; ity level
etc. plantation; meetings; Meetings, planning,
cleaning springs consultations; consultations, implementation
and water sources training/orienta training/orientatio ; monitoring etc.
etc. tions; exposure n, visits etc. Disaster Risk
visits etc. (Construction - Reduction
(health, road, hydro- related
agriculture, electricity, Committees and
conflict irrigation, decisions etc.
resolution, school/halls etc.
plantation etc.)
Mostly poor and Women – mostly Mostly Women Advantaged Men46 Advantaged
marginalized women who do not hold in leadership in leadership Men in
living in remote Leadership position and positions, in ward leadership
location and usually position; residing close to and technical positions, in
not members of local the Ward or committees and ward and
44 The results of Local Election 2017 show that women won as deputies instead of mayors and chairpersons.
Only 2% of the mayor and chair positions out of the total 753 went to the women, while 91% of the deputy
positions went to women. (https://www.recordnepal.com/wire/features/data-reveals-local-elections-a-disaster-
for-gender-equality/)
45 HIMAWANTI: Himalayan Grassroots Women’s Natural Resource Management Association – active in 45 districts
of Nepal.
46 Advantaged Men: in the context of Koshi Basin, they are mostly men in leadership position affiliated to political
parties in power, who are usually literate, economically rich, from higher caste groups (Chettris/Brahmins) or
dominant indigenous peoples (such as Rais and Chaudharys)
Page 33 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 186 ---
Daily engagement at
Household/
Farm levels:
Example:
Farm, forest, water,
energy management
etc. | Community
Activities
(Voluntary labour):
Example:
Clearing for water
pipe construction;
plantation;
cleaning springs
and water sources
etc. | Community
Activities –
(Gender, Social
related):
Example:
Representation
in committees;
meetings;
consultations;
training/orienta
tions; exposure
visits etc.
(health,
agriculture,
conflict
resolution,
plantation etc.) | Community
Activities:
(Infrastructure;
technical related):
Example:
Representation in
committees;
Meetings,
consultations,
training/orientatio
n, visits etc.
(Construction -
road, hydro-
electricity,
irrigation,
school/halls etc. | Decision-
Making;
Leadership:
Example:
Ward/municipal
ity level
planning,
implementation
; monitoring etc.
Disaster Risk
Reduction
related
Committees and
decisions etc.
Mostly poor and
marginalized women
living in remote
location and usually
not members of local | Women – mostly
who do not hold
Leadership
position; | Mostly Women
in leadership
position and
residing close to
the Ward or | Advantaged Men46
in leadership
positions, in ward
and technical
committees and | Advantaged
Men in
leadership
positions, in
ward and

--- Table 2 on Page 186 ---
Only 2% of the mayor and chair positions out of the total 753 went to the women, while 91% of the deputy
positions went to women. (https://www.recordnepal.com/wire/features/data-reveals-local-elections-a-disaster-
for-gender-equality/)

=== PAGE 187 ===
committees or Municipality those mostly technical
groups. HQs and with affiliated with committees and
more wealth political parties those mostly
(e.g. mostly poor and affiliated with
Dalits, Kumals. discretionary political parties
Majhi’s, Botes, time (having
Sardars, Rais, alternative
Bhotes, Chettri energy
Brahmins etc.). technologies
such LPG gas
stoves; pressure
cookers etc.).
Poor and Poor and Women from Few Women in Negligible
marginalized men, marginalized remote areas in leadership position women in
mostly elderly men women and men leadership and residing close leadership
in high hills living in (Hill and Tarai positions, more to the Ward or position and
remote locations and Dalits, Botes, wealthy, literate Municipality HQs; affiliated to
who are usually not Kumals, Majhi’s, and mostly political parties.
members of elderly men affiliated to
committees or particularly Rais in political parties
groups. the high hills).
* Based on the field consultations and FGDs (September 2019)
• Women from poor and marginalized groups fail to recognize the value of participating in
community development activities, local committees and decision-making forums both
due to their historical discrimination and situational vulnerabilities caused by the
changing climate and disasters which have further alienated them. Thus, even if they are
specifically included and invited to participate they do not understand the value of
participation, cannot articulate their needs and demands, and thus cannot fully engage and
benefit from the resources and opportunities provided to them. Development agencies find
it challenging to plan and implement specific programs for these groups.
“Last fiscal year our ward had solar light distribution program for which we had allocated
NRs.10,000 loan to be paid in instalments. We had specifically made provisions for the Dalits
and went to their houses to invite them for the meeting and orientation program. Except for
one, none of them came for the meeting. This is not the first time, they never participate in
other meetings too. They are uncooperative, lazy, disinterested and need constant follow-up if
we do any programs for them. They don’t want to change.” - Male Ward Member, Facksinda
(Besi), Ward 5, Makalu Rural Municipality
5. Knowledge, experiences and roles of poor and highly marginalized women, particularly
indigenous and Tarai Dalit women are not recognized and their contributions remain
largely invisible.
• Poor and highly marginalized women, particularly the indigenous women from the
mountain and high hills such as the Rais, Bhotes, Botes, Majhi’s, Kumals and Dalit
women from the Koshi Tappu areas such as the Sardars, Bantars, Khatwes, Musharas
are highly dependent on the natural resources and have good knowledge and
experience of managing it. However, their indigenous and traditional knowledge and
experiences and their roles in climate change and natural disaster management are not
recognized and their contributions largely remain invisible in local policy making,
Page 34 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 187 ---
committees or
groups.
(e.g. mostly poor
Dalits, Kumals.
Majhi’s, Botes,
Sardars, Rais,
Bhotes, Chettri
Brahmins etc.). |  | Municipality
HQs and with
more wealth
and
discretionary
time (having
alternative
energy
technologies
such LPG gas
stoves; pressure
cookers etc.). | those mostly
affiliated with
political parties | technical
committees and
those mostly
affiliated with
political parties
Poor and
marginalized men,
mostly elderly men
in high hills living in
remote locations and
who are usually not
members of
committees or
groups. | Poor and
marginalized
women and men
(Hill and Tarai
Dalits, Botes,
Kumals, Majhi’s,
elderly men
particularly Rais in
the high hills). | Women from
remote areas in
leadership
positions, more
wealthy, literate
and mostly
affiliated to
political parties | Few Women in
leadership position
and residing close
to the Ward or
Municipality HQs; | Negligible
women in
leadership
position and
affiliated to
political parties.

=== PAGE 188 ===
planning and financing. Their experiences are seldom used to draw knowledge of local
situation and ecology. Hence, they are unable to fully engage in, benefit from, and
contribute in more meaningful, recognized and paid activities and opportunities.
“During the devastating Koshi flood in 2008 we had to move our cattle and grains to a safer
place. Our cultural group47 got together and made boats out of banana trees and large water
drums tied under the beds. This saved many lives and assets of our people. It took 2-3 days for
the external agencies to get the boats from India and the cities and we were the last ones to
receive it. Likewise, we have several traditional knowledge on the use of medicinal plants,
homemade remedies, for diarrhoea, warding off snakes, headaches etc. which are very useful
during monsoon and flooding. However, we are never consulted or asked for our support. They
don’t trust us and use other members of the community when it comes to collecting information
for distribution of goods and services.” - Sardar Women (Tari Dalit) from Koshi Tappu
4.2 Institutional level findings
6. The planning and decision-making processes seem to be largely controlled by the local
politics and power, side lining the participatory and inclusive processes and structures
established and promoted by the government and development agencies.
• Local politics and power structures48 play a major role in deciding which groups or
institutions, leaders or individuals should be given authority and recognition to decide
on who or where to invest in, in what manner, inform, govern on how and who to select
for resource distribution etc. This trend isolates the poor and highly marginalized
women and men who are not part of these networks and their needs, interests and
priorities do not get space and priority in the planning and decision-making, particularly
during disasters where they tend to get excluded. In the majority of the cases in the
Koshi basin areas, ward chairperson and secretary largely make the prioritization of
issues, demand collection and decisions for the ward’s annual planning. Among the 5
key members in the ward committee, the other two members who are elected and
nominated from the women and Dalits quota do not have much say or power to
influence decisions. The local government’s seven step planning process, which provides
spaces for the local people to participate, is also not systematically and effectively
followed. See Table 4 for the trends in ward level budget allocation.
“We do inform the whole village to gather for the tole (cluster) level planning meetings but only
few people participate, mostly elite men. It is very difficult to convince the poor women and
Dalits to participate. They do not submit their demands and we end up planning for them. And
later, they also cannot develop proposals for implementing their approved plans. Last year their
budget got frozen and we had to spend this budget for Teej celebration.”
- Tole committee member, Kumal Goan, Tumlingtar
47 Musahars, Sarder, Bantars, Khatwes (Tarai Dalits) community organises themselves in groups to collect funds
from the village (usually from rich people) to use it for praying and during disasters. These groups seem to get
together during disasters and to help each other and use their traditional knowledge to do so.
48 Power Structures: power structures in the local context are mainly – politics and political networks (ruling party),
caste/ethnicity (who is the dominant caste/ethnic group), gender (men and women from which groups) wealth,
networks, education etc.
Page 35 of 51

=== PAGE 189 ===
“The biggest challenge is implementing the resettlement and rehabilitation programmes for the
displaced from landslides. Although we knew the households which need land for rehabilitation,
in the last landslide in Pepuwa village, several people with houses in Num bazar and Tarai
registered their names for resettling in school dada near Num bazar. Since they have political
affiliations and connections, we cannot easily remove them.”
- Village social worker, Num Bazar, Makalu
Table 3: Trends of Allocation and Use of Ward Level Annual Budget 2018-2019 fiscal year
Name of the Ward Budget Budget Budget for Budget for Use of the
planned by approved (for Infrastructure Gender Gender
ward (NRs) development) issues Budget
(NRs)
Num, Ward 5, Around 39 Around 2 Around 70% Around 1% Gender
Makalu million million Budget used
(Separate for Teej
budget from celebration;
Municipality Social/empow
for erment budget
empowerme used for
nt/social computer and
issues) tailoring
training
Silicho, Tamku, Ward Around 32 Around 1.8 Around 60% Around 1% Women could
3, Makalu Million million not submit the
proposal as
there are no
active
women’s
groups/platfor
ms. Ultimately
the budget got
frozen and
was used for
Teej
celebration
Jarayotar, Bhojpur Around 30 Around 1.5 Around 60% Around 1.5%
Million million
Kumal Goan, Around 33 Around 1.5 Around Around 2% Last fiscal year
Tumlingtar, Khadbari Million million 70% from ward budget got
Municipality budget and frozen in both
NRs. wards, as no
25,00000. demand was
(Municipality made for
budget). gender
activities
Hattiwagadi, Bhojpur Around 30 Around 2 Around 60% Around 2%
million million
Source: Field interviews and assessments 2019
7. The impact of changing climate together with the transition from the past governance
system to the new federal system has brought both opportunities and challenges in
women’s leadership and empowerment processes. A large number of women have come
Page 36 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 189 ---
Name of the Ward | Budget
planned by
ward (NRs) | Budget
approved (for
development)
(NRs) | Budget for
Infrastructure | Budget for
Gender
issues | Use of the
Gender
Budget
Num, Ward 5,
Makalu | Around 39
million | Around 2
million | Around 70% | Around 1%
(Separate
budget from
Municipality
for
empowerme
nt/social
issues) | Gender
Budget used
for Teej
celebration;
Social/empow
erment budget
used for
computer and
tailoring
training
Silicho, Tamku, Ward
3, Makalu | Around 32
Million | Around 1.8
million | Around 60% | Around 1% | Women could
not submit the
proposal as
there are no
active
women’s
groups/platfor
ms. Ultimately
the budget got
frozen and
was used for
Teej
celebration
Jarayotar, Bhojpur | Around 30
Million | Around 1.5
million | Around 60% | Around 1.5% | 
Kumal Goan,
Tumlingtar, Khadbari
Municipality | Around 33
Million | Around 1.5
million | Around
70% | Around 2%
from ward
budget and
NRs.
25,00000.
(Municipality
budget). | Last fiscal year
budget got
frozen in both
wards, as no
demand was
made for
gender
activities
Hattiwagadi, Bhojpur | Around 30
million | Around 2
million | Around 60% | Around 2% | 

=== PAGE 190 ===
into leadership positions. But due to reasons such as decrease in dedicated human
resources and sectors, one-door policy for development interventions, and near absence
of active and organized platforms in the province and ward to mobilize and support
women, it has affected women’s leadership and ability to voice and influence decisions.
• In the previous governance system, at the village development committee levels (VDCs),
there were about 45 members to run a VDC. However, in the new federal system, a
ward is almost of the same size as VDC, which has only 5 key members, of which 2 are
from the women and Dalit49 quotas. These 2 members have very little role and say in
the planning and decision processes. Hence, the chairperson and his two-team
members control the whole planning cycle. Further, at the ward level, all the external
interventions and interactions by the communities to the outside agencies or sectors
have to be made through the ward members. This one-door policy has largely affected
women and marginalized groups from practicing their leadership to mobilize and access
resources and services. The merging of district level line agencies with the local
government has also largely affected women leaders and groups from directly
contacting and mobilizing the technical agencies for support and services.
“Nowadays its difficult to get even a packet of seeds and information on new pests directly from
agriculture office. We have to go through ward members to get their support. Our ward
members are usually busy handling large projects and do not find it important to deal with our
small problems and demands. Before when there were line agencies at the DDC (District
Development Committees) it was easy for us. Our farmers group could directly visit these offices
(referring to DADO) to get services.” - Women member, Farmers Group, Jarayotar, Bhojpur
8. There seem to be awareness among the national and local level institutions about the
need to address gender equality and inclusion of GESI. However, knowledge and skills or
capacity on how to integrate in the design and planning cycle is limited.
• Knowledge and skills on participatory methods and approaches, gender and social
analysis, planning and gender integration of the national and provincial institutions such
as the climate change and disaster risk reduction related sectoral ministries, provincial
and local level authorities and disaster committees, field research centers (e.g. PARC50)
and local CSOs are very limited. Investments in the form of dedicated human resources;
budget and GESI capacity building seem to be a non-priority. This gap has contributed in
promoting elite capture of the development and disaster related resources and
opportunities.
• For example, the agricultural research centers in the field with heavy focus on extension
services, do not have dedicated staffs with expertise on gender and social analysis to
ensure that the agricultural technologies, extension services etc. are GESI responsive. In
PARC, the criteria for selection of demonstration sites and caretaker-farmers to test and
promote improved technologies, varietal seeds, fruit trees, livestock etc. are: based on
interest of farmers (voluntary); farming experience; risk bearers; influential; willingness
to participate in trainings and meetings; having land to test etc. Poor women and
49 Dalits: Dalit is the term used to identify the group of people who are unlawfully being considered lower class or
untouchable. They account for million or 12.82% of total population of Nepal.
50 PARC: Pakhribas Agriculture Research Center
Page 37 of 51

=== PAGE 191 ===
marginalized groups do not fall in these criteria and hence majority of the caretaker-
farmers are advantaged men.
• The poor investments on developing appropriate and GESI responsive extension
materials and approaches have also largely affected in making these services ineffective,
particularly for poor indigenous people. The uses of technical and non-local language in
delivering the extension services seem to be an issue for them.
“Three years ago there was a meeting on forest management and the participants were mostly
women as most of the men in our village are abroad. Most of us could not understand what sir
(resource person) was trying to tell us. From the posters he showed us, we assumed that the
meeting was on forest management.” - Rai woman (IP), Besi, Packsinda 5, Makalu
• Besides the issues related to capacities, the local level institutions do not have
structures and mechanisms for integrating GESI in their planning cycle, making it
difficult for them to find spaces to plan and implement. Before federal local level
administrative structure there used to be a separate women development office (WDO)
with dedicated staffs and planning system and budget at the local district level. The
WDO is now merged with the municipality with only one staff and the separated
planning process for gender related activities are not a priority.
9. The stakeholders and beneficiaries, particularly in climate /disaster risk
reduction/management related planning, committees and activities are largely
considered as a monolithic group. The historical exclusion of the poor women and highly
marginalized groups are not specifically considered, which has made it difficult for them
to compete for resources with the advantaged groups.
• The local level disaster risk management committees and district disaster management
committees largely do not categorize its stakeholders from gender, age, ethnicity, socio-
economic and geographical diversity perspectives during disasters. This has contributed
in excluding the poor, socially and geographically marginalized women and men from
disaster response, and rehabilitation support.
“Disaster do not discriminate between the rich and the poor and hence we do not have special
provisions for the poor and marginalized during landslide rescue and response. The door is
always open for all.” - Member, District Disaster Management Committee, Khadbari,
Sankhuwasabha
Page 38 of 51

=== PAGE 192 ===
5. Key Recommendations
1. Establish a working definition of the primary stakeholders (women, marginalized, highly
marginalized and vulnerable groups) for the project area, by contextualizing and
categorising according to their different and overlapping exclusions, vulnerabilities, roles
and contributions and intersectionality from the following perspectives:
• Historical/Structural Exclusion – against certain groups based on gender, caste, ethnicity,
language or location e.g. Dalits, particularly from remote rural areas, Tarai Dalits such as
Sardars, Doms, Musahars etc.; marginalized ethnic/indigenous peoples such as the Botes,
Majhi’s, Kumals living along the river beds; Rai’s Bhotes from remote and disaster and
drought prone locations etc.
• Situational Vulnerabilities due to climate change and disaster risks – particularly women
and residing in disaster prone, remote and climate affected locations and who are disabled,
elderly, children and single women.
• Economically poor households (ranging from food security for 3 months to 6 months/year).
• Women and men (Contributors) who are directly engaged in the day to day management of
the farms, and natural resources, but whose contributions and knowledge largely remain
invisible.
2. Identify and promote tested women-friendly and climate smart technologies and
practices both at household and farm levels by developing partnership with specialized
government and non-governmental institutions/local resource persons to reduce poor
and marginalized women’s time poverty.
• The focus of the technologies and practices could be on water recharge and management,
for e.g. recharge spring water, micro-irrigation, multiple-use water system, solar pumps etc.
promoted by agencies such as DoFSC, Helvetas, ICIMOD, iDE, WWF/KCAP etc.; appropriate
cooking energy (e.g. GEF/SGP, CRT, Practical Action, PEEDA); women-friendly farming
technologies; fodder improvement; pest and weeds/invasive species management, storage
of agricultural products, mini power tillers, climate resilient vegetable and crop seeds and
varieties for income generation; development of commercial pockets etc. (e.g. Rural
Municipalities/Wards, ARC-Pakhribas/NARC, LIBIRD, CEAPRED, RRN, iDE etc.);
3. Strengthen existing or form new women and marginalized people’s groups (e.g. Women,
IPs, Dalits) and networks at local level, and organize them to participate, practice
leadership, market forest/ agricultural/ tourism products, influence planning and
decision-making processes, mobilize both project and local development resources.
Ensure systematic and formal linkages of these groups with the local wards and
municipalities and DRR/CC related committees' planning structures.
• Ensure that poor and marginalized women and men who are not included nor part of any
committees are the main members of these groups. Identify local women leaders and
champions, particularly from among the marginalized groups, and provide them with
leadership and advocacy training and regular mentorship/coaching.
Page 39 of 51

=== PAGE 193 ===
• Ensure that the GESI related groups and networks allow both women and men to learn
about GESI and the importance of women and marginalized group’s engagement in DRR
and Climate Change related decision-making and access to financial and technical resources
to improve their livelihoods.
• Develop technical knowledge and skills of women and marginalized groups to ensure their
meaningful engagement and to be able to implement community based GLOF, EWS etc.
• Ensure that local government’s budgets are also allocated for GESI related activities
including GESI responsive infrastructures such as safe houses for shelter during disasters;
meeting halls etc.
4. Increase poor and marginalized women and men’s income and employability by tapping
and linking with those institutions with experience, and with Value Chains (VCs) and
Micro-enterprises (MEs) that are already tested, established and successful in the Koshi
Basin areas.
• For example, poultry, livestock, horticulture, vegetable seeds, crops etc. promoted by ARC-
Pakhribas could be supported by the project through the provision of seed money or
facilitating to lease public/private farming land; support agro-tourism (organic), eco-friendly
homestays; link them with micro-finance organisations and cooperatives, learn from
MEDEPA, USAID’s KISAN-II , Hariyo Ban Project etc.
5. Ensure timely, transparent/complete, and easy to understand communication and
information to the poor women and marginalized groups on the project’s and local
government’s financial and technical resources.
• For example, information related to opportunities such as training, planning meeting;
technical information (subsidies, loans, business/entrepreneurial skills, CC induced DRR,
EWS, agriculture related etc.).
6. Support the Monitoring Information System (MIS) of the project to capture gendered
outcomes and pilot the same in selected ward(s)/municipality to upscale it. Gender-
related challenges and learning should feed back into the project’s annual planning
process, and disseminated through publications and other knowledge-sharing events at
national and community levels.
• For example, by developing a knowledge management strategic plan on GESI and Climate
Change Induced Disasters and Hazards, which can be tied with the Project’s knowledge
management/communication efforts as well as to monitoring and evaluation processes.
7. Develop a simple working GESI in Climate Change induced disaster risk reduction and
management strategy or a guideline for the project to ensure systematic integration of
GESI in the project cycle and pilot the same in selected wards/municipality to upscale it.
• The working strategy could be based on the findings and recommendations of the various
studies conducted by UNDP for the preparation of the proposal, such as GESI Assessment
(2019), Indigenous People’s consultation report, baseline study (2020) and the GoN’s GESI
Strategy for different sectors (Forestry, Agriculture, Ministry of Local Development). The
Page 40 of 51

=== PAGE 194 ===
Working GESI strategy/guideline could include the following:
- Develop a working definition of the local community and primary stakeholders in the
context of disasters and climate change (as explained in Recommendation 1 above). This
definition should be used to identify and include representatives of the primary
stakeholders/vulnerable groups in designing, planning, implementation and
monitoring/reporting and benefit sharing for all project related programs and activities.
Select interested/potential wards or municipality to pilot it.
- Designate mandatory quota for women and the marginalized groups. For example, at
least 50% women and 30% marginalized groups (marginalized Indigenous peoples; poor
Dalits) for their inclusion across all project activities, for example in key decision-making,
membership, consultation and awareness raising, technicians, local resource persons,
recipients of resources- climate change induced DRR, agriculture, infrastructure
development related equipment, training, materials, funds etc.)
- Systematically integrate GESI in operations and project cycle. The Working GESI
strategy/guideline should provide a clear direction and resources to systematically
integrate GESI in all stages of the project cycle management (design, planning,
implementation and M&E).
- The project’s and its partners’ senior management and project supervisors should be
held accountable. Terms of Reference (ToR) and appraisal systems should incorporate
responsibilities for social and gender results in planning and delivery. Designation of
GESI focal points, staffs etc.
- Provision to ensure “Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC" in decision-making. The
FPIC is to establish bottom-up participation and consultation of indigenous population
prior to the beginning of development on ancestral land or using resources within the
indigenous population's territory. Indigenous people have a special connection to their
land and resources, and they inhabit 20% of the earth's surface. These areas are
environmentally rich in both renewable and non-renewable resources. The collective
ownership style of most indigenous peoples conflicts with the modern global market
and its continuous need for resources and land. To protect indigenous peoples rights,
international human rights law has created processes and standards to safeguard their
way of life and to encourage participation in the decision-making process.
- Use of local languages in extension, communication, and information and respect of
customary laws and practices.
8. Develop a capacity building package with adequate resources, for the project’s staffs and
its key and direct partners to enhance GESI integration.
• Strengthen knowledge and skills of local level resource persons, technicians and managers
of both government and non-governmental institutions (e.g. Municipalities, Wards, civil
society organizations, local resource persons, media) to develop, implement, and monitor
GESI responsive local plans.
Page 41 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 194 ---
 |  | The
FPIC is to establish bottom-up participation and consultation of indigenous population |  | 
prior to the beginning of development on ancestral land or using resources within the |  | 
indigenous population's territory. | Indigenous people have a special connection to thei | 
land and resources, and they inhabit 20% of the earth's surface. These areas are |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 194 ---
and its continuous need for resources and land. To protect indigenous peoples rights,
international human rights law has created processes and standards to safeguard thei
way of life and to encourage participation in the decision-making process.

=== PAGE 195 ===
• The focus of the capacity development package should be on strengthening their:
a) participatory skills and methods; GESI analysis; vulnerability assessment from GESI
perspectives; planning and M&E; understanding the linkages between GESI and
DRR/Climate Change; b) leadership, Organizational Assessment (including accountability,
creating enabling environment and cooperation for GESI issues); etc.
• Develop and implement gender and social inclusion responsive materials, approaches and
methods.
Page 42 of 51

=== PAGE 196 ===
References
• GCF, UN Women. Toolkit Mainstreaming Gender. August 2017 (First Edition). Available
online at https://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/194568/Guidelines_-
_GCF_Toolkit_Mainstreaming_Gender.pdf/860d1d03-877d-4c64-9a49-c0160c794ca7
• GCF/Bangladesh/WBG/GCF/B.19/22/Rev. Gender Action Plan, FP070: Global Clean Cooking
Program – Bangladesh. April 2018.
• GCF/Bangladesh/WBG/GCF/B.19/22/Rev. Gender Assessment, FP070: Global Clean Cooking
Program – Bangladesh. April 2018.
• GCF/Guatemala | IUCN | B.21/15. Gender Assessment, FP087: Building livelihood resilience
to climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala’s highlands. January 2019.
• GCF/Guatemala/IUCN/B.21/15. Gender Action Plan, FP087: Building livelihood resilience to
climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala’s highlands. January 2019.
• GCF/Kazakhstan/EBRD/B.18/04. Gender Action Plan, FP047: GCF-EBRD Kazakhstan
Renewables Framework. September 2017.
• GCF/Kazakhstan/EBRD/B.18/04. Gender Assessment, FP047: GCF-EBRD Kazakhstan
Renewables Framework. September 2017
• GCF/Maldives/UNDP/B.11/11. Gender Action Plan, FP007: Supporting Vulnerable
Communities in Maldives to Manage Climate Change-Induced Water Shortages. Publication
date not available.
• GCF/Maldives/UNDP/B.11/11. Gender Assessment, FP007: Supporting Vulnerable
Communities in Maldives to Manage Climate Change-Induced Water Shortages. Publication
date not available.
• GESI Working Group, International Development Partners Group, Nepal. A Common
Framework for Gender Equality and Social Inclusion. April 2017. Available online at
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/nepal/docs/generic/GESI%20framework%20Report_Fi
nal_2017.pdf
• Global Gender and Climate Alliance, UNDP. Gender and Climate Change, Capacity
Development Series, Disaster risk reduction, Training Module 3. 2013.
• Government of Nepal. Disaster Risk Reduction National Policy 2018. Available online at
http://drrportal.gov.np/uploads/document/1476.pdf. 2018.
• Government of Nepal. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act 2017. Available online
at http://www.drrportal.gov.np/uploads/document/1509.pdf
• Government of Nepal. Nepal Earthquake 2015, Post Disaster Needs Assessment. Available
online at https://www.npc.gov.np/images/category/PDNA_volume_BFinalVersion.pdf.
2015.
Page 43 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 196 ---
• GESI Working Group, International Development Partners Group, Nepal. A Common
Framework for Gender Equality and Social Inclusion. April 2017. Available online at
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/nepal/docs/generic/GESI%20framework%20Report_Fi
nal_2017.pdf


=== PAGE 197 ===
• Green Climate Fund. Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan 2018–2020. 7 June 2018.
• Gurung, DD, Bisht S (2014). Women's Empowerment at the Frontline of Adaptation:
Emerging issues, adaptive practices, and priorities in Nepal. 2014/3. ICIMOD Working Paper
2014/3. Available online at www.icimoc.org/himaldoc
• Gurung, Dibya Devi. Inception Report, Gender and Social Inclusion Component Preparation,
Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from climate change induced flooding in glacial river
basins of Nepal, Submitted to UNDP Nepal. July 2019.
• Handicap International and European Commission Humanitarian Aid (ECHO).
Mainstreaming Disability into Disaster Risk Reduction, A Training Manual, Nepal. 2009.
• ICIMOD. Flood Early Warning Systems in Nepal, A Gendered Perspective, ICIMOD Working
Paper. 2014/4. Available online at: http://lib.icimod.org/record/29959/files/Flood_EWS.pdf
• ICIMOD. Submitted to UNDP Nepal. May 2018.
• London School of Economics and Political Science, University of Essex and Max-Planck
Institute of Economics. The Gendered Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact of
Catastrophic Events on the Gender Gap in Life Expectancy. 1981–2002.
• MoHA, Government of Nepal. Nepal Disaster Report 2019. June 2019. Available online at
http://drrportal.gov.np/uploads/document/1594.pdf
• MoFE, Government of Nepal. National Climate Change Policy 2019. February 2020. Availabe
at https://mofe.gov.np/downloadfile/climatechange_policy_english_1580984322.pdf
• MoPE, Government of Nepal. Draft, Climate Change and Gender Strategy. 2072 BS.
• Nepal
IASC Emergency Preparedness and Response Cluster System. The Multi-Agency Flood
Impact Assessment Koshi River Flood, Preliminary Results. September 2008.
• Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities. Indigenous Peoples consultation to
understand potential glacial lake outbursts floods risks for safeguarding lives and livelihood,
Final Report submitted to UNDP-Nepal. 26 February 2018.
• The Asia Foundation. Nepal's Locally Elected Women Representatives, Exploratory Study of
Needs and Capacity. Publication date not available.
• UN ISDR. Hydgo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and
Communities to Disasters Priorities for Action 2005-2015. 2015.
• UNDP India. Funding Proposal, FP084: Enhancing Climate Resilience of India’s Coastal
Communities, Decision B.21/34. Green Climate Fund. 28 November 2018.
Page 44 of 51

=== PAGE 198 ===
• UNDP India. Gender Action Plan, Funding Proposal, FP084: Enhancing climate resilience of
India’s coastal communities, B.21/15. 10 January 2019.
• UNDP Nepal and FEED (P) Ltd. Jhamsikhel, Lalitpur Nepal. Inception Report, Protecting
livelihoods and assets at risk from climate change induced flooding in glacial river basins of
Nepal (engineering design study). May 2019.
• UNDP Country Office Nepal, 2018. NGOs/CSOs, Private Sectors and Government
Consultation to Understand Potential Glacial Lake Outburst Floods Risks for Safeguarding
Lives and Livelihoods, Final Report submitted to UNDP-Nepal by Youth Alliance for
Environment, Nepal.
• UNDP Nepal. Concept Note, Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from climate change
induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal. Green Climate Fund. 14 February 2018.
• UNDP. Gender and Disasters, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery. October 2010.
• UNFCCC. Paris Agreement. 2015. Available online at
https://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_ag
reement.pdf
• United Nations. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. Available online
at https://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf
• United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals. Available online at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300
• Women Organising for Change in Agriculture and NRM, Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility/World Bank/Ministry of Forest, Environment and Climate Change-REDD-IC (2017).
Gender Assessment and Action Plan for integrating Gender in Emission Reduction
Programme Document. 2017.
• World Wild Life Fund (WWF), Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere (CARE),
Federation of Community Forestry Users in Nepal (FECOFUN), and National Trust for Nature
Conservation (NTNC). Hariyo Ban Program, Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Strategy for
Promoting transformational Leadership and Social Justice in NRM and Climate Change. 2013
- 2017. Publication date not available.
• WWF Country Office Bhutan, 2017. Gender Assessment, FP050: Bhutan for life, Bhutan,
WWF, B.18/04. Green Climate Fund.
Page 45 of 51

=== PAGE 199 ===
Appendices
Annex 1: Checklist for data collection
Guiding Questions for Institutional Level Data Collection (for federal, district and local levels)
GESI related structures and analysis capacities:
• What are the existing gender capacities of the institution? (GESI/GLOF/CC analysis skills;
knowledge and skills on participatory methods and approaches etc.)
• Is there a policy/strategy/guideline on GESI? If not, is there any interest/attempt to develop a GESI
policy? Does it use the findings of the gender research and assessments?
• Is gender expertise and capacity building budgeted for?
Commitments:
• Are any changes made to make the M&E system more gender-friendly in terms of gender
differentiation and in terms of operation? Do indicators exist to assess gender inequality and
impact?
• Has gender been made a critical factor in the selection of activities and consultation processes? Are
women and the marginalized groups consulted, and/or are their needs known and taken into
account?
• What evidence is there of a commitment to the gender policy or gender mainstreaming program
within the organization (management, different levels, board)? What kind of changes can be
observed?
• Do you feel that the organization cooperates in promoting gender within the organization? Is so
how?
Guiding Questions for Community Level Data Collection
Material Condition Related Questions – household and Social Position Related Questions -
community levels household and community levels
Definition of marginalized groups: Participation in decision-making;
• Who are considered the marginalized groups from the representation:
CC/GLOF perspectives? And why? • Who are included in the
decision-making processes and
Engagement and participation: how (e.g. in Local government
• What kind of GESI/CC/GLOF related knowledge, skills and planning; LDRMP, LAPA, CAPA
capacities do different groups of women and men have in etc.)?
the community? (Who does what? How? Where?; Who are • Who controls decisions? How?
the group members? Who are not included in the groups? Where? Why?
Why? • Who leads? Who decides?
• What are the GESI/CC/GLOF related needs and priorities of Who influences decisions?
the different groups of women and men in the community? • What are the GESI/CC/GLOF
related needs and priorities of
Access: the different groups of women
• What are the GESI/CC/GLOF related resources51 in the and men in the community?
community? What are the external GESI/CC/GLOF related
interventions/resources in the community? Who has access Access to social position related
to these resources? How? Who does not? Why? resources/information:
Benefit sharing: • Who knows what? Why? Who
• Who benefits the most from the forest- related resources knows very little, and why?
and interventions and how? Who benefits the least and
why?
51 Resources include – social, financial, human, physical and natural capitals.
Page 46 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 199 ---
 | Guiding Questions for Institutional Level Data Collection (for federal, district and local levels) | 
GESI related structures and analysis capacities:
• What are the existing gender capacities of the institution? (GESI/GLOF/CC analysis skills;
knowledge and skills on participatory methods and approaches etc.)
• Is there a policy/strategy/guideline on GESI? If not, is there any interest/attempt to develop a GESI
policy? Does it use the findings of the gender research and assessments?
• Is gender expertise and capacity building budgeted for?
Commitments:
• Are any changes made to make the M&E system more gender-friendly in terms of gender
differentiation and in terms of operation? Do indicators exist to assess gender inequality and
impact?
• Has gender been made a critical factor in the selection of activities and consultation processes? Are
women and the marginalized groups consulted, and/or are their needs known and taken into
account?
• What evidence is there of a commitment to the gender policy or gender mainstreaming program
within the organization (management, different levels, board)? What kind of changes can be
observed?
• Do you feel that the organization cooperates in promoting gender within the organization? Is so
how? |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 199 ---
 | Guiding Questions for Community Level Data Collection |  | 
Material Condition Related Questions – household and
community levels |  | Social Position Related Questions -
household and community levels | 
Definition of marginalized groups:
• Who are considered the marginalized groups from the
CC/GLOF perspectives? And why?
Engagement and participation:
• What kind of GESI/CC/GLOF related knowledge, skills and
capacities do different groups of women and men have in
the community? (Who does what? How? Where?; Who are
the group members? Who are not included in the groups?
Why?
• What are the GESI/CC/GLOF related needs and priorities of
the different groups of women and men in the community?
Access:
• What are the GESI/CC/GLOF related resources51 in the
community? What are the external GESI/CC/GLOF related
interventions/resources in the community? Who has access
to these resources? How? Who does not? Why?
Benefit sharing:
• Who benefits the most from the forest- related resources
and interventions and how? Who benefits the least and
why? |  | Participation in decision-making;
representation:
• Who are included in the
decision-making processes and
how (e.g. in Local government
planning; LDRMP, LAPA, CAPA
etc.)?
• Who controls decisions? How?
Where? Why?
• Who leads? Who decides?
Who influences decisions?
• What are the GESI/CC/GLOF
related needs and priorities of
the different groups of women
and men in the community?
Access to social position related
resources/information:
• Who knows what? Why? Who
knows very little, and why? | 

=== PAGE 200 ===
Annex 2: List of People Consulted (KIIs/IDIs, FGDs and consultations)
2A. List of KIIs/IDIs
SN. Name/ Location Organisation Gender Social Group
Position or Profession M F BC D J O
1. Indra Rai Num, Simale FUG X X
Simlae, Member
Salbote,
Makalu
2. Narmaya Num Besi, Single Women X X
Parajuli Makalu
3. Ashbol Rai Num Besi, Poor IP Farmer X X
Makalu
4. Santa Num Besi, Blacksmith X X
Bahadur BK Makalu
5. Jiban Prasad Khadbari CDO X X
Dulal
6. Khil Prasad Khadbari Planning X X
Sharma Officer,
Khandbari
Forest Office
7. Salina Rai Khadbari Assistant X X
Forest Officer,
Khadbari
Forest Office
8. Narbhupal Tamku, Rural X X
Rai Makalu Municipality
Working
Committee
Member
9. Ganander Arund Farmer X X
Dahal Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
10. Sarita Rai Arund Women ward X X
Rural member
Municipalit
y, ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
11. Devi BK Arund Women Dalit X X
Rural ward member
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
12. Arjun K. Rai Arund Farmer X X
Rural
Page 47 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 200 ---
SN. | Name/
Position | Location | Organisation
or Profession | Gender |  | Social Group |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | M | F | BC | D | J | O
1. | Indra Rai | Num,
Simlae,
Salbote,
Makalu | Simale FUG
Member | X |  |  |  | X | 
2. | Narmaya
Parajuli | Num Besi,
Makalu | Single Women |  | X | X |  |  | 
3. | Ashbol Rai | Num Besi,
Makalu | Poor IP Farmer | X |  |  |  | X | 
4. | Santa
Bahadur BK | Num Besi,
Makalu | Blacksmith | X |  |  | X |  | 
5. | Jiban Prasad
Dulal | Khadbari | CDO | X |  | X |  |  | 
6. | Khil Prasad
Sharma | Khadbari | Planning
Officer,
Khandbari
Forest Office | X |  | X |  |  | 
7. | Salina Rai | Khadbari | Assistant
Forest Officer,
Khadbari
Forest Office |  | X |  |  | X | 
8. | Narbhupal
Rai | Tamku,
Makalu | Rural
Municipality
Working
Committee
Member | X |  |  |  | X | 
9. | Ganander
Dahal | Arund
Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur | Farmer | X |  | X |  |  | 
10. | Sarita Rai | Arund
Rural
Municipalit
y, ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur | Women ward
member |  | X |  |  | X | 
11. | Devi BK | Arund
Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur | Women Dalit
ward member |  | X |  | X |  | 
12. | Arjun K. Rai | Arund
Rural | Farmer | X |  |  |  | X | 

=== PAGE 201 ===
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
13. Phulmaya Rai Arund Farmer X X
Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
14. Bishnu Arund Farmer X X
Shrestha Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur
15. Ritesh Shah Pakhribash Livestock X X
Officer, PARC
16. Narayan Pakhribash Site X X
Bhandari Caretaker/Lea
d Farmer,
PARC,
Pakhribash
17. Bal Kumar Ward Ward Member X X
Rai Number 6,
Hatuwagad
i, Ghoretar,
Bhojpur
18. Durga Kumar Udaipur Chairperson, X X
Thapa Belaka
Nagarpalika
19. Ram Chandra Kathmandu Ecologist, X X
Kadel DNPWC
20. Prem Kadel Kathmandu DDG/ DNPWC X X
21. Tamdev Koshi Warden, Koshi X X
Chaudhary Tappu Tappu
22. Sarju Kathmandu DHM X X
Vaidhya
23. Prativa Kathmandu DHM-Gender X X
Manandhar Focal Point
(GFP)
24. Indira Kathmandu DoFSC/MoEF - X X
Malapati GFP
25. Prem Paudel Koshi DoFSC/MoEF X X
Tappu/Kath
mandu
Page 48 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 201 ---
 |  | Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
13. | Phulmaya Rai | Arund
Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur | Farmer |  | X |  |  | X | 
14. | Bishnu
Shrestha | Arund
Rural
Municipalit
y, Ward
Number 6,
Jarayatar,
Bhojpur | Farmer |  | X |  |  | X | 
15. | Ritesh Shah | Pakhribash | Livestock
Officer, PARC | X |  |  |  |  | X
16. | Narayan
Bhandari | Pakhribash | Site
Caretaker/Lea
d Farmer,
PARC,
Pakhribash | X |  | X |  |  | 
17. | Bal Kumar
Rai | Ward
Number 6,
Hatuwagad
i, Ghoretar,
Bhojpur | Ward Member | X |  |  |  | X | 
18. | Durga Kumar
Thapa | Udaipur | Chairperson,
Belaka
Nagarpalika | X |  | X |  |  | 
19. | Ram Chandra
Kadel | Kathmandu | Ecologist,
DNPWC | X |  | X |  |  | 
20. | Prem Kadel | Kathmandu | DDG/ DNPWC | X |  | X |  |  | 
21. | Tamdev
Chaudhary | Koshi
Tappu | Warden, Koshi
Tappu | X |  |  |  | X | 
22. | Sarju
Vaidhya | Kathmandu | DHM | X |  |  |  | X | 
23. | Prativa
Manandhar | Kathmandu | DHM-Gender
Focal Point
(GFP) |  | X |  |  | X | 
24. | Indira
Malapati | Kathmandu | DoFSC/MoEF -
GFP |  | X |  |  | X | 
25. | Prem Paudel | Koshi
Tappu/Kath
mandu | DoFSC/MoEF | X |  | X |  |  | 

=== PAGE 202 ===
26. Sindhu Kathmandu MoEF-Chief- X X
Dhungana Planning/Gend
er Focal Point
27. Rishi Acharya Kathmandu MoFAGA X X
28. Kanti Kathmandu Chair- X X
Rajbhandari HIMAWANTI
29. Saanu Taibe Biratnagar Member, X X
HIMAWANTI
30. Sita Sunar Kathmandu Secretary, X X
HIMAWANTI
Total 19 11 11 3 15 1
(63%) (37%) (37%) (10%) (50%) (3.3%)
Note: M = Male; F = Female; BC = Bahun/Chettri; D = Dalit; J = Janajati; O = Other
Page 49 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 202 ---
26. | Sindhu
Dhungana | Kathmandu | MoEF-Chief-
Planning/Gend
er Focal Point | X |  | X |  |  | 
27. | Rishi Acharya | Kathmandu | MoFAGA | X |  | X |  |  | 
28. | Kanti
Rajbhandari | Kathmandu | Chair-
HIMAWANTI |  | X |  |  | X | 
29. | Saanu Taibe | Biratnagar | Member,
HIMAWANTI |  | X |  |  | X | 
30. | Sita Sunar | Kathmandu | Secretary,
HIMAWANTI |  | X |  | X |  | 
Total |  |  |  | 19
(63%) | 11
(37%) | 11
(37%) | 3
(10%) | 15
(50%) | 1
(3.3%)

=== PAGE 203 ===
2B. FGDs and sharing workshop
2B1. Aggregated and disaggregated data on FGD participants
SN. District FGD Number and Names FGD Type No. of No. of Participants
Participants Caste/Ethnic Group
Gender Wise
Rural Urban Orgnisat Male Female Brahman Dalits Janajati Tarai
Muni Muni ion /Chettri
1. Dhankuta Pakhribash Agricultural - - X 7 1 4 - 1 3
Research Centre, Dhankuta
2. Dhankuta Pakhribash Municipality - X - 6 6 8 - 4 -
3. Sunsari Koshi Rural Municipality X - - 6 18 3 20 1 -
(Ward 3)
4. Sankhuwasabha Khandbari Municipality, Venus - X - 12 3 3 1 11 -
Hotel
5. Sankhuwasabha Makalu Rural Municipality X - - 1 13 - 12 2 -
(Ward 5) (women), Num,
Saraswati Tole
6. Sankhuwasabha Khandbari Municipality (Ward - X - 9 12 - - 21 -
9), Tumlingtar, Kumal Village
(mixed Janajati group)
7. Sankhuwasabha Makalu Rural Municipality X - - 5 7 3 1 8 -
Office, Num Bazaar (mixed)
8. Sankhuwasabha Makalu Rural Municipality X - - 7 11 7 3 8 -
(Ward 5), Phyaksinda Besi
(mixed group)
9. Bhojpur Hatuwagadhi Rural X - - 8 16 - 1 23 -
Municipality (Ward 6) Bhojpur
(mixed group)
Total 4 9 3 2 1 61 87 28 38 79 3
Total number of people consulted 148
2B2. List of participants in FGDs and sharing workshop (separately)
Page 50 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 203 ---
SN. | District | FGD Number and Names | FGD Type |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | No. of |  |  |  | No. of Participants
Caste/Ethnic Group |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Participants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Gender Wise |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Rural |  |  | Urban |  |  | Orgnisat |  | Male | Male | Female | Female |  |  | Brahman |  | Dalits | Janajati | Tarai
 |  |  |  | Muni |  |  | Muni |  |  | ion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | /Chettri |  |  |  | 
1. | Dhankuta | Pakhribash Agricultural
Research Centre, Dhankuta | - |  |  | - |  |  | X |  |  | 7 |  | 1 |  |  | 4 |  |  | - | 1 | 3
2. | Dhankuta | Pakhribash Municipality | - |  |  | X |  |  | - |  |  | 6 |  | 6 |  |  | 8 |  |  | - | 4 | -
3. | Sunsari | Koshi Rural Municipality
(Ward 3) | X |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 6 |  | 18 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 20 | 1 | -
4. | Sankhuwasabha | Khandbari Municipality, Venus
Hotel | - |  |  | X |  |  | - |  |  | 12 |  | 3 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 1 | 11 | -
5. | Sankhuwasabha | Makalu Rural Municipality
(Ward 5) (women), Num,
Saraswati Tole | X |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 1 |  | 13 |  |  | - |  |  | 12 | 2 | -
6. | Sankhuwasabha | Khandbari Municipality (Ward
9), Tumlingtar, Kumal Village
(mixed Janajati group) | - |  |  | X |  |  | - |  |  | 9 |  | 12 |  |  | - |  |  | - | 21 | -
7. | Sankhuwasabha | Makalu Rural Municipality
Office, Num Bazaar (mixed) | X |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 5 |  | 7 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 1 | 8 | -
8. | Sankhuwasabha | Makalu Rural Municipality
(Ward 5), Phyaksinda Besi
(mixed group) | X |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 7 |  | 11 |  |  | 7 |  |  | 3 | 8 | -
9. | Bhojpur | Hatuwagadhi Rural
Municipality (Ward 6) Bhojpur
(mixed group) | X |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | 8 |  | 16 |  |  | - |  |  | 1 | 23 | -
Total | 4 | 9 | 3 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 61 |  | 87 |  |  | 28 |  |  | 38 | 79 | 3
Total number of people consulted |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 148 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 203 ---
No. of Participants
Caste/Ethnic Group

=== PAGE 204 ===
Annex 3: Sample of International and National Policies from GESI Perspectives
International Policies GESI provisions
The Universal Declaration of • Accords protection to the rights of women prohibits
Human Rights discrimination and accords equality before the law.
The International Covenant on • Prohibits discrimination, promotes equality of women
Civil and Political Rights and men’s rights and equality before the law.
The International Covenant on • Prohibits discrimination, and calls for equality of
Economic, Social and Cultural women and men regarding the rights recognized by the
Rights Covenant.
Convention on the Elimination of • Adopted in 1979 by the UN General Assembly, is often
All Forms of Discrimination described as an international bill of rights for women.
Against Women (CEDAW), Consisting of a preamble and 30 articles, it defines what
constitutes discrimination against women and sets up
an agenda for national action to end such
discrimination.
Beijing Declaration and Platform • Protects the human rights of women, as defined by
for Action and Beijing +10 international human rights instruments, will only be
dead words unless they are fully recognized, protected,
applied, and effectively enforced, at national legal and
practical levels, in family, civil, criminal, labor and
commercial codes, as well as in administrative
regulations (Paragraph 218).
Gender and the UN Declaration • The human rights of indigenous women are protected
on the Rights of Indigenous by all of the provisions of this UN Declaration, which
Peoples, also calls for particular attention to be paid to their
rights and special needs, and calls upon States to take
measures to ensure that indigenous women enjoy the
full protection and guarantees against all forms of
violence and discrimination.
The Hyogo Framework for Action • It is the first plan to explain, describe and detail the
(HFA), work that is required from all different sectors and
actors to reduce disaster losses. It was developed and
agreed on with the many partners needed to reduce
disaster risk - governments, international agencies,
disaster experts and many others - bringing them into a
common system of coordination. The HFA outlines five
priorities for action, and offers guiding principles and
practical means for achieving disaster resilience. Its goal
is to substantially reduce disaster losses by 2015 by
building the resilience of nations and communities to
disasters. This means reducing loss of lives and social,
Page 51 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 204 ---
International Policies | GESI provisions
The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights | • Accords protection to the rights of women prohibits
discrimination and accords equality before the law.
The International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights | • Prohibits discrimination, promotes equality of women
and men’s rights and equality before the law.
The International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights | • Prohibits discrimination, and calls for equality of
women and men regarding the rights recognized by the
Covenant.
Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), | • Adopted in 1979 by the UN General Assembly, is often
described as an international bill of rights for women.
Consisting of a preamble and 30 articles, it defines what
constitutes discrimination against women and sets up
an agenda for national action to end such
discrimination.
Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and Beijing +10 | • Protects the human rights of women, as defined by
international human rights instruments, will only be
dead words unless they are fully recognized, protected,
applied, and effectively enforced, at national legal and
practical levels, in family, civil, criminal, labor and
commercial codes, as well as in administrative
regulations (Paragraph 218).
Gender and the UN Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, | • The human rights of indigenous women are protected
by all of the provisions of this UN Declaration, which
also calls for particular attention to be paid to their
rights and special needs, and calls upon States to take
measures to ensure that indigenous women enjoy the
full protection and guarantees against all forms of
violence and discrimination.
The Hyogo Framework for Action
(HFA), | • It is the first plan to explain, describe and detail the
work that is required from all different sectors and
actors to reduce disaster losses. It was developed and
agreed on with the many partners needed to reduce
disaster risk - governments, international agencies,
disaster experts and many others - bringing them into a
common system of coordination. The HFA outlines five
priorities for action, and offers guiding principles and
practical means for achieving disaster resilience. Its goal
is to substantially reduce disaster losses by 2015 by
building the resilience of nations and communities to
disasters. This means reducing loss of lives and social,

=== PAGE 205 ===
economic, and environmental assets when hazards
strike.
UN Convention on Rights of • Adopted in 2007, aims to promote, protect and ensure
People with Disabilities (UNRPD) the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities,
and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.
National Policies and Strategies GESI provisions
Disaster Risk and Management • Have provisions that women at risk of disaster, children,
Act 2074 (2017) senior citizens, Dalits, marginalized groups and
communities, and people with disabilities will be
provided with special plans and programmes.
Disaster Risk Reduction National • Access, representation and meaningful participation of
Policy 2018 women, children, senior citizen, people with disabilities
and the people from economically and socially
marginalized communities will be ensured in all steps
and structures of disaster risk reduction based on
inclusive disaster management concept.
Guidelines: Disaster • Includes gender and cross cutting issues in
Preparedness and Response Plan preparedness and response planning; recognizes the
(DPRP) 2011 different needs, capacities and contributions of women,
girls, men and boys; ensures that the protection and
assistance provided in emergencies is planned and
implemented; considers the needs and capacities of
people with disabilities (PWD), women, and other
excluded groups; active participation in planning,
implementing and monitoring of the preparedness as
well as response activities.
Guidelines: District Disaster • Ensures participation of women, socially excluded
Management Plan (DRMP), 2012 groups, persons with disability in planning,
implementation, monitoring and reporting; collection
and maintenance of District Profile by sex, age,
disability and ethnicity/caste disaggregated data; GESI
analyses for District Profile.
Guidelines: Local Disaster Risk • Implementation of LDRMP has been made mandatory
Management Planning (LDRMP) for all local government bodies and it aims to
2012 institutionalize disaster risk management work and
mainstream it into annual programmes at the local
level. It ensures participation women, socially excluded
groups, persons with disability at all loves of the
development of the Local Disaster Risk Management
Plan. Mapping and documentation of VDC profile by
sex, age, disability and ethnicity/caste disaggregated
data.
National Climate Change Policy • The policy has recognized the need to integrate GESI
2019 through its Objectives, “To mainstream GESI into
adaptation and mitigation programs”, and as inter-
thematic area with GESI related 6 key strategies and
Page 52 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 205 ---
 | economic, and environmental assets when hazards
strike.
UN Convention on Rights of
People with Disabilities (UNRPD) | • Adopted in 2007, aims to promote, protect and ensure
the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities,
and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.

--- Table 2 on Page 205 ---
National Policies and Strategies | GESI provisions
Disaster Risk and Management
Act 2074 (2017) | • Have provisions that women at risk of disaster, children,
senior citizens, Dalits, marginalized groups and
communities, and people with disabilities will be
provided with special plans and programmes.
Disaster Risk Reduction National
Policy 2018 | • Access, representation and meaningful participation of
women, children, senior citizen, people with disabilities
and the people from economically and socially
marginalized communities will be ensured in all steps
and structures of disaster risk reduction based on
inclusive disaster management concept.
Guidelines: Disaster
Preparedness and Response Plan
(DPRP) 2011 | • Includes gender and cross cutting issues in
preparedness and response planning; recognizes the
different needs, capacities and contributions of women,
girls, men and boys; ensures that the protection and
assistance provided in emergencies is planned and
implemented; considers the needs and capacities of
people with disabilities (PWD), women, and other
excluded groups; active participation in planning,
implementing and monitoring of the preparedness as
well as response activities.
Guidelines: District Disaster
Management Plan (DRMP), 2012 | • Ensures participation of women, socially excluded
groups, persons with disability in planning,
implementation, monitoring and reporting; collection
and maintenance of District Profile by sex, age,
disability and ethnicity/caste disaggregated data; GESI
analyses for District Profile.
Guidelines: Local Disaster Risk
Management Planning (LDRMP)
2012 | • Implementation of LDRMP has been made mandatory
for all local government bodies and it aims to
institutionalize disaster risk management work and
mainstream it into annual programmes at the local
level. It ensures participation women, socially excluded
groups, persons with disability at all loves of the
development of the Local Disaster Risk Management
Plan. Mapping and documentation of VDC profile by
sex, age, disability and ethnicity/caste disaggregated
data.
National Climate Change Policy
2019 | • The policy has recognized the need to integrate GESI
through its Objectives, “To mainstream GESI into
adaptation and mitigation programs”, and as inter-
thematic area with GESI related 6 key strategies and

=== PAGE 206 ===
working policies. However, the policy is not informed by
the specific problems, challenges and opportunities
faced by different groups of women and men in the
context of climate change. The differential impacts of
climate change (CC) on different groups of women and
men are not taken into consideration. Even though the
GESI policy (inter-thematic area), mentions about
different vulnerable groups52 to be addressed, the
sectoral policies within it considers the
community/citizens as a monolithic groups and does
not take into consideration their historical
discrimination, situational vulnerabilities, and hence the
differential impacts of CC on these groups.
There are no GESI Outcomes making it difficult to
measure the achievements in the end of the policy.
National Adaptation Programme • Climate-induced disasters are one of the themes; GESI
of Action (NAPA) to Climate as cross-cutting sectors; and gender sensitivity analysis
Change 2010 of climate change impacts on NAPA themes. However,
the GESI analysis is not fully used to inform the plan and
is parked as Annex 5 in the NAPA document.
National Disaster Response • Disaster response activities (61 operational activities
Framework (NDRF) 2013 from 0 hour – 1 month) include: special protection
arrangement at the camps and distribution sites for the
protection of women, children, elderly, disable (47
activities), MoWCSW; ensure safe environment for
survivors particularly the vulnerable groups, and control
gender base violence (54), DWDO; social support to
unaccompanied children, disable and elderly, who have
lost their supporting family members; and reunion of
their lost members or relatives (56), MoWCSW/DWDO;
Emergency Response Preparedness; protection plan of
the vulnerable groups and gender based violence (28),
DWDO.
Gender Equality and Social • Have provisions for GESI being mainstreamed in
Inclusion Policy of Ministry of municipalities by trans-formatory social mobilization by
Local Development 2010 creating community level institutional structures like
Inclusive Ward Citizen Forums and Integrated Planning
Committees supported by Social Mobilization
Guidelines and Capacity Development Guidelines of
MoFALD; Social Units in Municipalities facilitate GESI
mainstreaming in planning, budgeting, and monitoring;
Socially Excluded Groups: Women, Dalits, indigenous
nationalities, Madhesis, Muslims, Children below the
age of 16 years, senior citizens above the age of 60
52 Chapter “8.9 GESI, Livelihoods and Good Governance” describes vulnerable groups as: Women, Dalit, indigenous
people, Madheshi, Tharu, Muslim, oppressed groups, backward class, minorities, marginalized, farmers, laborer,
youths, children, senior citizens, persons with all forms of disability, pregnant women, incapacitated and
disadvantaged persons or groups
Page 53 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 206 ---
 | working policies. However, the policy is not informed by
the specific problems, challenges and opportunities
faced by different groups of women and men in the
context of climate change. The differential impacts of
climate change (CC) on different groups of women and
men are not taken into consideration. Even though the
GESI policy (inter-thematic area), mentions about
different vulnerable groups52 to be addressed, the
sectoral policies within it considers the
community/citizens as a monolithic groups and does
not take into consideration their historical
discrimination, situational vulnerabilities, and hence the
differential impacts of CC on these groups.
There are no GESI Outcomes making it difficult to
measure the achievements in the end of the policy.
National Adaptation Programme
of Action (NAPA) to Climate
Change 2010 | • Climate-induced disasters are one of the themes; GESI
as cross-cutting sectors; and gender sensitivity analysis
of climate change impacts on NAPA themes. However,
the GESI analysis is not fully used to inform the plan and
is parked as Annex 5 in the NAPA document.
National Disaster Response
Framework (NDRF) 2013 | • Disaster response activities (61 operational activities
from 0 hour – 1 month) include: special protection
arrangement at the camps and distribution sites for the
protection of women, children, elderly, disable (47
activities), MoWCSW; ensure safe environment for
survivors particularly the vulnerable groups, and control
gender base violence (54), DWDO; social support to
unaccompanied children, disable and elderly, who have
lost their supporting family members; and reunion of
their lost members or relatives (56), MoWCSW/DWDO;
Emergency Response Preparedness; protection plan of
the vulnerable groups and gender based violence (28),
DWDO.
Gender Equality and Social
Inclusion Policy of Ministry of
Local Development 2010 | • Have provisions for GESI being mainstreamed in
municipalities by trans-formatory social mobilization by
creating community level institutional structures like
Inclusive Ward Citizen Forums and Integrated Planning
Committees supported by Social Mobilization
Guidelines and Capacity Development Guidelines of
MoFALD; Social Units in Municipalities facilitate GESI
mainstreaming in planning, budgeting, and monitoring;
Socially Excluded Groups: Women, Dalits, indigenous
nationalities, Madhesis, Muslims, Children below the
age of 16 years, senior citizens above the age of 60

=== PAGE 207 ===
years, persons with disability and people living in
geographically remote areas
Forest Sector GESI Strategy- • Vision "Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation is a
2007 gender and social equity sensitive and socially inclusive
organization practicing good forest governance to
ensure equitable access to, benefits from, and decision
making power over forest resources of all
stakeholders." Its Outcomes states: Favorable policy
environment that is GESI sensitive/responsive
conservation; Resource, services and benefits made
available to the women, poor and excluded in a
transparent and accountable manner; GESI responsive
program budget and monitoring system
institutionalized in all service delivery in conservation;
Rights to equitable access and utilization ensured
resources, services and benefits.
Forest Sector Strategy (2016- • Outcome 3 is about inclusive Forest sector
2025) organisations and institutions and focuses on increasing
participation, competency and leadership of women,
indigenous nationalities and other poor and socially
excluded groups and individuals. It promote gender
equity, inclusive development and economic uplift of
the poor, women, dalits, janajatis, adibasi and other
marginalised groups of people
Agriculture Development • The vision, objectives, institutional mechanisms of the
Strategy (ADS) strategy has identified inclusion as one of the main
2015 to 2035. component and has provisions for integrating GESI.
Although the Strategy promotes capital (commercial)
intensive mode of agriculture development, its
institutional mechanisms, objectives and actions does
provision for GESI integration – e.g. emphasis on
ensuring farmer’s participation in planning, decision
making, implementation and monitoring; classification
of farmers (commercial, subsistence and landless),
where the subsistence and landless farmers will be
directly benefitted from the programme, “The direct
effect is very strong in the case of the ADS measures
related to gender, social, and geographical inclusion;
land (eg. addressing the issues of tenancy, land leasing,
cooperative farming, reversing the trend towards
degraded land).”
Fifteen Plan (2076/77-2080/81) • Its strategy states: Gender equity and social inclusion
Approach Paper. mainstreaming in Forests, biodiversity and watershed
management and equitable sharing of benefit and its
Working policy states: implementation of GESI strategy
(with revision) in community based forest management
modalities.
Page 54 of 51

--- Table 1 on Page 207 ---
 | years, persons with disability and people living in
geographically remote areas
Forest Sector GESI Strategy-
2007 | • Vision "Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation is a
gender and social equity sensitive and socially inclusive
organization practicing good forest governance to
ensure equitable access to, benefits from, and decision
making power over forest resources of all
stakeholders." Its Outcomes states: Favorable policy
environment that is GESI sensitive/responsive
conservation; Resource, services and benefits made
available to the women, poor and excluded in a
transparent and accountable manner; GESI responsive
program budget and monitoring system
institutionalized in all service delivery in conservation;
Rights to equitable access and utilization ensured
resources, services and benefits.
Forest Sector Strategy (2016-
2025) | • Outcome 3 is about inclusive Forest sector
organisations and institutions and focuses on increasing
participation, competency and leadership of women,
indigenous nationalities and other poor and socially
excluded groups and individuals. It promote gender
equity, inclusive development and economic uplift of
the poor, women, dalits, janajatis, adibasi and other
marginalised groups of people
Agriculture Development
Strategy (ADS)
2015 to 2035. | • The vision, objectives, institutional mechanisms of the
strategy has identified inclusion as one of the main
component and has provisions for integrating GESI.
Although the Strategy promotes capital (commercial)
intensive mode of agriculture development, its
institutional mechanisms, objectives and actions does
provision for GESI integration – e.g. emphasis on
ensuring farmer’s participation in planning, decision
making, implementation and monitoring; classification
of farmers (commercial, subsistence and landless),
where the subsistence and landless farmers will be
directly benefitted from the programme, “The direct
effect is very strong in the case of the ADS measures
related to gender, social, and geographical inclusion;
land (eg. addressing the issues of tenancy, land leasing,
cooperative farming, reversing the trend towards
degraded land).”
Fifteen Plan (2076/77-2080/81)
Approach Paper. | • Its strategy states: Gender equity and social inclusion
mainstreaming in Forests, biodiversity and watershed
management and equitable sharing of benefit and its
Working policy states: implementation of GESI strategy
(with revision) in community based forest management
modalities.

=== PAGE 208 ===
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:&Agriculture$Research$Centre,$Pakhribas,$Dhankuta$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:$9$August$2019$
S Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
N& Ward,&Tole)& r&
F& M& Dalit& Madhesi& Janajati& Chet/Brahmi Others&
n&
1$ Amar$Bahadur$Gurung$ Agriculture$Research$ 9851174038$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
Centre,$Pakhribas,$
Chief,$Florist$
2$ Dr.$Suman$Karki$ ARS,$Pakhribas,$ 9855050510$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
Livestock$$
3$ Jawahel$Lal$Mandal$ ARS,$Pakhribas,$ 9817363276$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
$ Horticulture$
4$ Dhanik$Lal$Mandal$ ARS,$Pakhribas$ 9814374507$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
5$ Ritesh$Prasad$Shah$ ARS,$Pakhribas,$ 980383309$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
Nutrition$
6$ Amrit$Prasad$Poudel$ ARS,$Pakhribas,$PB$ 9856036939$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
7$ Dipesh$Pokhrel$ NCARP,$Agronomy$ 9842720771$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
8$ Dipti$Adhikari$ Bharatpur,$Chitwan,$ 9845079071$ √$ $ $ $ √ $
Horticulture$
$
$
$
$
$
$

--- Table 1 on Page 208 ---
S
N& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhesi& | Janajati& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Others&
1$ | Amar$Bahadur$Gurung$ | Agriculture$Research$
Centre,$Pakhribas,$
Chief,$Florist$ | 9851174038$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Dr.$Suman$Karki$ | ARS,$Pakhribas,$
Livestock$$ | 9855050510$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
3$ | Jawahel$Lal$Mandal$
$ | ARS,$Pakhribas,$
Horticulture$ | 9817363276$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
4$ | Dhanik$Lal$Mandal$ | ARS,$Pakhribas$ | 9814374507$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
5$ | Ritesh$Prasad$Shah$ | ARS,$Pakhribas,$
Nutrition$ | 980383309$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
6$ | Amrit$Prasad$Poudel$ | ARS,$Pakhribas,$PB$ | 9856036939$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
7$ | Dipesh$Pokhrel$ | NCARP,$Agronomy$ | 9842720771$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
8$ | Dipti$Adhikari$ | Bharatpur,$Chitwan,$
Horticulture$ | 9845079071$ | √$ |  | $ | $ | $ | √ | $

=== PAGE 209 ===
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:&Pakhribas$Municipality$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:&9$August$2019$$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhes Janajat Chet/Brahmi Other
i& i& n& s&
1$ Dal$Bahadur$Tamang$ Pakhribas$MunU$3,$ 9852053517$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
$ Ward$chairperson$
2$ Buddha$Bahadur$Rai$ Pakhribas$Mun,$ward$ 9842220795$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
chairperson$
3$ Nabina$Numna$ Women$Inspector$ 9842111011$ √$ $ $ $ $ $ $
4$ Ranjana$Subedi$ Kharidar$ 9842432069$ √$ $ $ $ $ √$ $
5$ Prakash$Chandra$ Kharidar,$Phy.$Officer$ 9855052306$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
$ Poudel$
6$ Sabina$Khatiwada$ Officer,$7th$ 9861973108$ √$ $ $ $ $ √$ $
7$ Gopan$Raj$Thapa$ Ward$chairperson,$ 9852053520$ $ $ $ $ $ √$ $
$ ward$no.$5$
8$ Sita$Ram$Rai$ Pakhribas$munU8$ 985453822$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $
9$ Debendra$Gurung$ Pakhribas$munU$7$ 9852050984$ $ √ $ $ √ $
10$ Dev$Kala$Poudel$ Pakhribas$munU10,$ 9852053911$ √$ $ $ √ $
Deputy$Mayor$
11$ Dik$Bahadur$Rai$ Pakhribas$mun,$Under$ 9852043111$ √ $ $ √ $
Secretary$
12$ Divi$Basnet$ Pakhribas$munU3,$ $ √ $ $ √ $
Ward$member$$

--- Table 1 on Page 209 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhes
i& | Janajat
i& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Other
s&
1$ | Dal$Bahadur$Tamang$
$ | Pakhribas$MunU$3,$
Ward$chairperson$ | 9852053517$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Buddha$Bahadur$Rai$ | Pakhribas$Mun,$ward$
chairperson$ | 9842220795$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
3$ | Nabina$Numna$ | Women$Inspector$ | 9842111011$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | $ | $
4$ | Ranjana$Subedi$ | Kharidar$ | 9842432069$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
5$
$ | Prakash$Chandra$
Poudel$ | Kharidar,$Phy.$Officer$ | 9855052306$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
6$ | Sabina$Khatiwada$ | Officer,$7th$ | 9861973108$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
7$ | Gopan$Raj$Thapa$
$ | Ward$chairperson,$
ward$no.$5$ | 9852053520$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
8$ | Sita$Ram$Rai$ | Pakhribas$munU8$ | 985453822$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ |  | $
9$ | Debendra$Gurung$ | Pakhribas$munU$7$ | 9852050984$ | $ | √ | $ | $ | √ |  | $
10$ | Dev$Kala$Poudel$ | Pakhribas$munU10,$
Deputy$Mayor$ | 9852053911$ | √$ |  | $ | $ |  | √ | $
11$ | Dik$Bahadur$Rai$ | Pakhribas$mun,$Under$
Secretary$ | 9852043111$ |  | √ | $ | $ |  | √ | $
12$ | Divi$Basnet$ | Pakhribas$munU3,$
Ward$member$$ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ |  | √ | $

=== PAGE 210 ===
$
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:& &Koshi$Rural$municipality$ward$no.$3& $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:&11$
August$2019$$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhes Janajat Chet/Brahmi Other
i& i& n& s&
1$ Rudrani$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ 9862151269$ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
2$ Samani$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
3$ Ilu$Devi$Chaudhary$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ 9805364579$ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
4$ Rabiya$Devi$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
$ Sardarni$
5$ Daliya$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
6$ Gyansari$Devi$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
Sardar$
7$ Kalsi$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
8$ Rudri$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
9$ Dhanami$Devi$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
Sardar$
10$ Samjha$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
11$ Asha$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
12$ Bhalsari$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
13$ Parbati$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 210 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhes
i& | Janajat
i& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Other
s&
1$ | Rudrani$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | 9862151269$ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
2$ | Samani$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
3$ | Ilu$Devi$Chaudhary$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | 9805364579$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
4$
$ | Rabiya$Devi$
Sardarni$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
5$ | Daliya$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
6$ | Gyansari$Devi$
Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
7$ | Kalsi$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
8$ | Rudri$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
9$ | Dhanami$Devi$
Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
10$ | Samjha$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
11$ | Asha$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
12$ | Bhalsari$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
13$ | Parbati$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $

=== PAGE 211 ===
14$ Basanti$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
15$ Parbati$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
16$ Ugra$Narayan$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ 9862150307$ √$ √ $ $ $ $
Sardar$
17$ Lakhan$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
18$ Prem$Lal$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
19$ Laxman$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
20$ Shanti$Devi$Sardar$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
21$ Satni$Sardarni$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
22$ Sabita$Yadav$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ $ √ √$ $ $ $
23$ Ram$Balak$Sharma$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ 984223870$ √ √ $ $ $
24$ Ashok$Kumar$Shah$ Koshi$rural$munU3$ 9842185866$ √ √ $ $ $
$
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:Venus$Hotel,$Khandbari,$Sankhuwasabha$$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:&7$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gend Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& er&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dali Madhes Janajat Chet/Brahm Other
t& i& i& in& s&
1$ Tika$Ram$Gurung$ Campus$chief,$Barun$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
$ Campus$
2$ Binod$Subba$ Vice$president,$NGO$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 211 ---
14$ | Basanti$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
15$ | Parbati$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
16$ | Ugra$Narayan$
Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | 9862150307$ |  | √$ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
17$ | Lakhan$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ |  | √ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
18$ | Prem$Lal$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ |  | √ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
19$ | Laxman$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ |  | √ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
20$ | Shanti$Devi$Sardar$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
21$ | Satni$Sardarni$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
22$ | Sabita$Yadav$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | $ | √ |  |  | √$ | $ | $ | $
23$ | Ram$Balak$Sharma$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | 984223870$ |  | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $
24$ | Ashok$Kumar$Shah$ | Koshi$rural$munU3$ | 9842185866$ |  | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $

--- Table 2 on Page 211 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gend
er& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dali
t& | Madhes
i& | Janajat
i& | Chet/Brahm
in& | Other
s&
1$ | Tika$Ram$Gurung$
$ | Campus$chief,$Barun$
Campus$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Binod$Subba$ | Vice$president,$NGO$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $

=== PAGE 212 ===
Gurung$ Federation$
3$ Bhabibhuwar$ Lawyer,$Khandbari$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
Gurung$
4$ Rajiv$Shrestha$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
5$ Tej$Bahadur$ Shilichong$Club,$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
$ Tamang$ Coordinator$
$
6$ Mitra$Kumar$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
Gurung$
7$ Salyan$Newali$ Red$Cross$ $ $ √$ √$ $ $ $ $
8$ Tatanath$Trital$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $
9$ Chitra$Lekha$ Shrijanshil$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $
Adhikari$ Community$School$
10$ Nabin$Gurung$ Journalist$ $ √$ $ √$ $
11$ Saroj$Bajracharya$ Nepal$Redcross$ $ √$ $ √$ $
Society$
12$ Wangchhedar$ FECOFUN$ $ √$ $ √$ $
Bhote$
13$ Bhuwan$Halide$ Kumal$Society,$ $ √$ $ √$ $
District$president$
14$ Pasang$Bhudar$ Aama$Mahila$ $ √$ $ √$ $
Samuha$
15$ Babita$Katuwal$ Shrijanshil$ $ √$ $ √$ $
Samudayik$Bikash$
$
$
$
$

--- Table 1 on Page 212 ---
 | Gurung$ | Federation$ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3$ | Bhabibhuwar$
Gurung$ | Lawyer,$Khandbari$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
4$ | Rajiv$Shrestha$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
5$
$ | Tej$Bahadur$
Tamang$
$ | Shilichong$Club,$
Coordinator$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
6$ | Mitra$Kumar$
Gurung$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
7$ | Salyan$Newali$ | Red$Cross$ | $ | $ | √$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
8$ | Tatanath$Trital$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ |  | $ | $ | √$ | $
9$ | Chitra$Lekha$
Adhikari$ | Shrijanshil$
Community$School$ | $ | √$ |  |  | $ | $ | √$ | $
10$ | Nabin$Gurung$ | Journalist$ | $ |  | √$ |  | $ | √$ |  | $
11$ | Saroj$Bajracharya$ | Nepal$Redcross$
Society$ | $ |  | √$ |  | $ | √$ |  | $
12$ | Wangchhedar$
Bhote$ | FECOFUN$ | $ |  | √$ |  | $ | √$ |  | $
13$ | Bhuwan$Halide$ | Kumal$Society,$
District$president$ | $ |  | √$ |  | $ | √$ |  | $
14$ | Pasang$Bhudar$ | Aama$Mahila$
Samuha$ | $ | √$ |  |  | $ | √$ |  | $
15$ | Babita$Katuwal$ | Shrijanshil$
Samudayik$Bikash$ | $ | √$ |  |  | $ |  | √$ | $

=== PAGE 213 ===
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:Makalu$Rural$municipalityU5,$Num,$Saraswoti$Tole$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:$6$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhesi& Janajat Chet/Brahmi Other
i& n& s&
1$ Anita$Rai$ Makalu$rural$munU5,$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
$ num$saraswoti$tole$
2$ Anju$Pradhan$ Aama$Samuha$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
3$ Samjhana$BK$ Aama$Samuha$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
4$ Sarmila$Darji$ Aama$Samuha$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
5$ Kalpana$Darji$ Aama$Samuha$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
6$ Kaushila$Darji$ Municipal$executive$ 986753814$ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
$ member$
7$ Aliza$Mahat$ Makalu$rural$munU5,$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
Num$
8$ Ful$Maya$BK$ $ $ √ $ √ $ $ $ $
9$ Tek$Bahadur$Darji$ $ $ √$ √ $ $ $ $
10$ Indira$Darji$ $ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
11$ Hima$BK$ $ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
12$ Menuak$Mahat$ $ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
13$ Ratna$Maya$Darji$ $ $ √ √ $ $ $ $
14$ Mamata$BK$ $ $ √ √ $ $ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 213 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhesi& | Janajat
i& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Other
s&
1$ | Anita$Rai$
$ | Makalu$rural$munU5,$
num$saraswoti$tole$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Anju$Pradhan$ | Aama$Samuha$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
3$ | Samjhana$BK$ | Aama$Samuha$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
4$ | Sarmila$Darji$ | Aama$Samuha$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
5$ | Kalpana$Darji$ | Aama$Samuha$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
6$ | Kaushila$Darji$
$ | Municipal$executive$
member$ | 986753814$ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
7$ | Aliza$Mahat$ | Makalu$rural$munU5,$
Num$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
8$ | Ful$Maya$BK$ | $ | $ | √ | $ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
9$ | Tek$Bahadur$Darji$ | $ | $ |  | √$ | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
10$ | Indira$Darji$ | $ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
11$ | Hima$BK$ | $ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
12$ | Menuak$Mahat$ | $ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
13$ | Ratna$Maya$Darji$ | $ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $
14$ | Mamata$BK$ | $ | $ | √ |  | √ | $ | $ | $ | $

=== PAGE 214 ===
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:&&Khandbari$MunicipalityU9,$Samghuri,$Tumlingtar,$Kumar$Gau$$ $ $ $ $ Date:$7$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhesi& Janajati& Chet/Brahmi Others&
n&
1$ Bhuwan$Halide$ Khadbari$municipalityU 9842110213$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
$ 9,$Sanghuri$Tole$
2$ Buddhiman$Kumal$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
3$ Goma$Kumal$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
4$ Sangita$Kumal$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
5$ Khadga$Maya$Kumal$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
6$ Sarita$Kumal(A)$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
7$ Sarita$Kumal$(B)$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
8$ Kuamr$Kumal$ $ $ √$ $ $ √ $ $
9$ Yubraj$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
10$ Biajy$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
11$ Rajendra$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
12$ Binita$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
13$ Tara$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 214 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhesi& | Janajati& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Others&
1$ | Bhuwan$Halide$
$ | Khadbari$municipalityU
9,$Sanghuri$Tole$ | 9842110213$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Buddhiman$Kumal$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
3$ | Goma$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
4$ | Sangita$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
5$ | Khadga$Maya$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
6$ | Sarita$Kumal(A)$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
7$ | Sarita$Kumal$(B)$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
8$ | Kuamr$Kumal$ | $ | $ |  | √$ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
9$ | Yubraj$Kumal$ | $ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
10$ | Biajy$Kumal$ | $ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
11$ | Rajendra$Kumal$ | $ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
12$ | Binita$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
13$ | Tara$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $

=== PAGE 215 ===
14$ Shanti$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
15$ Kali$Bahadur$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
Tamang$
16$ Gyan$Bahadur$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
Kumal$
17$ Tika$Ram$Kumal$ Ward$chairperson$ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
18$ Sancha$Maya$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
19$ Hira$Devi$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
20$ Bhi$Kumari$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
21$ Karishma$Kumal$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
$
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:& &Makalu$rural$municipality,$municipal$office,$Num$Bazar$$ $ $ $ $ $ Date:$6$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhesi& Janajati& Chet/Brahmi Others&
n&
1$ Bhim$Laxmi$Tamang$ Municipal$executive$ 9840466423$ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
member,$Malaku$rural$
munU5$
2$ Lalita$Pokhrel$ Women$network,$ $ √$ $ $ $ $ √$ $
President$

--- Table 1 on Page 215 ---
14$ | Shanti$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
15$ | Kali$Bahadur$
Tamang$ | $ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
16$ | Gyan$Bahadur$
Kumal$ | $ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
17$ | Tika$Ram$Kumal$ | Ward$chairperson$ | $ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
18$ | Sancha$Maya$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
19$ | Hira$Devi$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
20$ | Bhi$Kumari$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
21$ | Karishma$Kumal$ | $ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $

--- Table 2 on Page 215 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhesi& | Janajati& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Others&
1$ | Bhim$Laxmi$Tamang$ | Municipal$executive$
member,$Malaku$rural$
munU5$ | 9840466423$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Lalita$Pokhrel$ | Women$network,$
President$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $

=== PAGE 216 ===
3$ Santosh$Darji,$Guide$ Accountant,$Makalu$ $ $ √$ √$ $ $ $ $
$ rural$mun$
4$ Kosh$Raj$Nepal$ Information$officer$ $ √$ $ $ $ $ √$ $
5$ Suresh$Kumar$Rai$ Makalu$munU5$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
6$ Shanti$Maya$Rai$ Aama$Samuha,$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
chairperson$
7$ Pratap$Karki$ Malaku$rural$mun$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $
8$ Uttar$Kumar$Rai$ Makalu$rural$munU5,$ $ $ √ $ $ √$ $
Social$Mobilizer$
9$ Nar$Bahadur$Tamang$ Makalu$rural$mun$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $
10$ Man$Maya$Rai$ Makalu$munU5$ $ √$ $ $ √ $
11$ Lalita$Rai$ MakaluU5$ $ √ $ $ √ $
12$ Kopila$Rai$ MakaluU5$ $ √ $ $ √ $
$
$
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:$Makalu$rural$municipality$U5,$Phyaksingda$besi$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:$6$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhes Janajat Chet/Brahmi Other
i& i& n& s&
1$ Indra$Rai$ Makalu$rural$munU5,$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
Syamsing$
2$ Bhalman$Parajuli$ Makalu$rural$munU5$ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
3$ Jit$Bahadur$Rai$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 216 ---
3$ | Santosh$Darji,$Guide$
$ | Accountant,$Makalu$
rural$mun$ | $ | $ | √$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
4$ | Kosh$Raj$Nepal$ | Information$officer$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
5$ | Suresh$Kumar$Rai$ | Makalu$munU5$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
6$ | Shanti$Maya$Rai$ | Aama$Samuha,$
chairperson$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
7$ | Pratap$Karki$ | Malaku$rural$mun$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
8$ | Uttar$Kumar$Rai$ | Makalu$rural$munU5,$
Social$Mobilizer$ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $ | √$ |  | $
9$ | Nar$Bahadur$Tamang$ | Makalu$rural$mun$ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $ | √ |  | $
10$ | Man$Maya$Rai$ | Makalu$munU5$ | $ | √$ |  | $ | $ | √ |  | $
11$ | Lalita$Rai$ | MakaluU5$ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ |  | $
12$ | Kopila$Rai$ | MakaluU5$ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ |  | $

--- Table 2 on Page 216 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhes
i& | Janajat
i& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Other
s&
1$ | Indra$Rai$ | Makalu$rural$munU5,$
Syamsing$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Bhalman$Parajuli$ | Makalu$rural$munU5$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
3$ | Jit$Bahadur$Rai$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $

=== PAGE 217 ===
4$ Harkaman$Rai$ $ $ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
5$ Sita$Diyali$ $ 984667582$ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
6$ Chandri$Maya$Diyali$ $ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
7$ Narmaya$Parajuli$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ $ √$ $
8$ Aashbal$Rai$ $ $ √$ $ $ $ √ $
9$ Santa$Bahadur$BK$ $ $ √ √$ $ $ $
10$ Tulasa$Parajuli$ $ 9864257048$ √ $ $ √ $
11$ Sumitra$Parajuli$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $
12$ Muna$Bhandari$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $
13$ Rukmani$Pokhrel$ $ $ √ $ $ √ $
14$ Deepak$Gurung$ $ $ √ $ √$ $
15$ Fulmati$Rai$ $ $ √ $ √ $
16$ Sadhana$ $ $ √ $ √ $
17$ Mira$Pokhrel$ $ $ √ $ √ $
18$ Sumitra$Parajuli$ $ $ √ $ √ $
$
GCF$Project$Formulation$on$
“Protecting*livelihoods*and*assets*at*risk*from*climate*change*induced*flooding*in*glacial*river*basins*of*Nepal*"$
$Consultation$for$Gender$Assessment$and$Action$Plan$
Venue:& Hatuwagadhi$Rural$municipalityU6,$Bhojpur$ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Date:$10$August$2019$
SN& Name&& Address&(&Mun.,& &Contact&number& Gende Caste/Ethnicity&
Ward,&Tole)& r&
$ $ $ $ F& M& Dalit& Madhesi& Janajati& Chet/Brahmi Others&
n&
1$ Baram$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 98625954998$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
$ municipalityU$6$
2$ Bal$Kumar$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9824031550$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 217 ---
4$ | Harkaman$Rai$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
5$ | Sita$Diyali$ | $ | 984667582$ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
6$ | Chandri$Maya$Diyali$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
7$ | Narmaya$Parajuli$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $
8$ | Aashbal$Rai$ | $ | $ |  | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √ | $
9$ | Santa$Bahadur$BK$ | $ | $ |  | √ | √$ | $ | $ |  | $
10$ | Tulasa$Parajuli$ | $ | 9864257048$ | √ |  |  | $ | $ | √ | $
11$ | Sumitra$Parajuli$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | $ | √ | $
12$ | Muna$Bhandari$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | $ | √ | $
13$ | Rukmani$Pokhrel$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | $ | √ | $
14$ | Deepak$Gurung$ | $ | $ |  | √ |  | $ | √$ |  | $
15$ | Fulmati$Rai$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | √ |  | $
16$ | Sadhana$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | √ |  | $
17$ | Mira$Pokhrel$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ | √ |  | $
18$ | Sumitra$Parajuli$ | $ | $ | √ |  |  | $ |  | √ | $

--- Table 2 on Page 217 ---
SN& | Name&& | Address&(&Mun.,&
Ward,&Tole)& | &Contact&number& | Gende
r& |  | Caste/Ethnicity& |  |  |  | 
$ | $ | $ | $ | F& | M& | Dalit& | Madhesi& | Janajati& | Chet/Brahmi
n& | Others&
1$ | Baram$Rai$
$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 98625954998$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
2$ | Bal$Kumar$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$ | 9824031550$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $

=== PAGE 218 ===
municipalityU$6$
3$ Chandra$Dhoj$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9817354674$ $ √$ $ $ √$ $ $
municipalityU$6$
4$ Daya$Devi$Rijal$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ $ √$ $ √$ $ $ $ $
municipalityU$6$
5$ Arun$Lata$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9816308856$ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
municipalityU$6$
6$ Aasha$Kumari$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ $ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
municipalityU$6$
7$ Kusum$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9811312916$ √$ $ $ $ √$ $ $
municipalityU$6$
8$ Nirbachan$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9804033953$ √$ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
9$ Shulochana$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9817368686$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
10$ Ganga$Kumari$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9829354647$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
11$ Dhan$Kumari$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ $ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
12$ Sarita$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9807345367$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
13$ Chandrakala$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9825312454$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
14$ Shukra$Raj$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9823594895$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
15$ Sushman$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9810428798$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
16$ Asha$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9816163779$ √ $ $ √ $ $

--- Table 1 on Page 218 ---
 |  | municipalityU$6$ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
3$ | Chandra$Dhoj$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9817354674$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
4$ | Daya$Devi$Rijal$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | $ | √$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | $
5$ | Arun$Lata$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9816308856$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
6$ | Aasha$Kumari$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | $ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
7$ | Kusum$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9811312916$ | √$ | $ | $ | $ | √$ | $ | $
8$ | Nirbachan$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9804033953$ |  | √$ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
9$ | Shulochana$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9817368686$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
10$ | Ganga$Kumari$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9829354647$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
11$ | Dhan$Kumari$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | $ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
12$ | Sarita$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9807345367$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
13$ | Chandrakala$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9825312454$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
14$ | Shukra$Raj$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9823594895$ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
15$ | Sushman$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9810428798$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
16$ | Asha$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$ | 9816163779$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $

=== PAGE 219 ===
municipalityU$6$
17$ Babita$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9869036400$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
18$ Thapan$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9811370887$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
19$ Asha$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9805392132$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
20$ Tara$Kumari$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9804306058$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
21$ Eliza$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9824441146$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
22$ Ram$Bahadur$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9814328319$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
23$ Bal$Kumar$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9814328319$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
24$ Laxman$Rai$ Hatuwagadhi$rural$ 9805382281$ √ $ $ √ $ $
municipalityU$6$
$

--- Table 1 on Page 219 ---
 |  | municipalityU$6$ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
17$ | Babita$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9869036400$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
18$ | Thapan$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9811370887$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
19$ | Asha$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9805392132$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
20$ | Tara$Kumari$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9804306058$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
21$ | Eliza$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9824441146$ | √ |  | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
22$ | Ram$Bahadur$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9814328319$ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
23$ | Bal$Kumar$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9814328319$ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $
24$ | Laxman$Rai$ | Hatuwagadhi$rural$
municipalityU$6$ | 9805382281$ |  | √ | $ | $ | √ | $ | $

=== PAGE 248 ===
_____________
