=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20250608191939+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
ModDate: D:20250608192202+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat (64-bit) 25.1.20474
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
30 June – 3 July 2025
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
Provisional agenda item 11
9 June 2025
Consideration of funding proposals –
Addendum XI
Funding proposal package for FP269
Summary
This a ddendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and
Adaptation (DaIMA)";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF public
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any,
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies.

=== PAGE 2 ===
.
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 103
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 111
Secretariat’s assessment 114
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 128
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory
144
Panel's assessment
Gender documentation 145
Disclaimer:
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by
the Green Climate Fund.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaIMA)
Country(ies): Kenya, Rwanda, United Federation of Tanzania and Uganda
Accredited Entity: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Date of first submission: [2024/11/28]
Date of current submission [2025/04/18]
Version number [V.5]

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or Programme A.2. Public or Public and private
programme private sector
A.3. Request for
Not applicable
Proposals (RFP)
A.4. Result area(s) Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.
GCF Co-financers’
contribution contribution
Mitigation total 50 % 40 %
☒ Energy generation and access 10 % 10 %
☐ Low-emission transport Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances Enter number % Enter number %
☒ Forestry and land use 40 % 30 %
Adaptation total 50 % 60 %
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 50 % 50 %
Health and well-being, and food and water security Enter number % Enter number %
Infrastructure and built environment Enter number % Enter number %
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services % 10 %
A.5. Expected mitigation 2,169,485 tCO2 eq. A.6. Expected 17,9 million (direct + indirect)
outcome (108,474 tCO2 eq./year) adaptation 2,5 million 15,4 million
outcome (direct) (indirect)
(Core indicator 1: GHG 1.3% (direct 8.1% (indirect
emissions reduced, avoided or (Core indicator 2: beneficiaries vis- beneficiaries vis-
removed / sequestered) direct and indirect à-vis total à-vis total
beneficiaries reached) population1) population)
A.7. Total financing (GCF 358.26 million USD A.9. Project size Large (Over USD 250 million)
+ co-finance)
A.8. Total GCF funding 150.00 million USD
requested
For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17.
A.10. Financial Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
instrument(s) requested with A.8.
for the GCF funding ☒ Grant 132.50 million ☐ Equity Enter number
☒ Loan 17.50 million ☐Results-based payment
☐ Guarantee Enter number
A.11. Implementation 6 years A.12. Total lifespan 20 years
period
A.13. Expected date of A.14. ESS category
B
AE internal approval
A.15. Has this FP been Yes ☒ No ☐ A.16. Has Yes ☒ No ☐
submitted as a CN Readiness or PPF
before? support been used
to prepare this FP?

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
ECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme | Programme | A.2. Public or
private sector |  | Public and private | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) | Not applicable |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | GCF
contribution | Co-financers’
contribution
 | Mitigation total |  |  | 50 % | 40 %
 | ☒ Energy generation and access |  |  | 10 % | 10 %
 | ☐ Low-emission transport |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | ☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | ☒ Forestry and land use |  |  | 40 % | 30 %
 | Adaptation total |  |  | 50 % | 60 %
 | ☒ Most vulnerable people and communities |  |  | 50 % | 50 %
 | Health and well-being, and food and water security |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | Infrastructure and built environment |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number %
 | ☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  |  | % | 10 %
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or
removed / sequestered) | 2,169,485 tCO2 eq.
(108,474 tCO2 eq./year) | A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2:
direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached) |  | 17,9 million (direct + indirect) | 
 |  |  |  | 2,5 million
(direct) | 15,4 million
(indirect)
 |  |  |  | 1.3% (direct
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total
population1) | 8.1% (indirect
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total
population)
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance) | 358.26 million USD | A.9. Project size |  | Large (Over USD 250 million) | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested | 150.00 million USD
For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17. |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8. |  |  |  | 
 | ☒ Grant 132.50 million
☒ Loan 17.50 million
☐ Guarantee Enter number |  | ☐ Equity Enter number
☐Results-based payment |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period | 6 years | A.12. Total lifespan |  | 20 years | 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  | A.14. ESS category |  | B | 
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before? | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP? |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | 

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
B
A.17. Is this FP included Yes ☒ No ☐ A.18. Is this FP Yes ☒ No ☐
in the entity work included in the
programme? country
programme?
A.19. Complementarity Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
and coherence etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☒ No ☐
A.20. Executing Entity In the four countries, the Executing Entities for the implementation of Components 1 and 2
information will be: in the Republic of Kenya, acting through its National Treasury (for the channelling
of the GCF Proceeds) and the State Department for Livestock Development (“SDLD”) of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (the “MoALD”) (for the implementation
of the Programme’s Activities); in the United Republic of Tanzania, acting through its
Ministry of Finance (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and its Ministry of Livestock
and Fisheries (the “MLF”) (for the implementation of the Programme’s Activities); in the
Republic of Rwanda, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (for the
channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Rwanda Agriculture Board (the “RAB”) within the
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (“MINAGRI”) (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); and in the Republic of Uganda, acting through its Ministry of
Finance, Planning and Economic Development (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and
its Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (the “MAAIF’’) (for the
implementation of the Programme’s Activities), in each case, with respect to the Activities
to be implemented in the Host Country of the relevant Executing Entity, together the
“National Executing Entities” or “NEEs”.
The Executing Entities for the implementation of Components 3 and Output 3.1 will be: in
the Republic of Kenya, acting through its National Treasury (for the channelling of the GCF
Proceeds) and the Agricultural Finance Cooperation (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); in the United Republic of Tanzania, acting through its Ministry
of Finance (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Tanzania Agricultural
Development Bank (for the implementation of the Programme’s Activities); in the Republic
of Rwanda, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (for the
channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Development Bank of Rwanda (for the
implementation of the Programme’s Activities); and in the Republic of Uganda, acting
through its Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (for the channelling
of the GCF Proceeds) and the Uganda Development Bank (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); and in the case of Output 3.2, SDLD, MLF, RAB and MAAIF, in each
case, with respect to the Activities to be implemented in the Host Country of the relevant
Executing Entity. The Agricultural Finance Corporation, the Tanzania Agricultural
Development Bank, the Development Bank of Rwanda and the Uganda Development Bank
are together, the “Wholesale Banks”, (together, the “Executing Entities”).
A.21. Executive summary
1. Climate context. Observed and projected climate change scenarios (Representative Concentration Pathways
(RCPs) 2.6 and 8.5) in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda indicate significant changes in precipitation and
temperature patterns, as well as heat stress and other extreme weather events that will negatively impact the dairy
sector. The frequency and severity of droughts are projected to increase, resulting in substantial losses of dairy
livestock, affected pastures and rangelands. This combination of factors has profound implications for the dairy industry
and dairy farmers in East Africa, leading to lower milk yields and production, reduced cattle health, deterioration in
pasture and feed quality, and increased risks in milk losses along the value chains. In addition to the sector's existing
vulnerabilities, such as farmers’ lack of access to knowledge and new skills, insufficient milk collection facilities, limited
access to quality inputs, natural capital and finance, climate change-related factors faced by dairy farmers in East Africa
make adaptation strategies essential to its sustainability and resilience. On the mitigation side, methane (CH4)
emissions from the dairy sector dominate the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions inventories of Kenya, Rwanda,
1 According to the World Bank statistics (https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/search/dataset/0037712), there are 54.2 million people in
Kenya, 65.5 million in Tanzania and 47.2 in Uganda and 13.8 in Rwanda.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme? | Yes ☒ No ☐
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☒ No ☐ |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information | In the four countries, the Executing Entities for the implementation of Components 1 and 2
will be: in the Republic of Kenya, acting through its National Treasury (for the channelling
of the GCF Proceeds) and the State Department for Livestock Development (“SDLD”) of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (the “MoALD”) (for the implementation
of the Programme’s Activities); in the United Republic of Tanzania, acting through its
Ministry of Finance (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and its Ministry of Livestock
and Fisheries (the “MLF”) (for the implementation of the Programme’s Activities); in the
Republic of Rwanda, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (for the
channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Rwanda Agriculture Board (the “RAB”) within the
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (“MINAGRI”) (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); and in the Republic of Uganda, acting through its Ministry of
Finance, Planning and Economic Development (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and
its Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (the “MAAIF’’) (for the
implementation of the Programme’s Activities), in each case, with respect to the Activities
to be implemented in the Host Country of the relevant Executing Entity, together the
“National Executing Entities” or “NEEs”.
The Executing Entities for the implementation of Components 3 and Output 3.1 will be: in
the Republic of Kenya, acting through its National Treasury (for the channelling of the GCF
Proceeds) and the Agricultural Finance Cooperation (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); in the United Republic of Tanzania, acting through its Ministry
of Finance (for the channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Tanzania Agricultural
Development Bank (for the implementation of the Programme’s Activities); in the Republic
of Rwanda, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (for the
channelling of the GCF Proceeds) and the Development Bank of Rwanda (for the
implementation of the Programme’s Activities); and in the Republic of Uganda, acting
through its Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (for the channelling
of the GCF Proceeds) and the Uganda Development Bank (for the implementation of the
Programme’s Activities); and in the case of Output 3.2, SDLD, MLF, RAB and MAAIF, in each
case, with respect to the Activities to be implemented in the Host Country of the relevant
Executing Entity. The Agricultural Finance Corporation, the Tanzania Agricultural
Development Bank, the Development Bank of Rwanda and the Uganda Development Bank
are together, the “Wholesale Banks”, (together, the “Executing Entities”). |  | 
A.21. Executive summary |  |  | 
1. Climate context. Observed and projected climate change scenarios (Representative Concentration Pathways
(RCPs) 2.6 and 8.5) in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda indicate significant changes in precipitation and
temperature patterns, as well as heat stress and other extreme weather events that will negatively impact the dairy
sector. The frequency and severity of droughts are projected to increase, resulting in substantial losses of dairy
livestock, affected pastures and rangelands. This combination of factors has profound implications for the dairy industry
and dairy farmers in East Africa, leading to lower milk yields and production, reduced cattle health, deterioration in
pasture and feed quality, and increased risks in milk losses along the value chains. In addition to the sector's existing
vulnerabilities, such as farmers’ lack of access to knowledge and new skills, insufficient milk collection facilities, limited
access to quality inputs, natural capital and finance, climate change-related factors faced by dairy farmers in East Africa
make adaptation strategies essential to its sustainability and resilience. On the mitigation side, methane (CH4)
emissions from the dairy sector dominate the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions inventories of Kenya, Rwanda, |  |  | 

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
B
Tanzania, and Uganda. The expected growth of the dairy sector means that absolute emissions and emission
intensities will continue to rise if no action is taken. The urgency of reducing the sector’s GHG emissions and increasing
its resilience to climate change is highlighted in national policies and plans, more particularly in the countries’ Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs). The IPCC recognizes “efficient livestock systems” as a feasible adaptation option
that has synergy with mitigation. This is shown in IPCC AR6 Synthesis Report, Figure SPM.7 (4th row).
2. Programme objectives and intervention approach. The proposed Programme, which will be implemented
in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda, aims to reduce methane and other GHG emissions from the dairy sector
while increasing the resilience of livestock-dependent communities. The Programme will support a shift from low
production efficiency to improved, gender-sensitive, integrated and NDC-aligned practices that reduce emissions at
farm and food system levels (including interventions that reduce milk losses and increase milk collection, decarbonize
processing with renewable energies, formalize dairy value chains and strengthening partnerships with the private
sector), as well as interventions that promote circularity, and increase rangelands ecosystems resilience and services
(including carbon sequestration in grasslands). The paradigm shift of the Programme will be accompanied by measures
to strengthen policies, regulations, and institutional capacities for a low-carbon climate-resilient dairy sector at national
and regional levels. To achieve this, the Programme comprises three components, each uniquely designed to promote
and encourage climate change adaptation and mitigation within the dairy sector.
3. Component 1 of the intervention focuses on initiating a paradigm shift towards a more productive, climate-
resilient, and low-emission dairy sector in East Africa. The Component's strategic approach is to review and update
national and regional regulations, policies, standards, and investment frameworks that promote public and private
investments aligned with the NDCs, ensuring these promote gender equality and social inclusion. It also includes
launching nutrition awareness campaigns on milk consumption and food safety, strengthening public and private
veterinary and extension services, improving national capacities for measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) of
emissions and climate risk analysis. In addition, a carbon certification system will be developed to give the sector access
to carbon finance. With a focus on institutional strengthening and knowledge dissemination at the national and regional
levels, the Component ensures that the sector is well equipped to manage and adapt to the changing climate landscape.
4. Component 2 targets smallholder dairy farmers and cooperatives, with a view to a low-emission and climate-
resilient dairy sector. It will focus primarily on farm-level interventions, where 90 percent of sector’s emissions occur,
and aim to reduce total emissions and reduce emission intensities in all dairy production systems, moving beyond the
business-as-usual scenario. On these farms, it will improve the efficiency in milk production (through animal health,
breeding, fodder, and feeding interventions), improve nutrient circularity and recycling through manure management
(including biogas production). It will invest in pasture and grassland management to increase ecosystem resilience and
carbon sequestration. Interventions also include capacity building for smallholder farmers, comprising of women, men
and youth, and cooperatives, including access to markets, the use of emission reduction technologies (renewable
energies) and milk aggregation to reduce losses. Primarily benefiting smallholder dairy farmers, Component 2 will
encourage the adoption of productivity-enhancing and emission-reducing technologies, paving the way for these
farmers to access finance through Component 3 for further growth and sustainability.
5. Component 3 is key to driving the transformation of the East Africa’s dairy sector towards sustainability and
climate resilience. It encompasses two strategies: (i) launching the Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF) to provide
green loans to climate-resilient dairy businesses, and (ii) provide high quality, well-targeted technical assistance to
participating banks and the borrowing dairy-sector businesses to ensure the achievement of DaIMA’s CC adaptation
and mitigation targets and its sectoral transformation objectives. By addressing financial barriers, including those for
women and the youth, and encouraging investment in sustainable practices, Component 3 aims to catalyze a significant
shift in productivity, resilience, and reduced emissions in the East African dairy sector.
6. Implementation arrangements. As Accredited Entity (AE) for the Programme, IFAD will be responsible for
overall management, which includes Programme appraisal, fiduciary and technical oversight, fund management, quality
monitoring, and reporting to the GCF, resulting in the Programme completion and final evaluation. This role extends to
IFAD's various offices, including its headquarters in Rome and regional office in Nairobi, as well as its country offices
in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda. A Regional Steering Committee will ensure regional alignment and added
value of the Programme. National Programme Steering Committees (PSCs) and Programme Coordination Units
(PCUs) will be established in each country to oversee (for the former) and coordinate (for the latter) the implementation
of the Programme. International and national entities, including ministries of agriculture and specialized entities (e.g.
the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI)) will provide targeted services to the national implementation
teams.

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
B
7. Programme costs and financing. The total cost of the Programme is US$ 358.26 million, of which: US$ 58.20
million for Component 1, US$ 234.98 million for Component 2, US$ 45.0 million for Component 3 (Green Dairy
Financing Facility), US$ 13.36 million for Programme management, and US$ 6.72 for monitoring and evaluation.
8. GCF will provide US$132.50 million grants to finance Components 1, 2 and 3, as well as programme
management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to the 4 countries, IFAD will contribute US$193.28 million co-
financing in the four countries through its national projects, while the Governments will contribute US$14.98 million.
Finally, for the Green Dairy Financing Facility under Component 3, a total of US$45 million is allocated. Of this amount,
US$35 million will be for on-lending loan capital (GCF loan of US$17.5 million, IFAD loan of US$ 17.5 million).
9. Beneficiaries and impacts. The Programme aims to directly benefit 2.5 million people. The Programme aims
to reduce the milk emission intensities by 29 percent, of which by 28 percent in Kenya, 50 percent in Rwanda, 29
percent in Tanzania and 33 percent in Uganda over a 20-year horizon. Over the same period, the Programme is
expected to reduce total GHG emissions on the targeted dairy farms, while significantly increasing milk production by
34 percent, of which by 31 percent in Kenya, 73 percent in Rwanda, 36 percent in Tanzania, and 30 percent in Uganda.
This increase in milk production will contribute to agricultural GDP growth in these four countries, marking a substantial
impact on the economy and climate resilience of the region. Total GHG emissions from milk production are expected
to decrease by 4.01 percent at the level of the Programme, or (i) by 2.02 percent (–61,967 tCO2-eq) in Kenya, (ii) by
9.56 percent (-56,507 tCO2-eq) in Rwanda, (iii) by 4.69 percent (-65,718 tCO2-eq) in Tanzania and, (iv) by 5.22 percent
(-82,372 tCO2-eq) in Uganda. Methane from enteric fermentation is expected to decrease by 4.61 percent, while
methane from manure management would decrease by 5.93 percent. The Programme is also expected to generate
54,435 tCO2eq/yr savings from energy generation and access.
10. Economic and financial analysis. The financial analysis shows that the scenario’s proposed for different types
of dairy farms are financially viable, while increasing milk yields and reducing emission intensities per litre of milk. At
regional level, the aggregated Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of the countries’ incremental net benefit streams,
discounted at 13.25 percent (social discount rate), is US$ 181.20 million, with an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of
25.4 per cent for the baseline scenario. At a 6 per cent social discount rate, the ENPV is US$ 518.0 million. Two
additional economic scenarios were tested by integrating the economic value of the Programme’s GHG emissions
balance with a low carbon market price (LCP) and with a high carbon market price (HCP). Under the LCP scenario, the
ERR is 27.90 percent and the ENPV is US$ 217.87 million. Under the HCP scenario, the ERR is 30.30 percent and the
ENPV is approximately US$ 254.64 million. The sensitivity analysis confirms that DaIMA represents an economically
worthwhile investment.
11. Programme will directly contribute to the following targeted results in alignment with the GCF’s Updated
Strategic Plan (USP-2); T1 (by supporting the Country’s adaptation and mitigation goals), T4 Food (2,5 million
beneficiaries adopting low-emission climate-resilient dairy production practices) and T5 Ecosystems (178,362 hectares
of rangelands/pastures to be conserved, restored and sustainably managed) through T9 locally-led adaptation
approach. The Programme will also support dissemination of climate information and MRV system, directly contributing
to T3 -Climate Informational and Early Warning Systems (CIEWS). The Programme also aligns with T10 (by supporting
resilient market chains) and T11 (by developing a Green Dairy Financing Facility).

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
B. PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context
For more details, see Annex 2 (Feasibility Study)
12. Smallholder farmers dominate agriculture in East Africa. They rely heavily on livestock for their livelihoods2,
more particularly dairy, which are found in various production systems and diverse agroecologies, all driven by
climate. The region is dominated by a tropical savannah climate, separated by a corridor of arid steppe and desert
climates parallel to the Indian Ocean coastline and northwest of Kenya, as well as in the central parts of Tanzania.
Tropical rainforest conditions are found in the Lake Victoria and temperate climates are present along the highest
altitude areas of the Great Rift Valley bordering Kenya and Tanzania. Kenya is the driest among the four targeted
countries, with a total annual rainfall ranging between 400 to 600mm in the northwest of Lake Turkana and in areas
bordering Somalia. Conversely, Uganda and Rwanda have the highest total annual precipitation, ranging between
1000 and 1600mm. These conditions lead to a mosaic of climates and, consequently, to a wide range of
agroecological zones.
13. The dairy sector in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda is highly vulnerable to climate change (CC) and is
characterized by high GHG emissions, especially methane3. The four countries face significant CC challenges,
including extreme weather events and changing rainfall patterns4. In the dairy sector, the impacts of CC include heat
stress on dairy animals, prolonged and more recurrent droughts, intensifying heavy rainfall, flooding, and other
extreme weather events that reduce dairy cow productivity. Indirect effects include changes in disease patterns and
occurrence, decreased feed and water availability, and decreased pasture quality5. As a result, the Programme is
cross-cutting and addresses both mitigation and adaptation. Section B.1 describes the adaptation needs following
IPCC’s AR5 Risk Conceptualization (compounded effect of observed and projected climate hazards, exposure6,
vulnerability7, modulated by the existing adaptive capacity8), as well as the mitigation needs based on the GHG
emission profile of the dairy sector.9
CLIMATE HAZARDS10
14. East Africa's dairy systems and their spatial distribution are diverse, exposing dairy farmers’ livelihoods to a
wide range of hazards. Climate change poses risks both because of the potential impacts of weather hazards and
2 Shikuku, K. M., Winowiecki, L., Twyman, J., Eitzinger, A., Perez, J. G., Mwongera, C., & Läderach, P. (2017). Smallholder farmers’
attitudes and determinants of adaptation to climate risks in East Africa. Climate Risk Management, 16, 234–245.
3 Due to its structure, methane traps more heat in the atmosphere per molecule than carbon dioxide (CO2), making it 80 times
more harmful than CO2 for 20 years after it is released. Source: UNEP, 2022. Available online here.
4 Ayugi, B. et al. (2022). Projected changes in meteorological drought over East Africa inferred from bias-adjusted CMIP6 models.
Natural Hazards, 113(2), 1151-1176.
5 Godde, C. et al. (2021). Impacts of climate change on the livestock food supply chain; a review of the evidence. In Global Food
Security (Vol. 28).
6 Exposure: presence of livelihoods, ecosystems, and assets.
7 Vulnerability: degree to which a system, livelihood might be negatively affected.
8 Adaptative capacity: capacity to respond.
9 A Climate Impact Potential Assessment was carried out during project preparation and more details can be found in the
Feasibility Study.
10 Cucchi, M. et al. (2020). WFDE5: bias-adjusted ERA5 reanalysis data for impact studies. Earth System Science Data, 12(3),
2097-2120. The following information is drawn from the W5E5 dataset for 1981-2016 (36-year dataset of daily precipitation,
daily maximum and minimum temperatures, and relative humidity with a resolution of around 50 km

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
 | B. PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context | 
For more details, see Annex 2 (Feasibility Study)
12. Smallholder farmers dominate agriculture in East Africa. They rely heavily on livestock for their livelihoods2,
more particularly dairy, which are found in various production systems and diverse agroecologies, all driven by
climate. The region is dominated by a tropical savannah climate, separated by a corridor of arid steppe and desert
climates parallel to the Indian Ocean coastline and northwest of Kenya, as well as in the central parts of Tanzania.
Tropical rainforest conditions are found in the Lake Victoria and temperate climates are present along the highest
altitude areas of the Great Rift Valley bordering Kenya and Tanzania. Kenya is the driest among the four targeted
countries, with a total annual rainfall ranging between 400 to 600mm in the northwest of Lake Turkana and in areas
bordering Somalia. Conversely, Uganda and Rwanda have the highest total annual precipitation, ranging between
1000 and 1600mm. These conditions lead to a mosaic of climates and, consequently, to a wide range of
agroecological zones.
13. The dairy sector in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda is highly vulnerable to climate change (CC) and is
characterized by high GHG emissions, especially methane3. The four countries face significant CC challenges,
including extreme weather events and changing rainfall patterns4. In the dairy sector, the impacts of CC include heat
stress on dairy animals, prolonged and more recurrent droughts, intensifying heavy rainfall, flooding, and other
extreme weather events that reduce dairy cow productivity. Indirect effects include changes in disease patterns and
occurrence, decreased feed and water availability, and decreased pasture quality5. As a result, the Programme is
cross-cutting and addresses both mitigation and adaptation. Section B.1 describes the adaptation needs following
IPCC’s AR5 Risk Conceptualization (compounded effect of observed and projected climate hazards, exposure6,
vulnerability7, modulated by the existing adaptive capacity8), as well as the mitigation needs based on the GHG
emission profile of the dairy sector.9
CLIMATE HAZARDS10
14. East Africa's dairy systems and their spatial distribution are diverse, exposing dairy farmers’ livelihoods to a
wide range of hazards. Climate change poses risks both because of the potential impacts of weather hazards and |  | 

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
human responses to modulate their effects. The analysis of livestock and dairy exposure to observed and projected
weather hazards is supported by geospatial datasets on flood and drought prone areas.
Observed climate change
15. Precipitation declined over most of the four countries during the 1950s (-6.7mm/yr.) and the 1960s (-
21.8mm/yr.) but increased during the 1970s (+16.0mm/yr.)11. There are also statistically significant differences on
seasonal precipitation trends (p-value 0.05) across central Uganda between January and March, extending to the
north of Kenya and northern Tanzania between April and June where seasonal precipitation rates have declined at a
rate of -4 to -8 mm/yr. over 1981-2016. On the other hand, a precipitation increase has also been observed in the
southeast of Tanzania during the austral summer (January to March) over 1981-2016 (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Changes in accumulated seasonal precipitation (mm) over the 1981- 2016 period using the W5E5 dataset12
January-March (JFM) April-June (AMJ) July- September (JAS) October-November (OND)
16. Temperature. The annual average maximum temperature (mean Tmax) has increased significantly (p-value
0.05) across Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania. In Uganda (Eastern and Northern region) and Kenya (north of Lake
Turkana County), for example, the annual mean Tmax has increased by +0.030 to +0.035°C/yr., equivalent to +1.1
to +1.3°C during 1981-2016. In addition to having the highest mean Tmax increase, the Kenyan north Rift Valley has
the warmest mean Tmax year-round among the four targeted countries. There is also a significant change in average
daily minimum temperature (mean Tmin) in Kenya and Tanzania, but not in Rwanda or the west of Uganda. For
mean Tmin, the increase is observed in the east of Uganda and the northwest of Kenya where temperatures have
increased by +0.035ºC/yr., equivalent to +1.3ºC during 1981-2016.
17. Mean relative humidity. The Rift Valley in Kenya has the lowest average annual relative humidity (mean RH
<50 percent), while central and southern Uganda, especially the areas bordering Lake Victoria, have the highest
mean RH (75-85 percent). The Kenyan and Tanzanian coastlines are characterized by high mean RH (70 to 80
percent) all year round due to the incoming moisture from the Indian Ocean. A statistically significant decrease (p-
value 0.05) in mean RH between -0.10 and -0.25 percent/year was observed in most areas of Uganda and Rwanda
between 1981 and 2016. In addition, eastern and northeastern Kenya have experienced a statistically significant
decrease (p-value 0.05), while central and southern Tanzania have experienced the largest decline (-0.10 to -0.15
percent/year).
18. Rainfall variability. The region’s climatic seasons are influenced by a coupled transboundary ocean-
atmosphere phenomenon called the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). A long rainy season occurs from March
to May (MAM), and a short rainy season from October to December (OND) when the ITCZ migrates southwards.
There is high rainfall variability in OND due to large-scale oceanic-atmospheric patterns such as the El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) and Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), which frequently coincides with ENSO events. The relationship
11 Ongoma, V., & Chen, H. (2017). Temporal and spatial variability of temperature and precipitation over East Africa from 1951 to
2010. Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics, 129, 131-144.
12 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
between the 3-month Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI-3) and ENSO is significant for understanding
precipitation variability in East Africa (Figure 2). SPI-3 categorizes precipitation conditions, indicating whether they
are normal (-0.99 and +0.99), moderately dry (-1.49 to -1.0) and moderately humid (+1.0 to +1.49), severely dry (-
1.99 to -1.5) and severely humid (+1.5 to +1.99), and extremely dry (≤ -2.0) and extremely humid (≥ +2.0). During
the strong El Niño of 1997-1998, SPI-3 values indicated very humid conditions, while the subsequent strong La Niña
of 1999-2000 resulted in severe dry conditions over East Africa. The impacts of ENSO are apparent, since peak
ENSO events occur between October and March, coinciding with the short (October to November) and long (March
to May) rainy seasons in East Africa, further amplifying precipitation anomalies.
Extreme weather events
19. Dry-spells and very wet days. The average annual number of dry days (R≤1mm/day) in East Africa exceeds
300 days in the northern Rift Valley and northeastern Kenya. Conversely, the annual number of dry days decreases
toward Lake Victoria (including Mount Elgon in Uganda and Kenya) and the tropical rainforest near the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC). On average, Tanzania records 180 dry days/yr. along its border with Uganda and Rwanda
and over 280 days in its interior. The Indian Ocean coastline has seen an increase in dry days by +1.0 days/yr.,
equivalent to +36 dry days per year since 1981. In eastern Uganda, the number of dry days by -0.50 days/yr.,
equivalent to +18 wet days on average each year since 1981. Trends on very wet days (R≥20mm/day) show
statistically significant differences (p-value <0.05) along the Great Rift Valley in Kenya and Tanzania, with an average
annual increase of +0.15 days/yr. over the period 1981-2016, equivalent to an additional +5 very wet days on annual
average since 1981 (Figure 2). In contrast, neither the interior of Kenya, Tanzania nor Uganda have seen an increase
or decrease in the number of very wet days since 1981.
Figure 2. Spatiotemporal analysis of SPI-3-month over the 1981-2016 period in (a) Kenya, (b) Rwanda, (c) Uganda, and (d)
Tanzania13
a) b) c) d)
20. Extreme temperatures. Most of the change in the number of very warm days (Tmax ≥35ºC) on annual
average is reported in the northern Rift Valley, where the number of very warm days has increased by +1.2 to +2.8
days/yr., which is equivalent to an additional 40 to 100 very warm days as an annual average since 1981. In addition,
northern Uganda experienced an increase in very warm days at a rate of +0.8 days/yr. although this increase is not
statistically significant.
Projected climate change14
13 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study
14 Future climate projections were based on two representative concentration pathways (RCPs) namely RCP 2.6 (low emission
scenario) and RCP 8.5 (high emission scenario). Climate and Agriculture Risk Visualization and Assessment (CAVA) is an
approach to climate information with a focus on agriculture. Its goal is to provide long-term, climate services by democratising access
and simplifying the use of past and future climate and impact data. CAVA analytics uses the W5E5 merged dataset over the 1976-
2005 period to bias-correct the outputs of atmospheric models. More information is available here: https://fao-cava.predictia.es/

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
21. Annual precipitation. Some parts of East Africa may experience an increase in rainfall in the distant future
(Figure 3) under various Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)15. Arid and semi-arid regions are expected
to receive less precipitation, while the highlands and lake regions may receive more rainfall. Dry seasons in Kenya,
Tanzania, and Uganda could see an increase in precipitation. Future projections indicate an eastward increase in
Kenya under RCP 2.6 (+100mm), accentuated under RCP 8.5 (+100 to +200mm) in the distant future (2070-2099).
In Rwanda, a decrease in rainfall is expected under RCP 2.6 (-0.20mm/yr.) and an increase under RCP 8.5
(+0.18mm/yr.). In Uganda, climate projections show a decrease in rainfall of -0.30mm/yr. under both RCPs (Figure
3).
Figure 3. Total annual rainfall (mm) projections under RCP 2.6 and 8.5 in (a) Kenya, (b) Rwanda, (c) Uganda, and (d)
Tanzania16.
22. Mean maximum temperatures. Under RCP 2.6, the mean Tmax are expected to peak in the mid-term (2040-
2069); whereas under RCP 8.5, the highest mean Tmax increase is expected by the end of the century (2070-2099).
Under RCP 8.5, mean Tmax may increase by up to +4.5oC in central parts of East Africa by the end of the century
(2070-2099). The rate of increase in both RCPs is slower (+1 to +2oC depending on the RCP) towards the ocean since
water can hold more heat than air, thereby taking longer to warm up than continental parts. Accordingly, the coastal
areas of Kenya and Tanzania may experience a mean Tax increase of +0.5 to +1.0oC (RCP 2.6) and +2.0 to +3.0oC
(RCP 8.5), respectively, by the end-of-century (2070-2099) compared to the baseline period (1976-2005). Similarly,
because of its large size, Lake Victoria may warm more slowly than its surroundings and, thus, have a lower rate of
mean Tmax increase over time. Overall, most models agree on a positive climate change signal for mean Tmax
(Figure 4).
Figure 4. (Left) Projected Changes in Maximum Temperature (annual). (Right) Projected change in Mean Annual Minimum Daily
Temperatures (mean Tmin; oC) over the 21st century from historical period (1976-2005)17
15 Ayugi, B. et al. (2022). Projected changes in meteorological drought over East Africa inferred from bias-adjusted CMIP6 models.
Natural Hazards, 113(2), 1151-1176.
16 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study
17 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
23. Mean minimum temperatures. The mean Tmin increase over East Africa is expected to follow the same
spatiotemporal pattern as mean Tmax. However, the rate of change in mean Tmin is slightly higher to that of mean
Tmax. Overall, mean Tmin could increase by +1.5 to +2.0ºC (RCP 2.6) and by +4.0 to +5.0ºC (RCP 8.5) inland and
by less than +1.5ºC (RCP 2.6) and +3.0ºC (RCP 8.5) on the Tanzanian and Kenyan coast by 2070-2099 compared
to 1976-2005.
24. The Mean relative humidity (mean RH) will change over the course of the century for RCPs 2.6 and 8.5. The
annual mean RH (+2 %) is expected to increase along Kenya and Lake Victoria. Under RCP 8.5, however, the mean
RH is expected to decrease on a yearly average (-2 to -8 %) in the central parts of Tanzania, with a high rate towards
the south.
25. Rainfall variability. In all countries, positive SPI-3 values will remain lower under RCP 8.5 than RCP 2.6,
implying fewer wet-years under RCP 8.5. For negative SPI-3 values (dry periods), negative trends are accentuated
in Rwanda, Uganda, and Tanzania, implying that 3-month precipitation values are increasingly more dispersed from
the mean.
26. Dry spells. The models show a positive agreement in the time of emergence on the number of dry days
(R≤1mm/day), slightly earlier and widespread for RCP 8.5 (2030-2050) compared to RCP 2.6 (2040-2060). The
positive change (increase in the number of dry days) is widespread throughout East Africa, particularly towards
western Kenya, all of Uganda and Rwanda, and most parts of Tanzania. Conversely, the timing of the emergence of
negative values (reduction in number of dry days) is projected from 2060 onwards for RCP 8.5 and a little earlier for
RCP 2.6, mainly in eastern and southern Kenya. In addition, most of the increase in very wet days (R≥20mm/day) is
projected in southwestern Kenya under RCP 2.6, where there could be an extra +1 to +2 very wet days on average
per year by the end of the century (2070-2099). For RCP 8.5, the increase in very wet days is widespread over
Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania, and southwestern Kenya (Figure 5).
Figure 5. Analysis of SPI-3-month over the century under RCPs 2.6 and 8.5 in a) Kenya, b) Rwanda, c) Uganda, and
d)Tanzania18
a) b)
18 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
c) d)
27. Extreme temperatures. Very warm days (Tmax ≥35ºC) are expected to increase in frequency and intensity
(Figure 6). In the low emission scenario (RCP 2.6), +25 to +75 additional very warm days on average per year are
expected in Uganda, the Rift Valley of Kenya, and central Tanzania in the mid-term (2040-2069). Most of the increase
in very warm days is projected by the end of the century (2070-2099) under RCP 8.5, showing an increase in the
range of 100 to 200 additional very warm days on average per year compared to 1981-2010. On the contrary, the
cooling effect of large water masses such as Lake Victoria and the Indian Ocean can significantly modulate the
upward trend of very warm days over time.
Figure 6. Climate change signal in the number of (left) very warm days (Tmax ≥35ºC) on annual average and (right) days with
tropical nighttime conditions (Tmin ≥20oC) on annual average over the 21st century from historical period (1976-2005)19
EXPOSURE
28. Exposure is the presence of people, livelihoods, species, and ecosystems that could be affected by hazards,
more particularly droughts and floods that cause disasters (Figure 7).
29. In East Africa, droughts tend to be more frequent, longer, and more severe in boreal spring and summer, as
rainfall and water storage decrease overall. Table 1 shows how drought will change under different climate scenarios.
Haile et al. (2020) show that the drought area in East Africa will increase, with extreme droughts increasing faster
than severe and moderate droughts. For example, by the end of the century (2080s), severe droughts are expected
to increase by 13.5 percent under RCP 8.5. In general, farmers can cope with mild droughts, but severe droughts
lead to large-scale livestock losses, decreased pasture regeneration, and an increased prevalence of drought-related
livestock diseases.20 Overall, droughts affect the availability and quality of water for pasture regeneration, feed
production, water and hygienic practices in the dairy production system.
19 Source: Annex 2: Feasibility Study
20 Huho, J. M., & Mugalavai, E. M. (2010). The Effects of Droughts on Food Security in Kenya. The International Journal of Climate
Change: Impacts and Responses, 2(2).

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
30. Floods. East Africa experiences frequent flooding due to climate variability and anthropogenic factors that
exacerbate livestock exposure to flooding (Figure 7). Among its flood-prone areas, Uganda has the highest number
of flood-related casualties, particularly in the Northern, Eastern, and Central regions along the White Nile River. Each
year, floods affect between 10,000 and 25,000 people per administrative boundary in these regions of Uganda, with
up to 36,000 people per administrative boundary in the Northern region. In Tanzania, floods affect 10,000 to 25,000
people per administrative boundary in Tanga, Morogoro, and Pwani. In contrast, in the central parts of Kenya, fewer
than 100 people per administrative boundary were affected by floods on an annual basis. Due to the increase in
population and increased rainfall in Lake Victoria under RCP 8.5, flooding along the White River Nile is likely to
increase.
31. Disasters. In East Africa, between 1971 and 2023, more than 95 million people were affected by disasters
caused by meteorological (storms), hydrological (floods, landslides) and climatological (droughts)21 events. Since
1971, 248 disasters have occurred, of which 78 disasters in Kenya, 70 in Tanzania, 60 in Uganda, and 40 in Rwanda.
About 69 percent related to floods and 17 percent to drought. Over time, the number of disasters has increased
exponentially, from 28 during 1971-1990 to 174 during 2001-2020. The most common disaster is flooding, followed
by drought and landslides. Between 1900 and 2023, 176 floods were recorded in the targeted countries, most of them
river floods caused by heavy rainfall. Evidence shows that women and men are affected by drought differently, and
that gender inequalities diminish women’s capacity to cope with these calamities.
Table 1. Projected changes (%) in drought over East Africa22
RCP 2.6 RCP 8.5
Projected changes
2020s 2050s 2080s 2020s 2050s 2080s
Change in drought area (%) 9% 17% 16% 14.5% 41.5% 39%
Change in moderate drought
7.5% 12% 12% 10% 17% 11.6%
(%)
Change in severe drought (%) 1.4% 3.8% 3.5% 3.4% 12.3% 13.5%
Number of drought events 3 4 4 3 5 3
Figure 7. (Left) Estimated number of people exposed to drought; and (Right) number of people affected by floods in Kenya,
Uganda, Rwanda, and Tanzania
VULNERABILITY
32. CC also poses many challenges and threats to the East African dairy sector, which is subject to pre-existing
physical and socio-economic vulnerabilities. By reducing these vulnerabilities, which will be exacerbated by climate
change, the sector becomes more resilient. These vulnerabilities are presented below:
21 Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) database (2023). 2022 Disasters in Numbers. Available at: link
22 Based on Haile et al. (2020)

--- Table 1 on Page 15 ---
Projected changes | RCP 2.6 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  | 
 | 2020s | 2050s | 2080s | 2020s | 2050s | 2080s
Change in drought area (%) | 9% | 17% | 16% | 14.5% | 41.5% | 39%
Change in moderate drought
(%) | 7.5% | 12% | 12% | 10% | 17% | 11.6%
Change in severe drought (%) | 1.4% | 3.8% | 3.5% | 3.4% | 12.3% | 13.5%
Number of drought events | 3 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 5 | 3

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
a) Poverty and income inequality. Kenyan, Tanzanian, Rwandan and Ugandan societies are marked by
important poverty and income inequality. The Human Development index (HDI) 2022 ranking in Kenya (146th),
Rwanda (159th), Uganda (159th) and Tanzania (160th) reflect low achievements in some of the key dimensions
of human development, while high GINI indices (38.7 in Kenya, 43.7 in Rwanda, 40.5 in Tanzania and 42.7 in
Uganda)23 evidence strong income inequalities. The vulnerable – more particularly poor dairy farmers and
women24 - will be the most affected by climate change.
b) Degraded of rangelands and ecosystems. The availability of feed depends on the quality of rangelands,
which are degraded in the region. Figure 8 shows that degraded land accounts for 27 percent of total rangelands
areas in Tanzania, 3.6 percent in Kenya, 2.1 percent in Uganda and 2.1 percent in Rwanda. The main factors
leading to the degradation of rangelands and pasture are soil structure and erodibility, climate (rainfall intensity
and temperature), reduction of vegetation cover and topography (influencing water runoff capacity).
Degradation prevents rangelands from providing ecosystem services such as provisioning (production of
above-ground biomass, such as grass, as well as water) and regulating (such as the capacity of rangelands to
sequester carbon in the soils25). It also has a negative impact on the forage balance, as well as on the livestock
carrying capacity, which highlights the pressure that the land is under in terms of maximum number of animals
that the ecosystem can sustainably support over time, without causing damages to the environment (Feasibility
Study, Annex 2).
c) Limited access to quality inputs. Feed that reduces enteric emissions, veterinary services and climate-
resilient breeding stocks are difficult to access for dairy smallholder farmers. Limited veterinary services lead
farmers to prefer local or crossbred animals that are not as high yielding, whereas exotic breeds are highly
susceptible to local disease. In addition, limited access to improved breeds hinders genetic progress.
d) Limited water availability. Climate change affects water resources with changes in precipitation patterns
leading to water scarcity or excessive water supply in different regions. In food insecure areas, limited access
to safe and reliable water resources, and limited water harvesting systems can hinder livestock and dairy
production, contributing to food insecurity and increased vulnerability, especially for women who often provide
labour for livestock.
e) Frequent disease outbreaks. Foot-and-mouth disease, mastitis, and East Coast Fever (ECF) are common
livestock diseases. Disease outbreaks result in a high mortality rate, reduced milk production, and increased
veterinary costs. Poor disease control measures, inadequate quarantine facilities, and limited veterinary
services contribute to the prevalence of diseases in the dairy farming sector.
Figure 8. Level of degradation of rangelands and pastures in the four countries between 2012 and 2020 (left) and carrying
capacity, expressed in above-ground biomass surplus (ton of dry matter) (right)26
23 World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI
24 FAO. 2024. The unjust climate – Measuring the impacts of climate change on rural poor, women and youth. Rome.
25 Sub-Saharan Africa has been estimated to have the highest potential for soil carbon storage (0.41 tC/ha/yr) compared to other
regions of the world. The potential annual increase is estimated at 0.57, 0.53, 0.52, and 0.51tC/ha/yr, respectively, for Kenya,
Tanzania, Rwanda, and Uganda
26 As analyzed in Annex 2: Feasibility Study

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
f) Dairy processing facilities, energy supply and access to markets. Dairy farmers in East Africa face
inadequate infrastructure along the dairy value chain. The availability of reliable (and sustainable) energy supply
is also irregular, which affects the ability to cool and process milk, and reduce losses. Additionally, price
fluctuations and market volatility are common challenges. Most milk prices are determined by bulkers and
processors. Access to stable higher-value-added markets is further hindered by limited outreach of milk
collection centers (MCCs), dairy cooperatives and business alliances. More details are provided in the Market
Assessment (Annex 2).
g) Limited access to credit and financial services. Critical aspects of dairy farming, such as infrastructure,
animal health, and feed, require access to credit and finance. Small-scale dairy farmers and pastoralists,
especially women and young people, have difficulties accessing these services, due to lack of collateral, which
limits investments in modern equipment, infrastructure, and improved livestock.
h) Land tenure. In Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, a main risk for intensive grazing is tenure insecurity, i.e. tenure
rights or land ownership. Access to natural capital, particularly women’s and youth ownership, management
and control of land and land resources are major barriers to sustainability, and the adoption of climate-resilient
and low-carbon practices (Annex 2).
CLIMATE ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
33. About 70-90 percent of East African agriculture is rain-fed, with small-scale farmers relying on seasonal rainfall
for feed, fodder crops and pasture. As dairy systems are subject to significant seasonal, temporal, and spatial
variations, dairy farmers face extreme difficulties in planning investments, which also become riskier under CC. The
resilience of the dairy system depends on its ability to adapt to different climate conditions and to cope with the
impacts of CC. Identifying adaptation needs facilitates prioritizing actions and allocating resources for addressing
critical challenges.
34. Rising temperatures are disrupting agriculture, livestock and dairy, the economic backbone of East Africa.
Water scarcity, pest outbreaks, and declining productivity threaten food and nutrition security. Droughts and
deforestation exacerbate soil erosion. The intensification and frequency of droughts will hinder access to water under
different climate scenarios. Areas affected by extreme drought will expand faster than those affected by severe and
moderate droughts, especially under RCP 8.5. Storms and floods have become more frequent and intense, causing
deaths, damage to infrastructure and loss of livelihoods. The dairy sector’s adaptive capacity stems from the following:

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
a) Access to climate-smart27 practices and technologies. Improved dairy breeds, drought-tolerant forage
varieties, and efficient milk processing equipment are some of the climate-smart technologies farmers need.
These practices and technologies should be labor saving to reduce workloads for women.
b) Capacity building and knowledge transfer. Farmers' technical knowledge and skills in dairy management can
be enhanced by providing training programmes, Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS), and extension services
on sustainable feeding practices, breeding strategies, disease control measures and water resource efficiency.
c) Financial and market support. Affordable financing supports farmers' investments in productive assets,
infrastructure, and value-addition. Dairy cooperatives and value chain linkages can improve farmers' incomes.
Agribusiness can provide input and output markets that improve the productivity of smallholder dairy farmers28.
d) Strengthening infrastructure. Improving rural infrastructure, such as water harvesting systems, renewable
energy, milk collection and processing facilities, will reduce transport costs and improve market access for dairy
farmers, and reduce the drudgery associated with fetching water by women.
e) Climate information. Informed decisions on feed management, breeding and disease control can be made
through climate information, early warning systems, and advisory services. This will help dairy farmers anticipate
and adapt to climate-related risks. These skills equip youth as agents and service providers in dissemination of
new information.
f) Policy support and institutional strengthening. To enable dairy farmers to thrive, it is imperative to develop
policies, regulations, and institutions that are tailored to their needs, especially addressing barriers related to
gender inequalities and youth, as well as strengthening research and extension actors. Key adaptation
requirements require collaboration between governments, research institutes, dairy cooperatives, and financial
institutions.
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE
35. East Africa’s dairy sector is one of the most vulnerable sectors to climate change, the impact of which are felt
at all levels of the dairy value chain (Figure 9). The impacts at the dairy farm level are as follows: (i) a decline in milk
yields, especially of high milk-yielding breeds; (ii) heat stress in dairy cattle; (iii) increased development of pathogens,
diseases, parasite and vectors in dairy cattle; (iv) decreased feed production and productivity, due to reduced or
excess soil moisture and fertility; (v) a decrease in the quantity and quality of pasture; (vi) deterioration of fodder in
an unprotected warehouse. At the rangeland level, livestock owners face: (i) reduced access to rangelands resources;
(ii) ecosystem degradation; (iii) a decrease in rangeland and pasture productivity and forage quality. At the dairy value
chain level, high temperatures compromise the safety of milk and dairy products, higher risks of milk losses, and
higher costs per unit of produce.
Figure 9. Potential impacts of climate hazards on the livestock land-based food supply chain29
27 According to FAO, climate-smart agriculture is “an approach to help the people who manage agricultural systems respond
effectively to climate change” by pursuing “the triple objectives of sustainably increasing productivity and incomes, adapting to
climate change, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions”. For more details, please see https://www.fao.org/climate-smart-
agriculture/en/
28 Omondi, I. et al. (2017). Processor Linkages and Farm Household Productivity: Evidence from Dairy Hubs in East Africa.
Agribusiness, 33(4)
29 Godde, C. et al. (2021). Impacts of climate change on the livestock food supply chain; a review of the evidence. In Global Food
Security (Vol. 28).

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
36. Climate change and milk yields. Temperature and humidity have a significant impact on milk production
(Annex 2, Feasibility Study, Chapter 2). Significant milk production losses have been observed in Kenya, Uganda,
and Tanzania’s coastal regions between 1981 and 2016, from 4 to 8 kg/day for the Holstein-Friesian breed and
between 0.5 and 1 kg/day for the Boran breed. Over the period 1981-2016, milk production declined less than 2
kg/day for the Holstein-Friesian breed in the high-altitude areas of Kenya, Tanzania, and Rwanda. Future milk
production is expected to decrease up to 1 kg/day for Holstein-Friesian cows and up to 0.15 kg/day for Boran animals
by the end of the century under RCP 2.6, and even up to 2.5 kg/day for Holstein Friesian cows and 0.5 kg/day for
Boran cows under RCP 8.530. Heat stress also causes reproductive problems (missed mating or insemination).
37. Ruminant feed and forage supplies are most affected by climate change due to changes in cereal,
forage, and rangeland productivity. Changes in temperature and CO levels will affect the composition of pastures
2
by altering the species competition dynamics due to changes in optimal growth rates31. In addition, availability of
rainfall determines rainfed crop production. Feed and fodder are available in the rainy and early dry seasons and
sparse in the dry season, leading to strong seasonal fluctuations in milk production and milk prices. Even during the
rainy seasons, there is often not adequate forage (fodder and pasture) to be stored for utilization during the dry
season32. Feed availability fluctuates throughout the year, challenging livestock production. It can also lead to conflicts
between communities and competition with wildlife in pastoral areas. Pastoral communities are more vulnerable to
feed shortages because of droughts, degradation of rangelands, and limited access to grazing lands. Both RCPs
predict the greatest yield change in the north of Kenya and Uganda in the mid- and long-terms (2031-2060 and 2061-
2090). Under RCP 2.6, maize yields, commonly used as feed, are likely to decline by 5 to 15 percent in Uganda and
by 20 to 25 percent in Kenya under RCP 8.5. Napier grass yields are likely to decline mostly in Uganda (e.g., North
region by more than 30 percent), the north of Kenya by 30 percent, and the southeast of Tanzania by 20 to 30 percent.
Under RCP 8.5, Napier grass yield losses are up to 10 percent lower in the southwest of Tanzania both in the mid-
term (2031-2060) and into the future (2061-2090). For maize, models show that Africa is likely to suffer up to 10
percent yield loss by 2055 due to CC.
38. Climate change will affect pathogens, vectors, hosts, or reservoirs, as well as human behaviour.
Estimating climate change effects on livestock diseases is difficult due to the complex interactions between climatic
and non-climatic factors. Temperature and humidity play a significant role in pathogen and parasite development.
Wind patterns affect the movement of locusts and pathogens. Pathogen propagation may be limited by hot and dry
conditions, changes in rainfall and temperature regimes which influence disease vector distribution, such as ticks,
mosquitoes and flies. Vector dynamics are also influenced by soil and vegetation type, and topography. In most cases,
30 For further details see section 7.2.2. of the Climate Impact Potential Assessment
31 Rojas-Downing, M.M., Nejadhashemi, A.P., Harrigan, T. and Woznicki, S.A., 2017. Climate change and livestock: Impacts,
adaptation, and mitigation. Climate risk management, 16, pp.145-163.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221209631730027X
32 Mudavadi, O. et al. (2020). Effects of Season Variation on Water, Feed, Milk Yield and Reproductive Performance of Dairy Cows
in Smallholder Farms in Eastern Africa. Journal of Agriculture and Ecology Research International.

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
vectors and pathogens negatively affect livestock. Zoonotic diseases spread during droughts and feed shortages.
Further details are available in Annex 2, Chapter 2.
39. The above impacts of climate change on milk production at farm level will have a direct impact on
national and household food and nutrition security. At household level, less milk will be available for dairy
consumption, with an immediate impact on nutrition and health of young children and women. It will also reduce
revenues from sales of milk. In the four countries, small daily revenues from the sales of surplus milk, often 1 to 5
litres per household, are essential for rural poverty reduction. At national level, a reduction of domestic milk production
will lead to higher imports from the international market and require monetary reserves. Also, a higher dependence
on the international market to purchase feed, in particular maize and soybean, will impact the national balance of
trade.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION PROFILE OF THE DAIRY SECTOR
40. Dairy production systems. In Kenya, 39 percent of milk is produced by intensive systems or zero-grazing
systems, 43 percent by semi-intensive systems, and 18 percent by extensive systems. In Rwanda, 93 percent of the
milk is produced in intensive/zero grazing systems, 4 percent in semi-intensive and 3 percent in extensive. In
Tanzania, dairy systems are traditional and intensive. The traditional system is characterized by meat-milk production
and large herds of cattle grazing natural pastures, producing 91 percent of the country’s milk. In Uganda, systems
are also traditional and intensive (Figure 10). Traditional systems produce 98 percent of the country’s milk. Further
disaggregation of systems in Annex 2 (Chapter 2.2).
Figure 10. Livestock production systems in East Africa33
41. Absolute GHG emissions (baseline, present and future). Methane (CH ), nitrous oxide (N O) and carbon
4 2
dioxide (CO ) are released by ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats) during the enteric fermentation and through manure
2
production.34 East Africa represents about 5% of GHG emissions of the global cattle sector, but they are increasing.
Enteric methane emissions from the dairy sector dominate the GHG emission inventories of Kenya, Rwanda,
Tanzania and Uganda, followed by cattle manure. Enteric methane is not only a short-lived climate pollutant, but it
represents a waste in the production process that doesn’t result in milk or meat. In addition, cattle manure releases
N O and CH . Over 90 percent of dairy sector emissions occur on farm35. Land-use changes and degradation further
2 4
contribute to GHG emissions due to the disruption in carbon stocks.
33 Prepared under Feasibility study 1.
34 The production of CH4, a potent GHG with a 27 times higher global warming potential than carbon dioxide over the long-term - 100-
year time period (IPCC, 2021), significantly contributes to the region's carbon footprint.
35 See studies produced by Bain and Company (citing FAO), in the context of the project formulation studies.

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
42. In Kenya, GHG emissions have increased from 57 MtCO eq in 1955 to 94 MtCO eq in 201536. Agriculture
2 2
produces half of all emissions. The GLEAM37 tool of the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations
(FAO), estimated that dairy cattle (4.5 million animals) emit 6.4 MtCO eq (based on 2019 data). The dairy sector
2
emits the most CH
4
and N
2
O at 93 percent and 6.6 percent respectively. About 82 percent of CH4 emissions are
caused by enteric methane, while 11 percent are caused by manure management. While business-as-usual (BAU)
emissions from agriculture are projected to reach 142 MtCO eq by 2030, FAO’s GLEAM tool estimates that total milk
2
production and enteric CH emissions will respectively increase by 43 and 36 percent by 2050 under current practices,
4
in a baseline scenario carried out at national level.
43. In Rwanda, total GHG emissions were estimated to be 6.7 MtCO₂eq in 2018, of which 3.3 MtCO₂eq, or 49
percent from agriculture. During the last decade, agriculture, forestry, and other land use (AFOLU) emissions
increased by 34 percent. Methane emissions from the livestock sector represent about 46 percent of total GHG
emissions. Enteric fermentation accounts for 74 percent of emissions, followed by CH and N O emissions from
4 2
manure management (15 percent and 11 percent, respectively). Dairy systems in Rwanda emit about 3.6 MtCO -eq
2
in 202038. Crossbred cattle contribute 58 percent to methane emissions in zero-grazing systems, while exotic dairy
cattle contribute only 0.2 percent. Zero grazing practices account for 93 percent of these emissions, semi-grazing
systems 2 percent, and open grazing 5 percent. FAO’s GLEAM model estimates that by 2050 milk production and
enteric CH emissions will increase by 64 percent and 59 percent respectively, under a baseline scenario.
4
44. In Tanzania, total GHG emissions are estimated to be 286.5 MtCO₂eq39, to which agriculture contributed 49.7
MtCO₂eq or 17 percent. Methane emissions represent 94 percent of total GHG emissions from dairy cattle systems.
Enteric fermentation counts for 92 percent of GHG emissions, and manure management by 2 percent. Emissions
from the dairy sector are expected to increase by mid-century, in response to the projected dairy herd growth to satisfy
the future demand for dairy products, which is expected to grow from 1.4 billion litres of raw milk in 2020, to 2.0 billion
litres in 2030, and 8 billion litres in 2050. Projections based on milk demand under a BAU scenario (from 2020 data),
will be associated with an increase of enteric methane emissions by 43 percent, escalating from 19 to 27 Mt of CO eq
2
between 2020 and 2030. FAO’s GLEAM model estimates that enteric CH emissions will increase by 117 percent by
4
2050, under a baseline scenario.
45. GHG emissions in Uganda totalled 95 MtCO eq in 2017, of which the AFOLU sector accounted for 79
2
MtCO eq40 or 84 percent. The GLEAM tool estimated that the dairy sector in 2019 24.4 MtCO eq or 30 percent of the
2 2
AFOLU sector’s emissions. CH emissions from enteric fermentation (78 percent, 19 MtCO eq) and CH and N O
4 2 4 2
emissions from manure management (4 percent or 2 MtCO eq) dominate GHG emissions from dairy cattle sector
2
and mostly concentrated in the Eastern, Central, Southern and Northeast (Karamoja) regions. FAO’s GLEAM model
estimates that milk production and enteric CH emissions will increase by 80 percent by 2050, under a baseline
4
scenario.
46. Total GHG emissions from dairy cattle in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda are presented in Figure 11.
The pattern follows the distribution of the dairy herd in the country.
36 Nationally Determined Contribution, communication to UNFCCC, December 2020. unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
06/Kenya%27s First NDC %28updated version%29.pdf
37 The Global Livestock Assessment Model (GLEAM) is a modelling framework that simulates the interaction of activities and
processes involved in livestock production and the environment. It is designed to analyze multiple environmental dimensions, such
as feed use, greenhouse gas emissions, land use and land degradation, nutrient and water use and interaction with biodiversity.
More information on GLEAM can be found here https://www.fao.org/gleam/en/
38 The analysis of the direct GHG emissions was conducted using the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM),
a geo-referenced model framework that simulates the bio-physical processes and activities along livestock supply chains based on
the life cycle assessment and based on the IPCC Tier 2 methodology. More information on GLEAM can be found here
https://www.fao.org/gleam/en/
39 CAIT. (2022). Climate Watch data: Climate Watch. 2022. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. World Resources Institute.
https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions
40 MWE, Uganda National Communication 3, 2022. See https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Final%20TNC%20Uganda.pdf

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
Figure 11: Direct GHG emissions from Dairy Cattle population (a) Kenya; (b) Tanzania; (c) Uganda; (d) Rwanda41
47. Emission Intensities (EI). The methane emission intensity, defined as the volume of methane emissions
generated per kg of milk, varies widely across intensive, semi-intensive and extensive dairy production systems, with
more productive systems having much lower EIs per kg of milk. In East Africa, EIs vary from 1.5 kg CO eq./kg milk
2
for exotic dairy breeds in Kenya to 24.2 kg CO eq./kg milk for traditional systems in Uganda. This shows the range of
2
performances between (but also within) systems and the potential for improvements, including by importance of
increasing the productivity in dairy production and promoting intensive and semi-intensive practices from dairy
systems with a low emission intensity per kg of milk. Details per country and per dairy production system are presented
in Figure 12.
48. In Kenya, the enteric CH EI is on average 2 kg CO eq./kg of milk produced, ranging from 1.4 kg CO eq./kg
4 2 2
milk in intensive exotic systems to 5 kg CO eq./kg milk in extensive indigenous systems. Emissions intensities were
2
on average higher for the indigenous systems (3.5 kg CO eq./kg milk) then for exotic systems (1.5 kg CO eq./kg
2 2
milk).
49. In Rwanda's dairy herd, crossbreeds account for 63 percent of enteric methane emissions, local breeds for 29
percent, and exotic breeds for 8 percent. The intensity of enteric CH emissions lays between 1.8 (exotic/ crossbreed
4
pasture grazing) and 4.6 kg (local semi-grazing) of CO eq. per kg of milk. This highlights the importance of mitigation
2
strategies targeting the crossbreeds. Approximately 93 percent of the dairy sector emissions are attributed to zero
grazing practices.
50. In Tanzania, enteric methane represents about 92 percent of total GHG emissions. About 97 percent of enteric
CH emissions are associated with traditional dairy cattle systems, whereas improved dairy systems contribute 3
4
percent. The intensity of enteric CH emissions varies between 1.9 and 19 kg of CO eq. per kg of milk. Unlike CH
4 2 4
production, CH intensity is notably elevated in the traditional system when compared to the improved system.
4
41 Source: FAO GLEAM, pre-feasibility study on GHG emissions baseline, scenarios and pathways analysis.

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
51. In Uganda, the enteric EI is on average 8.9 kg CO eq./kg milk produced. Emission intensities range from 7.7
2
to 24.2 kg CO eq./kg milk in traditional systems, compared to the range of 1.4 to 2.9 kg CO eq./kg milk for commercial
2 2
systems. The highest emission intensity is observed for pastoral systems at 24.2 kg CO eq./kg milk.
2
Figure 12. Enteric emission intensities per production system in (a) Kenya; (b) Rwanda; (c) Tanzania; (d) Uganda42
PROPOSED CLIMATE SOLUTIONS
52. The Programme’s interventions will address the climate change adaptation and mitigation issues across the
various dairy production systems and along the dairy value-chain, while addressing the barriers identified in the theory
of change (ToC, see B.2). It will scale-up: (i) farm and herd level practices to increase productivity, reduce emission
intensity, and decrease absolute emissions compared to a BAU scenario; (ii) farm level solutions for manure
management and nutrient recycling, to improve circularity, resilience and reduce emissions; (iii) landscape-level
interventions to improve the resilience and services of rangelands ecosystems, particularly soil carbon sequestration,
and water and biomass supply for animal feed; and (iv) value-chain level interventions, to reduce milk losses (and
corresponding GHG emissions) and increase the use of renewable energy. This holistic and sustainable approach,
that will also address enablers such as access to markets, finance, knowledge and services, will lead to lower
emissions from the dairy sector when compared to the business-as-usual scenario. A detailed table, linking the climate
drivers with interventions and their benefits is available in Annex 2, Chapter 6.
53. Interventions at farm and herd levels. Interventions will focus on the various climate risks and impacts,
namely the decrease in milk yields, heat stress of animals, the increase in cattle mortality, the change in dairy cattle
diseases, the decrease in feed productivity, the deterioration of fodder in unprotected warehouses due to excess
humidity. For all dairy systems, the Programme will encourage the combined adoption of climate adaptation and
mitigation practices, including the enhancement of animal genetic resources (artificial insemination with locally-
adapted improved and indigenous livestock breeds, sexed semen), improved herd health (e.g. vaccination against
East Coast Fever), animal welfare, water access, recycling, harvesting and reuse for cattle watering. In intensive and
semi-intensive systems, in addition to the above, interventions will improve the availability of forage grasses and
legumes, feeding practices, and use of conserved silage and complementary feed. In intensive systems, interventions
will include the establishment of forage grasses and legumes (Calliandra, Leucaena, etc.), the use of conserved silage
42 Ibid.

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
and urea-molasses multi-nutrient blocks (UMMB), the use of methane inhibitors (e.g. tannins rich Calliandra, lipids),
supplementation (use of non-conventional feed resources, e.g. biochar or sweet potato vines), precision feeding and
improving animal welfare and housing. In extensive systems, activities will include improving pasture management
(e.g. rotational grazing), the use improved pasture species and management practices to improve forage quality and
quantity, and use of multipurpose leguminous trees.
54. On-farm solutions for manure management and nutrient recycling. These interventions will address the
CH and N O emissions on dairy farms and limits related to the cost and availability of mineral fertilizers. Interventions
4 2
include promoting simple circular manure management practices to reduce nutrient losses and GHG emissions
(covering, compaction, composting, liquid-solid separation, production and addition of biochar). The Programme will
also invest in biogas solutions to produce renewable energy for cooking and electricity, as well as nutrient-rich
biofertilizer.
55. Interventions at the landscape level will address the negative impact of CC on ecosystem degradation
(rangeland and pastures) that result in reduced soil carbon sequestration, decreased quantity and quality of pasture,
reduced feed and water availability and livestock carrying capacity, all leading to lower milk yields. The interventions
will focus on improved rangeland management, through participatory learning and promoting sustainable grazing
practices. Land management activities will rehabilitate degraded rangelands to increase soil carbon sequestration,
promote access to fodder and address the natural barrier to rangeland degradation. In the four countries, soil carbon
impacts were identified as a strategy for carbon sequestration activities such as grazing intensity management,
mowing frequency, organic inputs and fertilizers used in fodder production, and improved agroforestry systems
associated with mixed crop-livestock production systems.
56. Interventions at the dairy value chain level will include the upgrading or equipping MCCs, milk collection
points (MCPs) and processing centres. This will increase the supply of milk through formal aggregation and
processing channels and create a stable market outlet for dairy farmers. Interventions will also aim to reduce milk
losses and its carbon footprint, and reduce GHG emissions through the use of photovoltaic (PV) systems as a
renewable energy (RE) source for milk collection, cooling and processing.
57. Interventions to improve the enabling environment. The focus will be on (i) a climate-sensitive policy and
regulatory environment (institutional framework, dairy value chain governance, farmer awareness campaigns) for the
dairy sector; (ii) strengthening proximity public and private services to the dairy sector, in particular expanding access
to veterinary services and innovative gender-inclusive advisory services combined with input supply services; (iii)
strengthening dairy cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs to encourage farmers to adopt the above- mentioned pathways.
Improved MRV capabilities will provide more precise Tier2-emissions data and improve the quality of national
inventories, as well as policies, planning, and investment decisions. Through regional cooperation, knowledge sharing
and joint learning, coordinated strategies will be adopted and efforts of the individual countries will be amplified.
TARGET AREAS
58. Climate risk. A climate risk mapping (Figure 13) was conducted by overlaying the sum of climatic hazards,
exposure, vulnerability and subtracting the adaptive capacity. The maps show that most of the region has a high risk
to climate hazards in the mid-term (2040-2069) and far future (2070-2099). More details, including the selected
geospatial layers under each risk category, can be found in Annex 2, Chapter 4.
Figure 13. Spatial distribution of climate risks for RCPs 8.5 in (a) the mid-term (2040-2069) and (b) far-future (2070-2099)43
(a) (b)
43 Source: pre-feasibility study. Climate Impact Potential Assessment.

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
59. Programme intervention areas are identified based on the integration of: (i) the climate risk hotspots; (ii)
absolute methane emissions from the dairy sector; (iii) soil carbon sequestration potential in pastures and rangelands;
(iv) milk production by district/county; and (v) complementarity with other international financing institutions (IFI)-
funded interventions, more particularly from IFAD (Figure 14).
Figure 14. Illustration of the methodology to select intervention areas (Districts/Counties)
60. The Programme will intervene in 94 counties/districts in the four countries. In Kenya, 12 counties44 were
selected and co-financing from the IFAD-funded Integrated Natural Resource and Environmental Management
(INReMP) Project will be leveraged. Rwanda will implement the Programme in 27 rural districts45, fully aligned with
the IFAD-funded Rwanda Dairy Development Project, phase 2 (RDDP-2). In Uganda, the Programme will invest in
44 Elgeyo Marakwet, Kakamega, Kericho, Kiambu, Nakuru, Nandi, Nyeri, Trans Nzoia, Uasin Gishu, West Pokot, Marsabit and
Samburu. See Feasibility Study for more details.
45 In the Eastern Province, Nyagatare, Gatsibo, Kayonza, Ngoma, Kirehe, Rwamagana, Bugesera; In the Northern Province, Gicumbi,
Rulindo, Gakenke, Burera, Musanze; In the Western Province, Nyabihu, Rubavu, Ngororero, Rutsiro, Karongi, Nyamasheke, Rusizi;
In the Southern Province, Kamonyi, Muhanga, Ruhango, Nyanza, Huye, Gisagara, Nyamagabe and Nyaruguru. See Feasibility
Study for more details.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
30 districts46 along the cattle corridor, aligned with the ReLIV. In Tanzania, the Programme will be implemented in 9
regions (25 districts)47, aligned with the Climate Smart Smallholder Dairy Transformation Project (C-SDTP).
COUNTRY OWNERSHIP
61. The NDCs, National Adaptation Plan (NAP) in the case of Kenya, and other national CC strategies outline the
countries approaches to reduce GHG emissions and adapt to climate change (Table 2a). The proposed Programme
is fully aligned with these national strategies, which propose measures such as: climate-resilient crops and livestock
production, CC resilient animal breeds, improved husbandry, and windrow composting to reduce enteric fermentation
emissions from livestock, and more efficient manure management systems. In addition, the Programme will support
the Ministries responsible for the dairy sector to review and formulate national policies, strategies, and regulations
that are essential for a sustainable transformation of the dairy sector aligned with the NDCs.
Table 2a. Alignment with key national climate priorities and livestock MRV status48
Kenya Rwanda Uganda Tanzania
National Climate National Adaptation National Climate
National Climate
Change Action Plan Plan (NAP) for the Change Strategy
Change and
(NCCAP) (2018): agriculture sector (2012): Provides a
Environment Policy
Incorporates ways to (2016): A framework for strategy for tackling
(2019) Mainstreams
reduce GHG emissions, adapting Uganda's climate change across
climate change
enhance carbon sinks, livestock sector to all sectors, including
concerns across all
and strengthen climate climate change, climate change
sectors and outlines the
resilience into the including enhancing adaptation measures
country’s priorities for
National Climate veterinary services and and measures for
adaptation and
Change Response improving water sustainable livestock
mitigation measures.
Strategy (NCCRS). management. management.
Kenya Climate Smart Climate Change Policy
National Adaptation
Agriculture 2015): Encourages Tanzania Climate
Plan for the
Implementation Uganda's livestock Smart Agriculture
Agricultural Sector
Framework (2018‒ sector to incorporate Program (TCSAP)
(2017): Provides a
2027): Provides a climate change (2017): A framework for
framework for adapting
roadmap for promoting considerations. The promoting climate-smart
the livestock sector to
climate-resilient policy includes agriculture in Tanzania.
climate change impacts,
agriculture, including measures to increase Measures include
through drought-tolerant
improved animal climate change increasing animal
livestock breeds,
feeding and watering, resilience, reduce GHG feeding and watering,
improved water
pasture management, emissions, and promote managing pastures, and
management, and
and manure sustainable managing manure.
veterinary services.
management. development.
Livestock
Livestock
Kenya Livestock Development Strategy
Rwanda Livestock Development Master
Master Plan (KLMP) and Investment Plan
Master Plan (2017): Plan (LDMP) (2013):
(2013): Roadmap for (LDSIP) (2015)
Climate-resilient Livestock sector
the livestock sector to Livestock sector
livestock management roadmap, based on
mainstream climate- roadmap, based on
practices promoted improved livestock
resilient livestock climate-resilient
along with strategies for productivity, enhanced
management practices livestock management,
improving livestock value chains, and
and livestock enhanced livestock
productivity. adaptation to climate
productivity. productivity and value
change.
chains.
46 In the Central region: Kasaanda, Kayunga, Kiboga, Kyankwanzi, Kyotera, Nakasongola, Nakaseke, Gomba, Rakai, Sembabule; In
the Eastern Region: Buyende, Kamuli, Kapelebyong, Katakwi, Kibuku, Kumi, Ngora, Pallisa, Serere and Soroti; In the Northern
Region (this region includes what is sometimes referred to as Karamoja, with a distinct pastoralist livelihoods system): Amolotar,
Amudat, Kaabong, Karenga, Kole, Kotido, Lira, Moroto, Nabitaluk and Nakapiripirit. See Feasibility Study for more details.
47 Southern Highland: Mbeya (Rungwe, Mbeya, Chunya and Mbarali districts), Iringa (Mufundi, Kilolo, Iringa districts) and Njombe
(Njombe, Makete and Wanging’ombe districts); Eastern Zone: Tanga (Lushoto, Muheza, Korogwe, Pangani, Tanga districts),
Morogoro (Mvomero, Kilosa and Morogoro districts) and Pwani (Kibaha and Bagamoyo). Zanzibar: Unguja (West, Central and South
districts) and, Pemba (South and North districts). See Feasibility Study for more details.
48 Taken from Annex 2: Feasibility Study

--- Table 1 on Page 26 ---
Kenya | Rwanda | Uganda | Tanzania
National Climate
Change Action Plan
(NCCAP) (2018):
Incorporates ways to
reduce GHG emissions,
enhance carbon sinks,
and strengthen climate
resilience into the
National Climate
Change Response
Strategy (NCCRS). | National Climate
Change and
Environment Policy
(2019) Mainstreams
climate change
concerns across all
sectors and outlines the
country’s priorities for
adaptation and
mitigation measures. | National Adaptation
Plan (NAP) for the
agriculture sector
(2016): A framework for
adapting Uganda's
livestock sector to
climate change,
including enhancing
veterinary services and
improving water
management. | National Climate
Change Strategy
(2012): Provides a
strategy for tackling
climate change across
all sectors, including
climate change
adaptation measures
and measures for
sustainable livestock
management.
Kenya Climate Smart
Agriculture
Implementation
Framework (2018‒
2027): Provides a
roadmap for promoting
climate-resilient
agriculture, including
improved animal
feeding and watering,
pasture management,
and manure
management. | National Adaptation
Plan for the
Agricultural Sector
(2017): Provides a
framework for adapting
the livestock sector to
climate change impacts,
through drought-tolerant
livestock breeds,
improved water
management, and
veterinary services. | Climate Change Policy
2015): Encourages
Uganda's livestock
sector to incorporate
climate change
considerations. The
policy includes
measures to increase
climate change
resilience, reduce GHG
emissions, and promote
sustainable
development. | Tanzania Climate
Smart Agriculture
Program (TCSAP)
(2017): A framework for
promoting climate-smart
agriculture in Tanzania.
Measures include
increasing animal
feeding and watering,
managing pastures, and
managing manure.
Kenya Livestock
Master Plan (KLMP)
(2013): Roadmap for
the livestock sector to
mainstream climate-
resilient livestock
management practices
and livestock
productivity. | Rwanda Livestock
Master Plan (2017):
Climate-resilient
livestock management
practices promoted
along with strategies for
improving livestock
productivity. | Livestock
Development Strategy
and Investment Plan
(LDSIP) (2015)
Livestock sector
roadmap, based on
climate-resilient
livestock management,
enhanced livestock
productivity and value
chains. | Livestock
Development Master
Plan (LDMP) (2013):
Livestock sector
roadmap, based on
improved livestock
productivity, enhanced
value chains, and
adaptation to climate
change.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
Tanzania Livestock
Kenya Vision 2030:
Rwanda Green Fund National Delivery of Modernization
Emphasizes sustainable
(FONERWA) (2012): Veterinary Services Initiative (TLMI)
rangeland management
Finance for climate Policy (2003): (2020): Aimed at
to mitigate climate
change mitigation and Prioritizes a sustainable transforming the
change impacts in
adaptation projects in increase in the livestock sector through
pastoral areas, efficient
Rwanda. Funds support production of live adoption of new
resource use, value
renewable energy, animals and livestock technologies, including
addition, research and
sustainable agriculture, products, such as milk, climate-smart feeds,
innovation, and market
and ecosystem meat, and other by- heat-tolerant breeds,
access for livestock
management projects. products. and improving disease
products.
management.
National Adaptation
National Organic National Adaptation
Plan (2016): Strengthen National Dairy
Agriculture Policy Plan (NAP) (2015):
the adaptive capacity Strategy and Strategic
(2019): Guidelines for Framework for adapting
and resilience of Plan (2013): Guides
organic livestock, livestock to climate
livestock production dairy sector
poultry, fisheries, and change, including
systems, through development, through
related subsectors like measures for enhanced
drought-tolerant policy support,
feed, fodder, veterinary livestock production
livestock breeds, research, extension
services, especially resilience such as
improving water services, infrastructure
given the significant drought-tolerant breeds,
management, development, and
number of domestic veterinary services, and
enhancing veterinary capacity building.
livestock. water management.
services.
Livestock MRV status:
currently using Tier 2 Livestock MRV status: Livestock MRV status: Livestock MRV status:
methodology for the currently using Tier 1 currently using Tier 1 currently using Tier 1
dairy sector, and Tier 1 methodology with methodology with methodology with
methodology with default regional default regional default regional
default emission factors emission factors. emission factors. emission factors.
for other livestock
ADDITIONALITY OF THE PROGRAMME
62. The Programme is a unique comprehensive framework to address concomitantly climate change
impacts in, and GHG emissions from, the dairy sector. As mentioned above, it will contribute to the NDCs, NAP,
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA), the Integrated Agriculture in National Adaptation Plans (NAP-Ag),
the National Agriculture Policy, and contributes to National Development Plans on climate-smart dairy value chains.
It is also fully in line with IFAD’s climate adaptation and mitigation priorities outlined in the four (4) Country Strategic
Opportunity Programmes (COSOPs). Through the introduction of climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices and
technologies, the Programme aims to trigger resilient low-carbon development of the dairy sector, with a focus on
methane mitigation.
63. Sources of methane from the dairy sector are among the main categories of anthropogenic GHG
emissions from Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use (AFOLU) sector identified in national inventories (e.g.,
National Communication (NCs), Biennial Update Reports (BURs)) in East Africa. Long-term low-emission
development strategies in East Africa must address the main source of methane emissions, namely the dairy sector.
In addition, the dairy sector is currently affected by several CC impacts, which requires more investment in the
adaptation and resilience of the dairy herd. Rapidly reducing methane emissions from livestock will help make near-
term gains in global efforts this decade. This strategy is regarded as the most effective in achieving the goal of limiting
warming to 1.5˚C.
64. In this regard, the Programme is a flagship and pioneering investment vehicle to support the Global
Methane Pledge (GMP). The GMP was launched at the Conference of Parties (COP) 26 in November 2021 in
Glasgow. Pledge participants agree to take voluntary action to contribute to a collective effort to reduce global
methane emissions by at least 30 percent from 2020 levels by 2030, which could eliminate warming of more than
0.2˚C by 2050. Participants also commit to using the highest tier IPCC good practice inventory methodologies, as
well as continuously improve the accuracy, transparency, consistency, comparability and completeness of national

--- Table 1 on Page 27 ---
Kenya Vision 2030:
Emphasizes sustainable
rangeland management
to mitigate climate
change impacts in
pastoral areas, efficient
resource use, value
addition, research and
innovation, and market
access for livestock
products. | Rwanda Green Fund
(FONERWA) (2012):
Finance for climate
change mitigation and
adaptation projects in
Rwanda. Funds support
renewable energy,
sustainable agriculture,
and ecosystem
management projects. | National Delivery of
Veterinary Services
Policy (2003):
Prioritizes a sustainable
increase in the
production of live
animals and livestock
products, such as milk,
meat, and other by-
products. | Tanzania Livestock
Modernization
Initiative (TLMI)
(2020): Aimed at
transforming the
livestock sector through
adoption of new
technologies, including
climate-smart feeds,
heat-tolerant breeds,
and improving disease
management.
National Adaptation
Plan (2016): Strengthen
the adaptive capacity
and resilience of
livestock production
systems, through
drought-tolerant
livestock breeds,
improving water
management,
enhancing veterinary
services. | National Dairy
Strategy and Strategic
Plan (2013): Guides
dairy sector
development, through
policy support,
research, extension
services, infrastructure
development, and
capacity building. | National Organic
Agriculture Policy
(2019): Guidelines for
organic livestock,
poultry, fisheries, and
related subsectors like
feed, fodder, veterinary
services, especially
given the significant
number of domestic
livestock. | National Adaptation
Plan (NAP) (2015):
Framework for adapting
livestock to climate
change, including
measures for enhanced
livestock production
resilience such as
drought-tolerant breeds,
veterinary services, and
water management.
Livestock MRV status:
currently using Tier 2
methodology for the
dairy sector, and Tier 1
methodology with
default emission factors
for other livestock | Livestock MRV status:
currently using Tier 1
methodology with
default regional
emission factors. | Livestock MRV status:
currently using Tier 1
methodology with
default regional
emission factors. | Livestock MRV status:
currently using Tier 1
methodology with
default regional
emission factors.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
GHG inventory reports under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris
Agreement, and to ensure greater transparency in key sectors. The Pledge aims to catalyse global action and
strengthen support for existing international methane emission reduction initiatives to advance technical and policy
work that will serve to support national actions. The Pledge recognizes the essential role that the private sector,
development banks, financial institutions and philanthropy play to supporting the implementation of the Pledge and
welcomes their efforts and commitment.
65. In line with the GMP, Programme additionality also includes building, through a large-scale investment
programme, long-term institutional capacity to deliver effective services that improve efficiency, climate
resilience, and reduce GHG emissions by improving the enabling environment. Capacities will focus on
preparing and implementing climate-smart policies at national and regional levels, promoting supportive trade policies
across East Africa to unlock climate-smart solutions, GHG MRV, climate risk analysis, and ensuring that the dairy
sector fully contributes to the participating countries’ NDCs.
SYNERGY WITH OTHER PROJECTS
66. At regional level, the Programme will be complementary with the GCF-funded Africa Rural Climate Adaptation
Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM, FP220, IFAD being the AE) for East Africa region. At the national level, synergies
will be developed with IFAD-funded initiatives, and key stakeholders will be involved in coordination and
implementation. In Kenya, implementation will be supported by the Kenya Dairy Board (KDB), the Kenya Agricultural
and Livestock Research Organization (KALRO), the Kenya Animal Genetic Resources Centre (KAGRC), amongst
others. The Programme will be closely linked to the Integrated Natural Resource Management Programme (INRMeP)
and the “Transforming Livelihoods through Climate Resilient, Low Carbon, Sustainable Agricultural Value Chains in
the Lake Region Economic Bloc” proposed by FAO to the GCF49. It will also build on the lessons learnt of the GCF-
funded “Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid
Rangelands” (FP113). In Uganda, implementation will be supported by the Dairy Development Authority (DDA), the
National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC & DB), National Research Organization (NARO),
Ministry of Local Government (MoLG). Synergy will be with the IFAD-funded Resilient Livestock Value Chain Project
(ReLIV). In Rwanda, implementation will build on the existing networks established through an ongoing project,
implemented by RAB, namely RDDP-2, as well as the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA).
Knowledge from the Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation (GCF FP167) will also be used for landscape
restoration interventions. In Tanzania, the Programme is an integral part of the C-SDTP. Implementation will be
supported by the Tanzania Dairy Board (TDB), the Tanzania Livestock Research Institute (TALIRI). It will also
leverage lessons learnt from the “Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma region” (GCF FP218). As
DaIMA will be aligned with RDDP-2, C-SDTP, ReLIV and INReMP, IFAD’s strategic objectives, more particularly its
pro-poor, youth and gender-sensitive approach and investment strategy will be fully mainstreamed into DaIMA.
ALIGNMENT WITH GCF SECTORAL GUIDES
67. The Programme will invest in climate-resilient livestock systems, one of the two paradigm-shift pathways
defined by the GCF Sectoral Guides on Agriculture and Food Security. The Programme improves and facilitates
climate change adaptation. At the national and regional levels, the appropriate composition and functioning of
management committees and knowledge platforms will ensure the meaningful participation of vulnerable groups,
such as women, youth, and the rural poor. Due to the vulnerability of climate-sensitive factors affecting the dairy
sector, the Programme supports integration of climate risks into business models involving the private sector in the
dairy value chain. As a result, the Programme aims to implement a transformational approach that avoids locking
dairy farmers into a high-carbon growth path.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram
68. The aim of the proposed Programme, which will be implemented in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda,
is to reduce methane and other GHG emissions from the dairy sector while increasing the resilience of livestock-
dependent communities. The Programme will support a shift from low production efficiency to improved, gender-
sensitive, integrated and NDC-aligned practices that reduce emissions at farm and food system levels (including
49 Project to be tentatively approved by GCF Board in 2025.

--- Table 1 on Page 28 ---
GHG inventory reports under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris
Agreement, and to ensure greater transparency in key sectors. The Pledge aims to catalyse global action and
strengthen support for existing international methane emission reduction initiatives to advance technical and policy
work that will serve to support national actions. The Pledge recognizes the essential role that the private sector,
development banks, financial institutions and philanthropy play to supporting the implementation of the Pledge and
welcomes their efforts and commitment.
65. In line with the GMP, Programme additionality also includes building, through a large-scale investment
programme, long-term institutional capacity to deliver effective services that improve efficiency, climate
resilience, and reduce GHG emissions by improving the enabling environment. Capacities will focus on
preparing and implementing climate-smart policies at national and regional levels, promoting supportive trade policies
across East Africa to unlock climate-smart solutions, GHG MRV, climate risk analysis, and ensuring that the dairy
sector fully contributes to the participating countries’ NDCs.
SYNERGY WITH OTHER PROJECTS
66. At regional level, the Programme will be complementary with the GCF-funded Africa Rural Climate Adaptation
Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM, FP220, IFAD being the AE) for East Africa region. At the national level, synergies
will be developed with IFAD-funded initiatives, and key stakeholders will be involved in coordination and
implementation. In Kenya, implementation will be supported by the Kenya Dairy Board (KDB), the Kenya Agricultural
and Livestock Research Organization (KALRO), the Kenya Animal Genetic Resources Centre (KAGRC), amongst
others. The Programme will be closely linked to the Integrated Natural Resource Management Programme (INRMeP)
and the “Transforming Livelihoods through Climate Resilient, Low Carbon, Sustainable Agricultural Value Chains in
the Lake Region Economic Bloc” proposed by FAO to the GCF49. It will also build on the lessons learnt of the GCF-
funded “Towards Ending Drought Emergencies: Ecosystem Based Adaptation in Kenya’s Arid and Semi-Arid
Rangelands” (FP113). In Uganda, implementation will be supported by the Dairy Development Authority (DDA), the
National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC & DB), National Research Organization (NARO),
Ministry of Local Government (MoLG). Synergy will be with the IFAD-funded Resilient Livestock Value Chain Project
(ReLIV). In Rwanda, implementation will build on the existing networks established through an ongoing project,
implemented by RAB, namely RDDP-2, as well as the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA).
Knowledge from the Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation (GCF FP167) will also be used for landscape
restoration interventions. In Tanzania, the Programme is an integral part of the C-SDTP. Implementation will be
supported by the Tanzania Dairy Board (TDB), the Tanzania Livestock Research Institute (TALIRI). It will also
leverage lessons learnt from the “Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma region” (GCF FP218). As
DaIMA will be aligned with RDDP-2, C-SDTP, ReLIV and INReMP, IFAD’s strategic objectives, more particularly its
pro-poor, youth and gender-sensitive approach and investment strategy will be fully mainstreamed into DaIMA.
ALIGNMENT WITH GCF SECTORAL GUIDES
67. The Programme will invest in climate-resilient livestock systems, one of the two paradigm-shift pathways
defined by the GCF Sectoral Guides on Agriculture and Food Security. The Programme improves and facilitates
climate change adaptation. At the national and regional levels, the appropriate composition and functioning of
management committees and knowledge platforms will ensure the meaningful participation of vulnerable groups,
such as women, youth, and the rural poor. Due to the vulnerability of climate-sensitive factors affecting the dairy
sector, the Programme supports integration of climate risks into business models involving the private sector in the
dairy value chain. As a result, the Programme aims to implement a transformational approach that avoids locking
dairy farmers into a high-carbon growth path.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram
68. The aim of the proposed Programme, which will be implemented in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda,
is to reduce methane and other GHG emissions from the dairy sector while increasing the resilience of livestock-
dependent communities. The Programme will support a shift from low production efficiency to improved, gender-
sensitive, integrated and NDC-aligned practices that reduce emissions at farm and food system levels (including

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B
interventions that reduce milk losses and increase milk collection, decarbonize processing with renewable energies,
formalize dairy value chains and strengthening partnerships with the private sector), as well as interventions that
promote circularity, and increase rangelands ecosystems resilience and services (including carbon sequestration in
grasslands).
69. The ToC presented below outlines the intervention logic of the Programme (Figure 15a). This section
describes the expected shift in the development trajectory as a result of the Programme’s intervention. The
Programme’s Goal Statement is as follows: “IF practices and technological solutions for reducing methane and other
GHG emissions and increasing climate resilience are adopted by dairy farmers and processors, and IF financial
services that efficiently sustain production and marketing are utilized, THEN a decrease in producers’ and other
stakeholders’ vulnerability and GHG emissions will be achieved in the dairy sectors of Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and
Uganda. This is BECAUSE the pathways to low-emissions and climate-resilient dairy production will be perceived as
financially beneficial to farmers, pastoralists, and processors.”
Figure 15a. Overall Theory of Change (ToC) diagram
70. As highlighted in the ToC, the multifaceted barriers (institutional, planning, knowledge, social, natural,
technological and financial) that hinder the achievement of the Programme goal are: (i) misalignment of multiple sector
policies and limited capacity for GHG MRV and for inventories at Tier 2 level, and for climate risk assessments in the
dairy sector, (ii) limited technical capacity to adapt to the changing climate in dairy farmers and extensions workers,
(iii) insufficiently improved breeds and their adaptability to climate change, combined with sensitivity to diseases; (iv)
dependence on rainfall for animal fodder and feed production, as well as rangeland degradation; (v) limited milk
bulking, processing, transport and distribution; (vi) low access to finance; (vii) limited women participation in decision
making, access to extension and control of resources. Adaptation and mitigation needs include: access to climate-
smart technologies; capacity building and knowledge transfer; financial and market support; strengthening
infrastructure and facilities; climate information systems; and policy support and institutional strengthening. More
details on the barriers are found in the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
Pathways to Low-Emission and Resilient Dairy Farming in East Africa
71. The dairy sector faces significant challenges related to climate change in East Africa. Dairy farming contributes
substantially to GHG emissions, with CC threatening its sustainability. Inefficiencies at the dairy farm level result in
excessive GHG emission intensities per kg of milk. In addition, many dairy farmers face barriers to accessing markets,
procuring local feed and fodder, obtaining extension and financial services, and managing risks. Low genetic potential,
herd management challenges, animal diseases, inadequate extension services, limited knowledge of climate-resilient
and low carbon practices and technologies, rangeland degradation and gender inequalities further harm the dairy
sector in these countries.
72. The Programme aims to address the following challenges: (i) strengthening climate resilience, (ii) reducing
emissions across the dairy value chain; (iii) the reduction of GHG emissions per kg of milk; and (iv) improving the
livelihoods of dairy farmers in East Africa. This requires a holistic approach to improving key aspects of the dairy sector
and addressing barriers, from improving policy, institutional and service delivery environments to building the capacity
of smallholder farmers, including women, youth and the marginalized. It also includes measures to facilitate access to
finance and innovative technologies with mitigation and adaptation benefits. As a result, dairy farmers and processors
will be motivated to adopt more efficient, climate-resilient practices that will increase incomes, reduce production costs,
and help combat climate change. Central to this transformative approach is the symbiosis of private sector support
and financial access within the dairy sector. This integration aims to foster market growth while promoting climate
resilience and reducing GHG emissions.
73. The paradigm shift envisioned by the Programme is a more efficient, climate-resilient dairy industry that
contributes to national and regional economic growth, improved smallholder farmers’ livelihoods, and reduced GHG
emissions. To achieve the above vision, the Programme aims to achieve the following three Outcomes:
Outcome 1: Systemic and institutional capacities in the dairy sector are strengthened to enable smallholder
dairy farmers and local value chain actors to reduce methane and other GHG emissions.
74. Outcome 1 aims to foster an enabling environment for the transformation of the East Africa’s dairy sector
towards increased productivity, climate resilience and lower emission intensity. To achieve this, several outputs must
be achieved.
75. The Programme will establish a climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment for the dairy sector
(Output 1.1) by reviewing regulatory frameworks, supporting value chain governance initiatives, and work on food
safety and dairy consumption. Through improved public services (Output 1.2.), namely the expansion of proximity
veterinary services and innovative extension services, both male and female farmers will be supported to address
animal health, feed quality, manure, and herd management issues. This will help scaling up climate-smart practices
and addressing the lack of knowledge and perception regarding adaptation. Enhanced measurement, reporting and
verification (MRV) capacities (Output 1.3.) will generate detailed Tier 2 emissions factors to improve national
inventories, and inform evidence-based policies, planning and investment. Robust MRV and modelling will address
data gaps and strengthen climate scenarios and assessments. Certification for low-carbon production and facilitating
access to the carbon markets will create financial incentives for mitigation efforts. Regional cooperation and knowledge
sharing (Output 1.4.) will ensure coordinated strategies, amplify country’s efforts, and promote joint learning. This
collaboration will be key to overcome institutional and knowledge barriers at national level.
Outcome 2: Smallholder dairy farmers and private sector value chain operators adopt low-emission, climate-
resilient, and sustainable practices for increased production and access market knowledge and tools.
76. Outcome 2 aims to improve incomes and productivity of smallholder dairy farmers, dairy cooperatives and
SMES by promoting sustainable and climate-resilient low-emission growth. The three Outputs leading to this Outcome
will also have a positive effect on gender equality, increased food security and nutrition for rural/urban consumers
(CB1) and women empowerment and inclusion of marginalized groups (CB2). More details on co-benefits are provided
in the Feasibility Study.
77. Output 2.1 supports dairy cooperatives to ensure that smallholder dairy farmers have a stable market for their
produce, reduce losses, and are interested in adopting the pathway innovations. Renewable energy solutions at
cooperative level will also be supported. The promotion of integrated pathway-specific solutions (Output 2.2.) will
include the introduction of better dairy cattle breeds, improved herd composition and animal health, increased
availability of high-quality feed and fodder, better manure management for biogas production and nutrient recycling.
This will increase productivity, improve circularity and reduce GHG emission intensity at animal, herd and farm levels.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
This Output helps to remove technological and natural barriers by improving on-farm infrastructure and overcoming
limitations related to animal nutrition, disease, mortality, and genetic potential. Improved pasture management (Output
2.3), through participatory learning and the promotion of sustainable grazing practices and land management practices
will rehabilitate degraded rangelands, increase access to fodder and address rangeland degradation. Together, the
three Outputs contribute to broader replication through increased productivity and income for smallholder dairy
farmers, increased carbon sequestration in soils, resulting in reduced greenhouse gas emissions. This aligns with the
desired paradigm shift towards a more productive, climate-resilient, and low-emission dairy sector, supported by
sustainable practices and gender-transformative growth. In particular, the project will create equal opportunities for
women and men and aim to: (i) Increase women economic empowerment through access to finance and skills; (ii)
Increase women participation, voice and decision making in farmer organization and cooperatives (iii) Reduce and
balance workloads with increased resilient production and greater efficiency of dairy production and post-harvest
technologies; (iv) Influence positive gender norms and to prevent Gender based violence through the GALS
methodology (v) Policy engagement to address gender barriers related in the sector. The result is a transformative
change in the East Africa’s dairy sector, which benefits not only dairy farmers, but also the wider community and
environment.
Outcome 3: Financial institutions make available the appropriate investment resources to make the necessary
transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient, and sustainable dairy production and strengthen value chain
linkages and improved productivity.
78. By improving access to finance for climate-smart technologies and practices, Component 3 (Figure 15b) aims
to facilitate dairy cooperatives and farmer-allied enterprises that are too small to qualify for GDFF investment, grant
financing will be provided under Component 2. This dual approach ensures that all segments of the dairy value chain
receive appropriate financial support, tailored to their size and capacity.
Figure 15b. GDFF Theory of Change (ToC) diagram
79. By improving access to finance for climate-smart technologies and practices, Component 3 aims to facilitate
the larger-scale transition to sustainable, low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy value chains. To achieve this outcome,

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
dairy value chain actors (including agro-input and technology providers, well-organised dairy cooperatives of SHF,
aggregators and processors) will be supported in overcoming technological and financial barriers to increase their
productivity and green their operations.
80. To contribute to the envisaged paradigm shift, two Outputs will be delivered (Figure 15b). Under Output 3.1, a
GDFF investment window will invest in climate-smart practices and technologies. The Investment Window will have a
dual focus of (a) establishing long-term Green Dairy Partnerships with targeted medium-size companies to provide
patient loans for dairy actors to invest in multiple productivity and climate-smart technologies and practices and (b)
providing shorter-term Green Dairy Loan Products that meet specific financing needs defined by the smaller dairy
sector businesses. Under Output 3.2, a GDFF Technical Assistance (TA) Facility will be established to maximize both
impact and returns by enhancing the capacity of (a) the participating banks of GSFF in green lending to develop their
green dairy sector portfolios and (b) borrowing dairy companies to implement effective green strategies, improve
operational efficiencies and achieve growth. In doing so, TA will address non-financial barriers currently preventing
greater climate-smart financing in the GDFF target regions. Together, these outputs contribute to the overall outcome
of improved access to finance and the adoption of green technologies and practices. The result is expected to make
a transformative change in East Africa’s dairy sector, leading to increased productivity, climate resilience and reduced
emissions.
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Energy Low- Building, Forestry Most Health, Infrastructure Ecosystems
Outcome
generation emission cities, and land vulnerable well-being, and built and
number
and access transport industries, use people and food and environment ecosystem
appliances communities water services
security
Outcome
☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒
1
Outcome
☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒
2
Outcome
☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
3
Co- Co-benefit
benefit
number Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Co-benefit 1
Increased food
security and ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
nutrition for rural
and urban
consumers
Co-benefit 2
Improved
women’s ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐
empowerment in
dairy value chains
B.3. Programme description
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS
81. The three Outcomes described in the ToC are delivered through 3 dedicated and interconnected components,
namely: Component 1: Strengthened national capacities and enhanced enabling environment for low emissions
climate resilient dairy sectors; Component 2: Enabling low-emission and climate-resilient dairy value chain
development; and Component 3: Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF). Each Component consists of a combination
of Outputs under full control of the Programme. They aim to result in specific outcomes, whether in behavioural or
systems change. These changes/outcomes will take place between the completion of the program outputs and the
achievement of impact.

--- Table 1 on Page 32 ---
dairy value chain actors (including agro-input and technology providers, well-organised dairy cooperatives of SHF,
aggregators and processors) will be supported in overcoming technological and financial barriers to increase their
productivity and green their operations.
80. To contribute to the envisaged paradigm shift, two Outputs will be delivered (Figure 15b). Under Output 3.1, a
GDFF investment window will invest in climate-smart practices and technologies. The Investment Window will have a
dual focus of (a) establishing long-term Green Dairy Partnerships with targeted medium-size companies to provide
patient loans for dairy actors to invest in multiple productivity and climate-smart technologies and practices and (b)
providing shorter-term Green Dairy Loan Products that meet specific financing needs defined by the smaller dairy
sector businesses. Under Output 3.2, a GDFF Technical Assistance (TA) Facility will be established to maximize both
impact and returns by enhancing the capacity of (a) the participating banks of GSFF in green lending to develop their
green dairy sector portfolios and (b) borrowing dairy companies to implement effective green strategies, improve
operational efficiencies and achieve growth. In doing so, TA will address non-financial barriers currently preventing
greater climate-smart financing in the GDFF target regions. Together, these outputs contribute to the overall outcome
of improved access to finance and the adoption of green technologies and practices. The result is expected to make
a transformative change in East Africa’s dairy sector, leading to increased productivity, climate resilience and reduced
emissions. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome
number |  |  | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | MRA 1
Energy
generation
and access | MRA 1 |  |  |  | MRA 2
Low-
emission
transport |  | MRA 3
Building,
cities,
industries,
appliances |  | MRA 4
Forestry
and land
use | MRA 4 |  | ARA 1
Most
vulnerable
people and
communities | ARA 1 |  |  | ARA 2 |  |  | ARA 3
Infrastructure
and built
environment |  | ARA 4
Ecosystems
and
ecosystem
services | ARA 4 |  | 
 |  |  |  | Energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Forestry |  |  | Most |  |  | Health, |  |  |  |  |  | Ecosystems |  | 
 |  |  |  | generation |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and land |  |  | vulnerable |  |  | well-being, |  |  |  |  |  | and |  | 
 |  |  |  | and access |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | use |  |  | people and |  |  | food and |  |  |  |  |  | ecosystem |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities |  |  | water |  |  |  |  |  | services |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | security |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Outcome
1 |  | ☐ |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  |  | 
 | Outcome
2 |  | ☒ |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  |  | 
 | Outcome
3 |  | ☒ |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  |  | ☐ |  | ☐ |  |  | 
 |  | Co- |  |  |  |  | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | benefit |  |  |  | Environmental |  |  | Social |  | Economic |  |  |  |  |  | Gender |  |  | Adaptation |  |  | Mitigation |  |  |  | 
 |  | number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Co-benefit 1
Increased food
security and
nutrition for rural
and urban
consumers |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  | ☒ |  |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  |  | 
 | Co-benefit 2
Improved
women’s
empowerment in
dairy value chains |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  | ☒ |  |  |  |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  |  | 
B.3. Programme description | B.3. Programme description |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS
81. The three Outcomes described in the ToC are delivered through 3 dedicated and interconnected components,
namely: Component 1: Strengthened national capacities and enhanced enabling environment for low emissions
climate resilient dairy sectors; Component 2: Enabling low-emission and climate-resilient dairy value chain
development; and Component 3: Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF). Each Component consists of a combination
of Outputs under full control of the Programme. They aim to result in specific outcomes, whether in behavioural or
systems change. These changes/outcomes will take place between the completion of the program outputs and the
achievement of impact. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 32 ---
MRA 2
Low-
emission
transport


--- Table 3 on Page 32 ---
MRA 3
Building,
cities,
industries,
appliances

--- Table 4 on Page 32 ---
ARA 3
Infrastructure
and built
environment

--- Table 5 on Page 32 ---
Outcome
number

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
82. All three components are interlinked. Component 1 creates an enabling national and regional policy and
regulatory environment and governance of the dairy value chain, improving public service delivery, amplifying GHG
MRV capacities, and ensuring regional knowledge management and exchange. This provides a solid foundation for
the adoption of sustainable practices that improve emission reductions, climate resilience, and increased productivity.
At the same time, Component 1 informs Component 3 by improving visibility and strengthening countries' GHG
measurement capability, a critical element for accessing to more public and private climate finance. It also supports
the creation and consolidation of support industries that can provide reliable and technically sound investment options
by helping to regularise and standardise these industries. Similarly, Component 2 enhances Component 3 by
strengthening the management capacity of smallholder farmers, improving their creditworthiness, and fuelling their
demand for alternative technologies and loans to acquire them. Finally, Component 3 strengthens Component 2 by
expanding smallholders access to finance through targeted financing and low-cost loans, providing carbon market
revenue streams, and providing technical assistance to reduce emissions and increase efficiency. The synergies
between the three components provide a holistic approach, addressing the environmental and economic needs of the
targeted beneficiaries, enabling and incentivising them to implement the desired change towards a sustainable and
climate-resilient landscape in the four target countries (Figure 16).
Figure 16. Complementarities and synergies between components
PROGRAMME BENEFICIARIES
83. The Programme will benefit about 2.5 million individual dairy farmers and dairy value chain actors, at least 40
percent of whom are women, 30 percent of whom are youth and 5 percent are marginalized groups (including people
with disabilities). As the geographic and social targeting of DaIMA is fully aligned with the IFAD projects in the four
countries (RDDP-2, ReLIV, INReMP, and C-SDTP), the pro-poor targeting approach, which will also include women
and youth, is fully mainstreamed into DaIMA. These beneficiaries will mainly be reached through Component 2, but
also through Component 3. The majority are dairy farmers in intensive and semi-intensive systems who currently sell
or aim to sell milk in formal and informal markets. These smallholder dairy farmers have generally between 1 to 5 dairy
cows (6 to 10 kg of milk/cow/day) in zero-grazing/intensive or semi-zero grazing/semi-intensive systems. They are the
main target group and can be considered as rural poor. They are the essential segment of producers who need to be
scaled to support the formalization of the dairy sector and foster sustainable intensification based on sound

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
investments and viable business development (see Feasibility Study and Market Studies). Dairy value chain support
will also benefit medium and large commercial farmers (6 or more dairy cows, 5-9 kg of milk/cow/day in semi-intensive
systems, 12 or more kg/cow/day in intensive systems). Under Output 2.3, the Programme will also benefit (i)
pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, and (ii) medium- and large-scale extensive farmers through the rehabilitation/
improved management of 178,362 hectares of rangelands. Entry points to reach dairy farmers will also benefit from
the Programme’s support, including dairy cooperatives and MCCs, L-FFS and Pastoralist field schools (PFS), farmers
and community-based organisations.
84. Beneficiaries of Component 3 (Figure 17a) will be medium-sized farmer-allied dairy value chain actors,
including aggregators and processors, agro-input and technology providers, and mature dairy farmers’ cooperatives,
selected through targeting and eligibility criteria as per the participating implementation partners, and based on a
through screening process. These formal stakeholders will also be involved in the business linkages through
Component 2. Component 1 supports public sector institutions with a mandate to regulate the dairy sector, as well as
national dairy boards that participate in the governance of the dairy value chain. Businesses identified by Component
2 as suitable for GDFF financing will be proactively encouraged to apply for support under Component 3.
Figure 17a. Programme beneficiaries and outreach
COMPONENT 1: STRENGTHENED NATIONAL CAPACITIES AND ENHANCED ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR
LOW EMISSIONS CLIMATE RESILIENT DAIRY SECTORS
85. This Component 1 will support the paradigm shift towards a more productive, climate-resilient, and low-
emission dairy sector, supported by sustainable practices and gender-inclusive growth. It will create an enabling
institutional environment for smallholder dairy farmers and value chain actors to reduce methane (CH ) and other
4
GHG emissions, while increasing resilience to CC. Therefore, it will also address the institutional, planning and
knowledge barriers identified in the ToC, and foster an enabling environment for policy, institutional, and service
delivery. The Component will contribute to the following GCF Results Areas: MRA4 “Forestry and land use”, ARA1
“Most vulnerable people and communities”, and ARA4 “Ecosystems and ecosystem services”.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
86. The Component 1 will have four Outputs, namely (i) an enabling policy and regulatory environment, including
improved consumer awareness and nutritional balance; (ii) improved public services delivery to the dairy sector, in
particular specialized livestock extension services and veterinary services; (iii) improved capacity to monitor GHG
emissions and vulnerabilities; and (iv) strengthening regional cooperation and knowledge management. Component
1 activities will provide public service goods and will therefore be funded by grants.
87. The activities carried out under the Component are sustainable. The Programme will carry out a series
of activities aimed at improving the enabling environment (policy, legal and regulatory) and long-term institutional
capacity of key stakeholders of the dairy sector, to provide effective services for greater efficiency, climate resilience
and GHG emission reductions. These capacities will revolve around the critical public responsibilities of preparing and
implementing climate-smart policies at national and regional levels, enabling trade policies across East Africa to unlock
affordable climate-smart solutions across the Region, GHG MRV, climate risk analysis, sector coordination with
climate policies and to ensure that the dairy sector fully contributes to the NDC of the participating countries.
88. The activities carried out under the Component have the potential for scaling-up and replication. The
Programme will provide innovative support to the countries in MRV of GHG in the livestock sector. GHG MRVs for
dairy production in East Africa have been piloted by the FAO and ILRI, particularly in Kenya with a Gold Standard
methodology50. The MRV will build on this pilot methodology to achieve scale and replication in the Region. But further
work is needed to obtain data on GHG emissions from East African livestock systems which remain scarce, as most
estimates are based on proxies and methodologies that were developed for temperate zones in high-income countries
and do not represent East African livestock systems well51. In addition, in the absence of specific data on the regional
dairy typology, several inventories use broad African averages by default52. This creates a notable bias in national
GHG inventories53 and prevents African countries from tracking progress on mitigation in their livestock sectors. In
addition, to ensure long-term feasibility and success of any CSA practice implemented at scale, East African countries
need the data and capacity to set up and maintain MRV systems. In addition, innovative climate risk analysis support
to extension services will strengthen the large-scale dissemination of climate information services to last-mile users
including women, young dairy farmers through cooperatives and farmers’ organizations. Moreover, regional platforms
and South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) will help to export the concepts, successes and lessons learnt
from the Programme to other sectors, regions, and countries.
Output 1.1: Climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment established.
89. Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate Dairy Sector policies, strategies and regulations for climate-
change adaptation and mitigation. In the four countries, the Programme will support the Ministries, Departments
and aligned institutions in charge of the dairy sector to review and formulate national policies, strategies, laws and
regulations that are essential for a sustainable transformation of the dairy sector, in line with the NDCs and NAPs.
This includes aspects related to mainstreaming CC adaptation and mitigation, as well as adopting export and import
regulations that favour sustainable development and private sector engagement and investment in the dairy value
chain (taxation of imports of dairy produce, specialized equipment, inputs, such as germplasm, fodder seeds, feed
additives, solar cooling, biodigesters, etc.). Resources will be provided to (i) mobilize national and international
expertise for policy review, formulation and dialogue; (ii) facilitate stakeholder consultations to ensure that the policy
review and dialogues are inclusive; (iii) validation processes through round tables, and (iv) the preparation of policy
briefs and communication materials for popularization. This activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing
Entities in each country (see sections B.3 and A.20), through service providers, including (i) in Kenya, the State
Department of Livestock Development (SDLD), KDB; (ii) in Rwanda, RAB and MINAGRI; (iii) in Tanzania, MLF, TDB;
(iv) in Uganda, DDA, and the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC & DB), in Uganda.
The regional activities will benefit from the participation of East Africa Commission (EAC) and the African Union Inter-
African Bureau for Animal Resources (AU–IBAR).
50FAO and ILRI, (2016) Smallholder Dairy Methodology: Methodology for GHG Emission Reductions from Smallholder Dairy
Production Systems. Published by FAO, ILRI, KENYA State Department of Livestock and the Gold Standard.
https://globalgoals.goldstandard.org/standards/405_V1.0_LUF_AGR_Agriculture-Smallholder-Dairy-Methodology.pdf
51 Graham MW, Butterbach-Bahl K, du Doit CJL, et al (2022) Research Progress on Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Livestock in
Sub-Saharan Africa Falls Short of National Inventory Ambitions. Frontiers in Soil Science 2:
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsoil.2022.927452
52 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2019
53 Korir D, Ndung’u PW, Onyango AA, et al (2023) IPCC Tier 1 methodology overestimates the carbon footprint of smallholder cattle
production systems in Kenya. 10 July 2023, PREPRINT (Version 1) available at Research Square. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-
3148140/v1

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
90. Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Support the review and preparation of national dairy policies, strategies, and
regulations to mainstream climate-change adaptation and mitigation. Priorities in the four countries will
be the following. In Kenya, (i) the Dairy Industry Strategy and Investment Plan to guide the sustainable
transition of the dairy sector; (ii) the draft National Strategy and legal framework for Animal Feed and Fodder;
(iii) a National Strategy for Animal Breeding and breeding regulations (iv) the draft Dairy Industry Act (1958);
(v) the Kenya Agricultural Sector Extension Policy (KASEP), (vi) the development of compost and bio-slurry
standards; and (vii) milk and milk product standards on food safety and quality. In Rwanda, the Strategic
Plan for Agriculture Transformation 5 (PSTA5) provides a framework for a low-carbon and climate-resilient
agriculture sector. Within this framework, the Programme will support the review of: (i) national climate and
sectorial policies that are regulating the dairy sector; a new agriculture and livestock policy for Rwanda is
currently under development which includes climate resilient livestock production; (ii) the regulatory
framework and standard operating procedures (SOP’s) for dairy value chain operators, the use of
methanogenesis inhibitors as feed additives, in direct collaboration with Rwanda Food and Drugs Authority
(FDA) and Rwanda Standards Board (RSB), for milk quality, standards and safety, feed formulation, energy
efficiency, and CC; (iii) the 2016 Ministerial Order to address new dairy value chain realities, including the
MCP-model and the need to regulate the raw milk market. Support will be given to the formulation of a national
regulatory framework for the private veterinary practice including for Community Animal Health Workers
(CAHWs) and L-FFS facilitators, with considerations of increasing women and youth participation; (iv) support
will also be given to the Rwanda National Dairy Platform (RNDP) to participate in the formulation of the dairy
value chain (DVC) regulatory law empowering the platform to conduct overall DVC regulation as in EAC
member countries. In Tanzania, the Programme will support finalizing the draft national Livestock Policy, as
well as (i) review of the Veterinary Act (2003) to update aspects related to private practitioners; (ii) review the
Dairy Act to update regulations on raw milk trade; (iii) the formulation of disease contingency and control
plans; (iv) prepare the Tanzania Dairy Development Strategy and roadmap, (v) finalization of the Animal
Breeding Act, (vi) review of the Animal Diseases Act (2003), (vii) review of the Animal Welfare Act (2008),
(viii) review of the Grazing Land and Animal Feed Resources Act (2010), and (ix) finalization of a Strategy
for Formalization of Dairy Industry. In Uganda, the Programme will support: (i) finalizing the National
Livestock Development Policy, integrating CC priorities (breeding, feeding, water), enabling policies for
private sector investments, research strategies on climate-resilient feed germplasm to offset predicted yield
declines, as well as rangeland ecology; (ii) the review of the Animal Disease and Health Act, and the Animal
Breeding Act); (iii) support drafting of regulations for the Food and Agriculture Regulatory Authority, livestock
identification and traceability, as well as dairy cattle breeding and livestock insurance to integrate CC
mitigation; (iv) review land policies and regulation to mitigate land tenure insecurity for dairy farmers.
91. Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Support the regional policy dialogue to mainstream climate-change adaptation
and mitigation in regional dairy policies, strategies, and legislations. In coordination with regional and
national dairy platforms, Ministries and stakeholders, the Programme will support a region-level assessment
and proposals for further regional alignment on dairy sector regulations, including export and import
regulations (common external tariffs), to accelerate regional convergence in dairy standards, regional trade
and market integration, and to enhance technology transfer within and from outside the region for solar
cooling and renewable energy and resource-efficient technologies. For this to happen, recurrent regional
policy dialogue events will be organised bi-annually, on a rotational basis, by (and in) each of the 4
participating countries. Activities will be coordinated by regional coordination and policy dialogue experts
recruited in each country to jointly support the implementation of regional activities. National stakeholders,
including women and young people, will be supported to participate.
92. Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 National dairy value chain governance and awareness creation on climate-
change. The aim of this activity is to enhance dairy value chain governance and to mainstream the
importance of climate-change in this process. At national level, the national dairy boards (KDB, DDA, TDB,
RNDP) and other relevant professional bodies of private stakeholders, will be supported to participate in the
dairy policy dialogue, to create awareness and education/capacity building on climate, feed and dairy policies
and regulations.
93. Sub-activity 1.1.1.4 District/regional/county level dairy value chain governance and planning. Local-
level multi-stakeholder platforms involving delegates from dairy value chain stakeholders will participate in
the annual planning and review of Programme activities. Participants will include dairy cooperative members,
milk collectors, milk processors, service providers of artificial insemination (AI), veterinary services, extension
staff and local government, ensuring participation quotas for women and youth.

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
94. Activity 1.1.2 Launch awareness campaigns on nutritional benefits of milk and food safety aspects.
Support to milk consumption and nutrition awareness, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour
change, targeting smallholder producer and consumer households, informal dairy value chain actors and milk handlers
in the school milk programs aims at improving nutritionally vulnerable group’s consumption of milk, therefore
enhancing their individual’s health and climate resilience. The Programme will support milk consumption and nutrition
awareness through increased availability, accessibility, affordability, and consumption of high-quality and safe dairy
products, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour change and communication (SBCC) to reach out
to nutritionally vulnerable groups. This activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing Entities in each country
(see B.3 and A.20), through service providers, i.e. (i) SDLD, KDB in Kenya; (ii) RNDP and the Single Programme
Implementation Unit (SPIU) in Rwanda; (iii) TDB and the Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre in Tanzania; (iv) DDA,
together with the Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Education and Sports, SNV and UNDPA, in Uganda.
95. Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Public awareness on the contribution of milk to nutrition and resilience, with
focus on climate vulnerable population. The awareness raising will target women and men and use
various community platforms such as extension, L-FFS, MCC/cooperatives. Topics will include improved
milk treatment, food safety and nutritional benefits of dairy produce, pasteurized and processed milk. In
Rwanda, it will include participation in dairy fairs/expos to showcase climate-friendly and energy efficient
local processing and consumption of dairy products. In Tanzania and Uganda, the Programme will scale up
school milk programs for improved nutrition of vulnerable children.
96. Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Build capacity of dairy inspection to ensure milk quality and safety and reduce
waste. Dairy inspection is essential for sector-level milk quality and safety, thus encouraging formal market
growth and reduction of milk rejection and waste (less GHG emission intensities). The Programme will
provide technical training and equipment to strengthen capacities of inspections to ensure development and
enforcement of milk quality and safety standards. Women and young people who are often involved in the
informal milk trade, will be included in the trainings.
97. Activity 1.1.3 Improve land tenure security for sustainable dairy farming. The Programme will adopt a fit-
for-purpose approach to identify and mitigate tenure risks. Activities to mitigate this risk will vary depending on the
type of land and type of governance. For pastoral and agropastoral systems, the focus will be on the identification and
protection of rangelands and on supporting participatory planning and management. In Rwanda, all land is registered
and individually owned, including women. The focus will be on optimizing land productivity through land consolidation
and land use planning. Activities will include capacity building and support to inclusive and participatory planning
processes to create local-level capacities. The activity will be implemented by the various EEs through service
providers, i.e. (i) National Land Commission (NLC) and County Governments in Kenya; (ii) the districts, land
registration centers, and specialized service providers in Rwanda; (iii) MLF, LGAs and national land use planning
commission in Tanzania; and (iv) MAAIF and District Local Government (DLGs) in Uganda.
98. Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and preparation of training materials. The
Programme will mobilize specialized technical assistance to: (a) implement a rapid tenure governance
capacity assessment, including a tenure risk assessment for the Programme target areas; (b) develop training
material to increase local authorities’ capacity to secure inclusive tenure rights for dairy production and the
public’s capacity to identify and secure legitimate tenure rights. Based on the national tenure context, each
dairy production system’s tenure risks in terms of access, use and security of land will be identified and
assessed, and appropriate mitigating strategies will be proposed.
99. Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure at decentralized level. The focus will be on
capacity building of local authorities and raising public awareness on options to incrementally increase tenure
security, especially for women and youth. The Programme can support public awareness campaigns on tools
to secure tenure rights.
Output 1.2 Improved service delivery to the dairy sector
100. Activity 1.2.1 Strengthen veterinary services for better animal health, higher milk yields and reduced
losses. A key barrier to reduce GHG emissions and sustainably increase the productivity of dairy animals is animal
health and welfare. Climate change exacerbates the emergence and re-emergence of diseases and infestation (East
Coast Fever – ECF, helminths infestation, etc.). Healthier animals are more resilient to climate hazards and more
productive, with less milk to be discarded, leading to a reduction of “unproductive” GHG emissions. The higher

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
revenues provide incentives for farmers to adopt animal health and welfare measures, especially if there is joint and
equitable sharing of benefits from dairy at the household. To expand the outreach and capacity of veterinary services,
the Programme will invest in proximity animal health support, as well as in national diagnostic capacity of veterinary
laboratories. The activity will be implemented by EEs through service providers, i.e. (i) Kenya Veterinary Board and
KALRO in Kenya; (ii) RAB, District veterinary extension services, and the Rwanda Council of Veterinary Doctors
(RCVD) in Rwanda; (iii) Directorate of Veterinary Services (DVS) and Tanzania Veterinary Laboratory Agency (TVLA)
in Tanzania; (iv) MAAIF (Directorate of Animal Resources, DAR), in partnership with service providers (e.g. VSFB), in
Uganda.
101. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Support the installation of both private and public veterinarians and
veterinary paraprofessionals. The Programme will implement the animal health support and disease
control system, using the “One Health” approach. The approach will have three levels: (i) support private
veterinarians and para-veterinarians, in particular young and female practitioners; (ii) support livestock
extension workers at local level; (iii) provide additional training to lead farmers, including women, from the L-
FFS for coaching their peers and assist private para-veterinarians and livestock extension workers. In Kenya,
veterinary education, and training programs to both private and public veterinarians and veterinary
paraprofessionals in the Programme area will be enhanced. In Rwanda, support will be provided for the
installation of young veterinary doctors, veterinary technicians and Community Animal Health Workers
(CAHWs) as private practitioners through the Veterinary Sanitary Mandate to enhance accessibility of
services while creating jobs. In Tanzania, Livestock Extension Workers (LEWs) will be equipped and trained,
and private male and female para-vets will be incentivised to ensure the last mile animal health and extension
services. In Uganda, the Programme will build capacity of veterinarians, para-veterinarian technicians, and
community-based animal health workers (CAHWs) on One Health principles, disease diagnosis, emerging
and re-emerging diseases because of CC.
102. Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Strengthening diagnostic capacity of veterinary laboratories and capacity
to test quality of animal feed. In Kenya, the Programme will improve disease control (surveillance and
monitoring, contingency planning, and treatment) of targeted diseases including modern diagnostic
equipment in regional centres (located in Nairobi i.e. Kabete and Embakasi, Nakuru, Kericho, Eldoret,
Karatina, Garissa and Mariakani), testing kits, telemedicine. In Rwanda, four (4) satellite laboratories will
receive additional equipment for serology (ELISA) and molecular diagnosis (PCR) to enable rapid detection
of infectious diseases, and treatment, as well as equipment for handling biological and hazardous waste and
the establishment of environmentally friendly practices. The Programme will also strengthen the national
veterinary laboratory (NVL) to handle advanced diagnostic capacity for viral diseases affecting livestock.
Accredited laboratory services such as KALRO, private laboratories and research institutions will be included
to provide laboratory services on testing of feeds. In Tanzania, the Programme will: (a) strengthen the
Tanzanian Veterinary Laboratories Agency (TVLA) and the Central Veterinary Investigation Laboratory in
Zanzibar; (b) support the establishment of district mobile laboratories that will serve LEWs local (para)vets;
(c) train laboratory technicians for each mobile laboratory. In Uganda, veterinary laboratories will be
strengthened (equipment, reagents, consumables for sample collection and mobile laboratory facility) for
detection of the diseases related to CC. It will also establish a national data management system on emerging
and re-emerging diseases because of CC (TAD and zoonosis). In each country, the Programme will: (i)
enhance the capacity to undertake feed testing in the national research institutions (KALRO in Kenya, RAB
and the College of Agriculture, Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine (UR-CAVM) in Rwanda, NARO in
Uganda, TALIRI in Tanzania); this includes equipment, training of researchers, including young females, and
inputs for testing feed samples; (ii) undertake on-farm feed sampling and laboratory quality testing (e.g., dry
matter, carbohydrates, protein, fat, minerals, vitamins).
103. Activity 1.2.2 Strengthen extension services for low-carbon and climate resilient dairy sector. To reach
out to dairy farmers, raise awareness and build their capacity in the field of CC mitigation and adaptation, the
Programme will adopt innovative extension models and tools, including digital, and enhance the capacity of extension
services. This activity will involve improving delivery of public and private extension services at farm and cooperative/
aggregation levels, by local (district/county) livestock officers who coordinate the community-based extension system.
To provide proximity advisory services on climate-smart practices, the Programme will provide support through L-FFS
in mixed crop-livestock systems and PFS in grazing and pastoralist systems. This activity will be implemented by EEs
through service providers, i.e. (i) KALRO and SDLD in Kenya; (ii) RDDP-2, RAB and REMA in Rwanda; (iii) MLF and
the LGAs in Tanzania; (iv) MAAIF (Directorate of Agriculture Extension Service) and MWE and the Uganda National
Meteorological Agency (UNMA), in partnership with implementers (e.g. FAO and SNV) in Uganda. International
technical assistance will be provided by ILRI and FAO to develop the tools and enhance national capacity.

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
104. Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Preparation of training modules for extension in climate mitigation and
adaptation measures. Specific topics that are part of the proposed pathways under Outputs 2.2 and 2.3 and
related to CC will be added to the modules of the L-FFS (or other extension approaches). The topics in the
training modules related to climate-smart milk production and handling could include: fodder production,
harvesting and conservation; use of conserved silage and UMMB; supplementation (use of non-conventional
feed resources e.g. sweet potato vines or tannin-rich plants reducing and inhibiting CH production)
4
reproductive management; health management including One-Health aspects and management of anti-
microbials, biogas and manure management, use of drought-resistant fodder, application of crop residues,
seed production (certification, traceability, quality control), improved diet formulation to reduce emission
intensities (use of feed formulation software, such as the innovative SNV-developed Rumen8® tool), and
animal welfare, including housing in zero-grazing practices. Also guidelines will be prepared on improved
fodder cultivar and climate-smart technologies, innovative management practices for pasture and fodder
production, and agroforestry practices (e.g. leguminous fodder trees as standalone or line trees). The L-FFS
modules will be developed with the support of national or international technical assistance. Also gender
inclusive training on the implementation of guidelines will be carried out.
105. Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Training of master trainers (ToTs) and facilitators of extension systems in
climate-change related topics. The Programme will support the strengthening of existing L-FFS and the
establishment of new L-FFS (aiming at 40 percent women and 30 percent youth). To support the sustainability
and scaling up of the L-FFS, existing L-FFS/ PFS master trainers and facilitators will be trained on the specific
topics listed above.
106. Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 Promote innovative extension tools. These innovative extension tools could
include: (i) participatory extension approaches, such as the Participatory Integrated Climate Services for
Agriculture (PICSA), which was piloted in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania, (ii) e-extension tools by using bulk
SMS and the internet to reach more farmers, provide highly captivating and interactive packages, partner
with other stakeholders in development of content and capacity and to improve ability to access and share
knowledge and skills on farming technologies, (iii) TV, radio and social media networks. In addition, other
innovative extension tools could include: in Kenya, the use of the agro-weather platform namely Kenya
Agricultural Observatory Platform (KAOP), a digital platform developed through a joint initiative between the
KALRO and the KMD, designed to provide weather information to support decision-making in the agricultural
sector in Kenya to develop capacity of extension officers and producers on climate change adaptability. In
Tanzania, the iCow app and or other innovative extension tool will be developed and promoted.
Output 1.3: Improved GHG MRV capacities & monitoring of climate vulnerabilities
107. To reliably track progress on the ambitious climate goals of the national NDCs, state-of-the-art systems of
MRV of GHG emissions are needed within the participating countries, along with national capacity to manage such
systems, more particularly in the livestock sector. This Output will enable countries to report with accuracy on
emissions in the dairy sub-sector in their national GHG inventories at Tier 2 level, according to the 2006 IPCC
Guidelines, and address the institutional, planning and knowledge barriers identified in the ToC. It will also unable
countries to capture the impact of investments in dairy on GHG emissions in their NDC and therefore contribute to
their climate commitments. Improved MRV systems will ensure that participating countries can conduct their own GHG
calculations with cutting-edge methods, develop their own mitigation pathways and policies, and attract more public
and private climate finance, including through carbon credits. This Output will also address the issues related to the
data for climate vulnerability assessment and national feed balances, all contributing to improved climate resilience.
The national research centers and Government Institutions will receive implementation support from ILRI (Mazingira
Centre and research stations) to execute Activities 1.3.1 and 1.3.2.
108. Activity 1.3.1: Develop capacity in the country on MRV system. The Programme will identify critical
capacity needs at national and local levels to improve the operation of MRV systems. This will help developing
consistent MRV systems for the dairy sub-sector that allows systematic updates, so that the impact of interventions of
the Programme, and beyond, can be monitored over time, and progress can be assessed against an established
baseline.
109. Sub-activity 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and development in capturing, recording, tracking, and
reporting data on dairy GHG emissions. This sub-activity will carry out in depth capacity assessments of

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
existing MRV tools and frameworks in the four countries, and the place of dairy in them. Based on these
assessments, capacity development will be provided to design activity data questionnaires for Tier 2 and/or
Tier 3 GHG emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers, weights, productivity, feed rations, animal health
interventions, manure management and grassland management) and develop a data management system to
ensure reliable flow of information between the various national and local agencies involved in the MRV system.
Countries will receive capacity development on data collection protocols adjusted to their needs to relevant
stakeholders (technicians, university staff, staff of national research institutes and ministries, and other relevant
actors). ILRI54 will provide dedicated digital data collection tools (e.g. ODK), data quality control, and calculation
of GHG emissions for inventory reporting, following established protocols.
110. Sub-activity 1.3.1.2: Developing MRV systems and engage in policy dialogue to align with national MRV
for the livestock sub-sector. After assessment of national MRV systems, this intervention will include
baseline, measurement of individual mitigation activities, impact assessment on absolute emissions and
emission intensities and institutional arrangements. To ensure sustainability and impact at scale, the sub-
activity will update of national livestock census questionnaires to include activity data requirements for GHG
inventories outlined by IPCC on other cattle and livestock. This will allow countries to track livestock productivity
and to report on enteric CH and manure CH and N O emissions, and soil carbon storage in grasslands/
4 4 2
rangelands55, following international inventory guidelines, using IPCC Tier 2 methodology.
111. Activity 1.3.2: Improve GHG emission measurements in dairy value chains. On-farm data like animal live
weights and milk yields are necessary to calculate Tier2 GHG emissions. Emission factors also need to be improved
to reflect local conditions (e.g., animal metabolism, feed composition). This activity will comprise the following sub-
activities:
112. Sub-activity 1.3.2.1: Collect activity data on farm to calculate Tier 2 dairy emissions under various herd,
feed, animal health and manure management situations. The Programme will finance the collection on-
farm activity data for baseline and “with-project” situation, using digital tools (e.g. livestock Tier 2-specific ODK
tool). This includes data on animal numbers, weights, productivity, feed rations and manure management
system. This sub-activity will be performed annually with the support of ILRI, in direct partnership with national
research institutions and academia of the four countries, to ensure sustainability and replication through the
transfer of capacity (see output 1.4). This activity will inform the Programme’s M&E system and provide data
for baseline and “with-project” situation.
113. Sub-activity 1.3.2.2: Conduct experiments and run models to generate Tier 2 emission factors (EF) for
baseline and improved dairy, under various herd, feed, animal health and manure management
situations. Evidence shows that local feeding conditions and indigenous livestock breeds result in different
emission factors for enteric methane56 and manure CH and N O emissions57 than assumed by the IPCC. In
4 2
this context, this sub-activity will develop local context-specific emission factors (EF) and inventory equations
through lab experiments. Together with 4 countries and research/academia, ILRI will quantify the GHG
mitigation potential of selected feed interventions using state-of-the-art cattle respiration chambers58 to derive
methane yields for enteric CH , as well as manure incubation setups to derive CH and N O emission factors
4 4 2
for manure management.
54 DaIMA, in partnership with ILRI, will support the member countries in monitoring existing SOC stocks via targeted soil sampling
campaigns, comparing different grassland management practices and degradation status along pedoclimatic gradients across the
four countries. The Programme will inform on impacts of grassland management on soil carbon storage and sequestration The
Programme will contribute to the development and validation of novel remote sensing approaches for rangeland monitoring via
drones and satellites. This also includes application of modern techniques such as Eddy Covariance (EC) towers for landscape-
scale monitoring of ecosystem carbon exchange to show if the ecosystem is a carbon sink or source, and how carbon uptake and
release are affected by seasonality, climatic extremes, and management. ILRI has two EC towers set up in their Kapiti research
station. See Feasibility Study for more details.
55 Ibid 30.
56 Goopy JP, Goopy JP, Korir D, et al (2020) Severe below-maintenance feed intake increases methane yield from enteric fermentation
in cattle. British Journal of Nutrition 123:1239–1246. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114519003350; Korir D, Marquardt S, Eckard R,
et al (2022b) Weight gain and enteric methane production of cattle fed on tropical grasses. Anim Prod Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1071/AN21327
57 Zhu Y, Merbold L, Pelster D, et al (2018) Effect of Dung Quantity and Quality on Greenhouse Gas Fluxes From Tropical Pastures
in Kenya. Global Biogeochem Cycles 32:1589–1604. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GB005949; Leitner S, Ring D, Wanyama GN, et
al (2021) Effect of feeding practices and manure quality on CH4 and N2O emissions from uncovered cattle manure heaps in Kenya.
Waste Management 126:209–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2021.03.014
58 For more information, see https://mazingira.ilri.org/infrastructure/

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
114. Sub-activity 1.3.2.3: Training on the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model – interactive
(GLEAM-i) and IPCC assessment tool to calculate GHG emissions biannually, and to inform the national
MRV system and inventories. By using collected activity data and Tier 2 EF generated, Programme results
will inform the national MRV system, using tools like the GLEAM-i59 developed by FAO to calculate emissions
biannually. Throughout the whole process, ILRI will transfer capacity on Tier 2 EF, data collection and GHG
emission calculation from the Programme.
115. Activity 1.3.3: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments. Together with improvements to extension
services under output 1.2, the Programme will seek to improve the accuracy and use of information (climate, feed
availability) to last mile-users in the dairy sector. This will include building the capacity of devolved CC units and
decentralized meteorological offices to develop and disseminate climate information services, including (i) impacts of
CC on the dairy sector; and (ii) information on availability of feed, through tools like national feed balance sheets. This
activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing Entities in each country (see sections B.3 and A.20), through
service providers, i.e. national meteorological departments. These include: (i) the Climate Change Department in the
Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE-CCD) in Uganda, (ii) the SDLD in MoALD and Climate Change Department
(CCD) in Kenya, (iii) the National Carbon Monitoring Centre (NCMC) in Tanzania; and (iv) Rwanda Meteorology
Agency.
116. Sub-activity 1.3.3.1: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments, including impacts on the dairy
sector, at local level. It will consist of carrying out dairy sector climate risk and vulnerability assessments at
local level, based on historical and projected climate data supported by impact-based models, analytical
frameworks and machine learning. This will involve (i) the development of agro-climatic zone maps and Dairy
Sector suitability maps based on the current and future climate, (ii) assessing the direct impacts of climate
change on specific cattle breeds using the tropical humidity index (THI) and milk decline (MDEC), (iii) improved
forecasting/projections of agricultural and pastureland drought through e.g. machine learning and artificial
intelligence.
117. Sub-activity 1.3.3.2: Review and enhancement of national feed balance mechanisms, and
support to early warning systems. The national feed balance mechanism and results will be reviewed and
improved using the FAO guidelines, to prepare a minimum of two balances per year, with dairy specific results.
Improvements will focus on seasonality and quality of feed and fodder resources (metabolizable energy and
crude protein content), in addition to quantity (in dry matter DM).
118. Activity 1.3.4 Facilitate low-carbon certification and reduce barriers to access carbon finance. This
activity will leverage MRV systems developed under activities 1.3.1 and 1.3.2 to track GHG emission reduction from
improved practices. The aim is to support selected dairy value chain stakeholders to receive premium prices for low-
carbon and high-quality milk production and engage on the voluntary carbon market. The Programme will pilot this
initiative and raise awareness of processors and consumers of the environmental performance of dairy products.
119. Sub-activity 1.3.4.1 Develop a carbon certification system for the dairy sector. In order to reduce
barriers to carbon finance, the Programme will mobilize technical assistance to: (i) review the alignment of
national regulations for registration of carbon projects in East Africa (which facilitate foreign investments); (ii)
develop/align monitoring and verification standards suitable for each national context (e.g. VERRA, Gold
Standard) and specifically dairy sector projects – in cooperation with the Africa Carbon Market Initiative (ACMI)
and research institutions; (iii) support the establishment of local monitoring and verification companies – to
reduce costs of certification/verification; (iv) undertake a policy dialogue in strengthening the position of e.g.
the Kenya Carbon Exchange in regional cooperation.
Output 1.4 Knowledge management and regional cooperation enhanced.
120. The Programme will facilitate transfer of knowledge through regional and SSTC, with the objective to replicate
the transformative practices for climate-resilient and low-carbon dairy adopted by the Programme. ILRI Mazingira
Centre, as a State-of-the-Art environmental and regional research and education Centre, will also contribute under
direct agreement with the EE in each country. This Output will address the institutional, planning and knowledge
barriers identified in the ToC. Shared knowledge will enhance future low-carbon planning in the dairy sector, minimize
59 See Feasibility Study for more details on the GLEAM-i tool.

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
climate risks and enable participating countries to take advantage of available climate smart opportunities within the
region.
121. Activity 1.4.1. Support to Regional Centres of Excellence for technology validation and for maintaining
a regional database on practices, GHG emissions and adaptation indicators. To ensure sustainability and
transfer of capacity to national institutions, the Programme will provide scientific support combined with capacity
development to “regional centres of excellence” to export knowledge regionally and globally on CC and GHG
emissions for the dairy value chain. National Centres of Excellence (or “knowledge hubs”) will include national
agricultural research institutions (e.g., KALRO in Kenya, NARO in Uganda, TALIRI in Tanzania, RAB in Rwanda),
local universities (e.g., Makerere and Busitema in Uganda; University of Nairobi, Eldoret or Maseno; University of Dar
es Salaam or Sokoine University of Agriculture (SUA) in Tanzania), targeting in particular young researchers. It will
build on the legacy of the East Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme (EAAPP, World Bank-funded), which has
built Regional Centre of Excellence (RCoE) in the dairy sector in Kenya.
122. Sub-activity 1.4.1.1: Support to regional Centres of Excellence in technology validation and
dissemination. The Programme will assist the above-mentioned institutions with (i) technical trainings and
protocols for GHG measurements (emission factors, soil carbon storage) and estimation methods to build their
own capacity for research, MRV and technology validation linked to climate change mitigation, (ii) research
capacity for conducting innovative research such as optimizing the biogas process for enhanced energy and
nutrient recovery and building efficient biodigester technologies, (iii) vocational training and development of
materials, standards, university-level educational curricula and guidelines, and (iv) knowledge, information and
visibility products, related to the four focus areas feeding, animal health, manure management and biogas, and
grassland management and soil carbon sequestration.
123. Sub-activity 1.4.1.2: Develop and maintain a regional database/ repository on practices, GHG
emissions per sources and systems, and climate change adaptation. This sub-activity will consist in
developing, maintaining, and promoting a regional database on best practices, and their impact on GHG
emissions per source and livestock production system, and adaptation indicators. ILRI has a large repository
of training materials on its open access CGSpace platform60, which will be leveraged, and made available to
all actors in the Programme.
124. Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional cooperation platforms and participation to regional/ global networks
for knowledge exchange on climate-smart dairy sector transformation. The cooperation platforms will be
organized by each country to include various public and private stakeholders active at the regional level and within
each of the DaIMA countries, including the AU-IBAR, IFAD, FAO, ILRI, the East and Southern Africa Dairy Association
(ESADA), local government partners, centres of excellence, international organisations and non-governmental
organisations (NGOs), and involve private sector platforms and networks (e.g. One Health Research and Education
Centre in Africa – OHRECA; Global Research Alliance Manure Management Network; Global Dairy Platform; Nutrient
Circularity Network; National Biogas Stakeholders Network in Kenya). The Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), through its Center for Pastoral Areas and Livestock Development, will be invited to share it
experience in facilitating appropriate and applicable knowledge, research, and technology development, including their
domestication, adoption, and transfer through regional platforms.
125. Sub-activity 1.4.2.1: Regional platform for knowledge sharing to enhance low-emission,
climate resilient dairy development. A regional platform – involving the above-mentioned entities - will be
organised on a rotational basis in each of the participating countries to share experiences and scientific
innovations and best practices implemented on farm. The regional platform will function as the knowledge
management mechanism for the Programme. It will capture and disseminate good practices and lessons
learned from both public sector, private sector, networks and the research and academic community. This sub-
activity will provide evidence – generated from the Programme M&E system - on the GHG efficiency gains
(from breeding, artificial insemination/ herd management, feed, animal health), circularity (manure
management, recycling) and carbon sequestration. Success stories for replication (e.g. Kenya for Tier 2 MRV),
scientific innovations (animal nutrition / TIMPs, manure management for continuous improvement) will be
documented. It will finance annual regional workshops, conferences, seminars, tours (exchange visits including
women and youth), meetings and policy briefs.
60 CGSpace is a repository of CGIAR and partner research outputs and knowledge products.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
126. Sub-activity 1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global climate policy mechanisms. In practice,
the sub-activity will consist of a joint participation of the 4 countries in global and regional climate policy events
(global science and policy mechanisms on dairy and climate change) such as the Greenhouse Gas and Animal
Agriculture Conference 2025, the African Climate Summit, the African Dairy Conference, and the UNFCCC
COP61). The objective will be to present the progress and results from the Programme for scaling-up and
replication, increase its visibility, and engage with other countries in sharing experience and learning.
127. Sub-activity 1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC). This sub-activity will
support the emergence of a global network of experience and expertise on reducing GHG emissions, especially
methane, in dairy production and value chains, as well as financing solutions to support these reductions. This
sub-activity will finance the participation in knowledge-exchange programs, including through IFAD’s “Learning
Routes” with e.g. Argentina, Brazil (Embrapa), Costa Rica and Uruguay on Tier2 analysis and climate impact
assessments in the dairy sector. Other initiatives for SSTC will be identified and assessed by the Regional
Steering Committee. It will finance study tours and participation of country delegations to workshops to share
innovations and scalable practices generated by the Programme.
COMPONENT 2: ENABLING LOW EMISSION AND CLIMATE RESILIENT DAIRY VALUE CHAIN
DEVELOPMENT
128. In line with the Programme paradigm shift, Component 2 aims putting dairy smallholders and private sector
value-chain operators on a transformative pathway towards a low-emission and climate-resilient dairy sector. Climate
mitigation and adaptation is critical on-farm, where 90 percent of the sector emissions arise. This Component will
contribute to GCF MRA1 “Energy Generation and Access", MRA4 “Forestry and Land Use”, ARA1 “Most vulnerable
people and communities”, and ARA4 “Ecosystems and ecosystem services”. Insufficient availability and adoption of
climate-smart technologies and practices have been identified in section B.1 and the ToC as key barriers to low
emissions and climate-resilient dairy value chains in East Africa. The selected technologies respond to the needs of
smallholder dairy farmers as well as medium and large-scale commercial farmers, dairy cooperatives, MCCs, MCPs
and other SMEs in the value chain.
129. This Component will contribute to the reduction of total GHG emissions and lower GHG emission intensity per
kg of milk compared to a “business-as-usual” scenario, and increase climate resilience of dairy farmers through a
three-pronged approach, i.e. (i) improvement in efficiencies in dairy production at farm and post-farm gate levels; (ii)
enhanced nutrient circularity, more particularly through manure management and bioeconomy interventions, and (iii)
carbon sequestration and removal through improved pastures and grassland management. This strategy will be
implemented through three Outputs, namely: (a) smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development; (b) the adoption
of integrated solutions for the dairy smallholder farm, including: animal breeding and health, feed and fodder, manure
management, and biogas use; and c) improved pasture management, including access to water to restore
ecosystems’ functions and increase soil carbon sequestration.
130. Beneficiaries of the component are smallholder dairy farmers, operating in zero-grazing/ intensive or semi-
zero grazing/semi-intensive systems. According to the Market Study, these smallholder dairy farmers are the critical
segment to scale, to grow the formal dairy sector and drive sustainable intensification while addressing climate change
adaptation and mitigation. The support to the dairy value chain will also benefit medium and large-scale commercial
farmers organised in dairy cooperatives and SMEs. Under Output 2.3, the Programme will also benefit pastoralists,
agro-pastoralists, and medium and large-scale extensive farmers. Entry points to reach the dairy farmers include dairy
cooperatives and MCCs, L-FFS/ PFS and community-based organisations.
131. Given the focus on climate-vulnerable smallholder dairy farmers, Component 2 will utilise (non-reimbursable)
grants (mechanisms depending on national practices and IFAD-funded projects co-financing DaIMA) to initiate the
graduation of small-scale operators and strengthen their capacities to adopt productivity enhancing and emission-
reducing technologies. If appropriate, grants will also support dairy cooperatives and MCCs to finance solutions that
drive increased awareness and understanding. Once this grant approach (under Outputs 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3) is
successfully deployed to demonstrate the impact of smallholders’ livelihoods, producers will be able to graduate and
access finance through Component 3’s instruments. Where private sector engagement is stronger, highly
61 Several participants from the Programme preparation process in 2023 were present at COP27 and will be attending or speaking at
COP28.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
concessional loans (depending on the activity and the economic capacity of the recipient farmer) under Component 3
will be used.
132. Activities under this Component are innovative, with scale-up and replication potential. Transforming
the dairy sector requires the comprehensive adoption of technologies and practices that sustainably increase
production, reduce absolute emissions, and lower emissions intensities. The proposed pathways, as identified in the
Feasibility Study (see Chapter 6), includes a range of well-selected and proven technologies that have significant
mitigation and adaptation impacts. These technologies will be promoted through the L-FFS, as all required modules
will be updated with all aspects related to the pathways. In addition, digital apps will be promoted to improve herd
management.
133. Activities under the Component are sustainable. The strengthening of dairy cooperatives will significantly
improve their operational and financial sustainability. This will be achieved through a combination of supports, including
enhanced management capacity, business development services, expanding/upgrading the network of MCCs,
investments in renewable energy to reduce the milk losses and energy expenditures, and building linkages with
upstream and downstream dairy value chain stakeholders, as well as access to markets.
Output 2.1: Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened.
134. The aim of Output 2.1 is to provide dairy farmers with consistent and stable access to market outlets for their
milk with fair prices and on-time payment. This will be achieved through the strengthening of dairy cooperatives and
their network of MCCs and milk collection points (MCPs). Dairy cooperatives are an essential entry point to unlock the
climate-smart milk production potential and driving adoption by dairy farmers of transformative climate-resilient
practices and technologies. Cooperatives not only provide a stable outlet for milk, but also (i) work to comply with
standards for milk; (ii) transmit technical knowledge and information on climate-smart practices to their members; (iii)
structure the dairy value chain and engage in upstream and downstream supply-chain agreements; and (iv) facilitate
access to markets, inputs, services, and financial services.
135. Activity 2.1.1 Strengthen dairy groups and cooperatives on organizational management and service
delivery. This activity aims to form and/or strengthen cooperative, organizational, and technical capacities of dairy
groups and cooperatives, and raise their climate-change and awareness of gender transformative approaches and
social inclusion considerations in their management teams and membership. This will aim to increase women and
youth representation, voice and decision-making in cooperatives. Support will also be provided to establish or enhance
their network of MCCs and MCPs, and their business linkages. Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 will be implemented by the
relevant Executing Entities in each country (see B.3 and A.20), through service providers, i.e. (i) SDLD and KDB in
Kenya, (ii) the Rwanda National Dairy Platform ((RNDP)) in Rwanda; (iii) the Dairy Development Authority (DDA), in
Uganda; (iv) the Tanzania Dairy Board (TDB) and the Tanzania Cooperative Development Commission (TCDC).
Implementation will also rely on specialized service providers, such as farmers’ organisations (e.g. National Alliance
of Agricultural Co-operatives in Uganda, NAAC), NGOs (e.g. Heifer International, SNV) and agritechs for digitisation
activities.
136. Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Strengthen the governance and management structures of dairy
cooperatives. This sub-activity will include: (i) training on cooperative governance, management practices and
management controls for all management, supervisory and general committees of dairy cooperatives; introduce
incentive to encourage ethical practices in dairy cooperatives; (ii) the business coaching of cooperatives by
business development service providers, (iii) where desirable, assistance for the formation and registration as a
formal dairy cooperative; and (iv) the participation in national and regional events that are essential for dairy value
chain governance, promoting inclusive policy, and business dialogues.
137. Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Strengthen capacity to reduce milk losses and ensure milk quality and
safety. At the aggregation stage, up to approximately 8 percent of the milk is lost via spillage and spoilage.
Aiming at reducing unproductive GHG emissions due to milk losses, this sub-activity is to assist dairy
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs in upgrading their technical capacity in milk quality control, covering raw milk
testing at milk collection, hygiene, and initial processing, in line with national and regional food safety standards.
The support will include: (i) basic equipment for milk collection (heavy-duty bicycles, motorcycles, milk cans and
can holders, testing equipment) and storage (cooling tanks), (ii) insulated milk transport vehicles (demonstration
purpose); and (iii) technical assistance and training on milk quality, food safety and hygiene for dairy stakeholders
along the value chain, e.g. farmers, milk transporters, staff of cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs; (iv) introduction of
milk quality management systems.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
B
138. Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Expand the outreach and capacity of dairy cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs.
The expansion of market-oriented dairy operations and higher productivity of dairy cows, which leads to lower
emission intensity of milk produced and sold, requires the nearby availability of milk collection capacity.
Therefore, the Programme will support investments in MCCs and MCPs, as well as small processing equipment
for cooperatives that are not linked / out of reasonable reach from existing formal market processors and have
sufficient scale to engage in processing. Milk collectors will be facilitated to collect milk (at farm gate) and deliver
to cooperatives and MCCs, for example with heavy-duty bicycles initially owned by the rural organisations, to be
transferred to the milk collectors’ ownership with proven use and maintenance over a period of 2 years.
139. Sub-activity 2.1.1.4 Create awareness on gender transformative approaches among
households of dairy farmers. Gender awareness have been integrated into the Programme interventions. The
Enhanced Gender Action Learning System (GALS+) methodology will be used to address power relations and
inequalities especially at household level, thereby enhancing behavioural change towards positive gender and
social norms, attitudes and practices in dairy management for purposes of increasing gender equality and
women’s empowerment, and climate resilience. As men and women have diverse ways of coping and adapting
to the adverse impacts of CC, GALS+ includes (i) an integrated climate component to strengthen the mitigation
measures and adaptive capacities of households and communities to CC; (ii) nutrition and food safety aspects.
Support will be given to: (a) gender awareness and targeting workshops for staff of implementation units and
contractors; (b) training of GALS lead farmers and cooperative management as ToT; (iii) rolling out of GALS in
L-FFS households through outreach; and (iv) national gender sensitization and training workshops for the
management of dairy cooperatives. The Programme will also organize trainings on Gender-based Violence
(GBV) and Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) prevention. DaIMA will also invest into the Free
Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) approach to ensure stakeholders’ and communities’ buy-in for the various
activities.
140. Activity 2.1.2 Build and enhance Productive Alliances along the dairy value chain. The Programme will
provide support to productive alliances between farmer cooperatives and enterprises with farmer-allied engagement
models, and scaling-up of dairy clusters. This will enable farmers to access affordable, high-quality inputs and services.
141. Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Strengthen cooperatives’ capacity in business and financial management.
The aim is to ensure that dairy cooperatives and their MCCs are run as viable business enterprises. Therefore,
the Programme will support cooperatives in building out business plans and partnerships for expanding and
enhancing the services they offer member farmers (e.g., facilitated feed and AI service purchases checked-off
against milk sales) – serving as “dairy hubs”. For implementation, providers of business development services
(BDS) will be mobilized. In addition, the members of dairy cooperatives and MCCs will receive: (i) financial literacy
training, financial management training and equipment (software and IT equipment); (ii) gender-sensitive and
inclusive business management and business plan development training (using participatory tools such as
RuralInvest, developed by FAO62).
142. Sub-activity 2.1.2.2. Build linkages along the dairy value chain. The BDS service providers
engaged to strengthen cooperatives will further provide capacity building for negotiation of offtake agreements
between cooperatives and private off-takers (Productive Alliance model), as well as public procurement (e.g.
school or hospital procurement) for better milk prices guaranteed by contract for selected cooperatives with high
capacity. The aim is to support establishing Productive Alliances with cooperatives and in designing, enhancing,
and scaling key components of their farmer engagement models, such as quality-based or volume-based price
incentive terms offered by processors, extension provision, and direct or facilitated provision of inputs and
services. Through this support, a pre-investment pipeline will be developed, and related financing needs
identified.
143. Sub-activity 2.1.2.3. Promote digitalization and traceability of dairy operations. The Programme
will promote digitalization and traceability to ensure quality and entry into formal supply arrangements that come
with services, and improved accounting (money and stock) for access to credit. Use of transformative end-to-end
(E2) digital solutions is currently limited. Digitalized systems for monitoring on-farm activities, milk production
disaggregated by farm (gender of farmer), aggregation, transportation, and marketing will increase the efficiency
and transparency in the dairy value chain and cold chain. It will support off-takers and cooperatives to improve
timely payments to farmers, traceability of the quality of milk and linkage to advisory services where farmers
62 https://www.fao.org/in-action/ruralinvest/about/en/

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
B
might need advisory interventions and access to finance. In the four countries, the Programme will enhance the
capacity of milk aggregators and cooperatives to improve their record-keeping and management through a digital
cooperative and MCC management information system (MIS) that will: (a) record the production of farmers, (b)
track milk flow/volumes and quality, (c) manage records of farmer payments allowing the development of digital
profiles and credit scores. Digital solutions developed by local agritechs and agri-fintechs (e.g. Emata in Uganda)
or FAO (Collect Mobile App) will be scaled-up to enable business operations management and credit-scoring for
better access to finance. A pilot will start with a limited number of cooperatives in each country and gradually
upgraded. The Programme will finance the required IT equipment and services.
144. Activity 2.1.3 Promote renewable energy (RE) and waste management technologies. The
decarbonization of the dairy value chain will be promoted. The Programme will focus on the substitution of fossil fuels
and firewood by green energy sources such as solar or less wood-intensive energy sources for milk cooling and
processing contributing to reduced workloads for women. Insulated vehicles and solar energy supply are typically
more suitable solutions for larger MCCs (>3m3 capacity). For processing, cold chain and quality preservation solutions
(e.g., cooling tanks, insulated / refrigerated trucks) are fundamental to business operations and contribute to reduced
milk losses (and less unproductive GHG emissions), yet not always used by small-scale processors. Solar is the key
mitigation solution and most applicable to relatively larger processors in the short-term given high upfront costs. Also
the management of waste and wastewater will be promoted. There is limited adoption of waste management solutions
along the value chain today. Processors only re-use waste (e.g., by-product whey as feed) selectively and recycling
is not a priority. Beneficiaries of the support would be MCCs and SMEs. Activity 2.1.3 will be implemented by the
relevant Executing Entities in each country (see sections B.3 and A.20), through service providers, i.e. (i) the KDB in
Kenya, (ii) the SPIU and Rwanda Energy Group (REG) in Rwanda; (iii) the DDA, Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Development, in Uganda; (iv) the MLF and TDB in Tanzania. Specialized service providers will be mobilized where
needed.
145. Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 Assess the need and viability of renewable energy and waste management
solutions. The aim will be to assess the clean energy needs of dairy cooperatives and propose RE solutions
(photovoltaic – PV, biogas systems, etc.), energy and labour-efficient equipment, and solid and water waste
management solutions. The assessment will look at scale and viability of such investments not just needs and
potential tech solutions.
146. Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 Support the acquisition of renewable energy and waste management
solutions. This will include the upgrading or equipping of dairy cooperatives with suitable RE, PV-powered
technology for milk coolers for milk aggregation, milk transfer tanks, solar water heaters, water recycling systems,
heat exchangers, milk pasteurizers, butter churners and cheese makers. Solar energy will complement the
existing electricity from national grid or generated by standby generators to cool down milk to 4oC.
147. Sub-activity 2.1.3.3 Organize capacity building in energy efficiency and waste management.
This training will focus on the management of the RE solutions in dairy cooperatives, SMEs and MCCs. This will
include strategies to avoid waste (including e-waste) through repair of the installed equipment and the
establishment of an equipment maintenance account in a local financial institution by each supported rural
organisation.
Output 2.2: Breeding, animal health, feed and fodder, manure management improved.
148. As detailed in section B.1 and Feasibility Study (Annex 2, Chapter 6), the pathways to reduce farm-level GHG
emissions from dairy cattle are based on the following building blocks63: (i) promotion of dairy breeds that are resistant
to heat stress and better adapted to CC; (ii) improving animal welfare, animal health and disease prevention to
increase productivity of dairy cattle and reduce mortality, and herd management to optimize the composition of the
dairy herd; (iii) affordable quality forage and fodder, and access to water; (iv) climate-smart feeding practices to reduce
enteric methane emissions; (v) manure management and use to recycle nutrients and reduce GHG emissions; and
(vi) biogas digesters at farm level to treat manure and recover methane for household energy use while providing
clean energy for cooking.
149. Activity 2.2.1 Promote the adoption of climate-smart dairy breeds adapted to climate change. Breeding
and genetic improvement will aim at improving productivity and heat tolerance of dairy cattle while preserving resilience
of livestock production systems by crossing indigenous and exotic breeds through AI. Exotic breeds, such as Holstein-
63 FAO and GDP. 2018. Climate change and the global dairy cattle sector – The role of the dairy sector in a low-carbon future.
Rome. 36 pp. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA- 3.0 IGO

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
B
Friesian or Jersey, are more vulnerable to high temperatures, and consequently to climate change, but present a
higher productive potential. Indigenous breeds, despite their lower productive potential and small size, are a reservoir
for resilience traits such as hardiness, mobility, rendering them more adaptable to extreme climatic conditions and to
certain diseases. Different generations of crossbreeds (exotic x native breeds) would contribute to maintaining the
resilience traits of indigenous breeds, while also adding productive traits to the gene pool, increasing the offspring’s
productivity in milk production, therefore contributing to reducing GHG emission intensity. Available studies shows that
improved dairy animals have a significantly lower GHG emission intensity per kg of milk due to their higher production
when compared to indigenous breeds64,65,66. This activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing Entities in
each country (see sections B.3 and A.20), through service providers, i.e. (i) KALRO and the Kenya Animal Genetic
Resources Centre (KAGRC) in Kenya; (ii) RAB and private in Rwanda; (iii) MLF, TALIRI, National Artificial
Insemination centre (NAIC), in Tanzania; and (iv) MAAIF with support from NARO, NAGRC, and DDA in Uganda.
Support will be given to scale-up the national breeding strategies with specific focus on climate resilience of dairy
cows.
150. Sub-activity 2.2.1.1 Make good quality semen for climate-smart breeds available, adaptable to
extreme climatic conditions and to diseases. The Programme will enhance availability and accessibility of
germplasm of exotic that will be crossed with local67. This will be achieved through (i) the identification of potential
climate-smart cattle breeds; (ii) the import of sexed semen68 and/or embryos, if needed; (iii) the procurement of
high genetic merit bulls to produce sexed semen or no-sexed semen for national and regional use; (iv) the
production and conservation of climate-smart breeds' germplasm, using laboratory techniques like in-vitro
fertilization, or simply artificial insemination (AI); and (v) capacity development to produce sexed semen to
increase production of dairy heifers.
151. Sub-activity 2.2.1.2 Invest in breeding and artificial insemination (AI) centres. To solve
bottlenecks in AI and embryo transfer, the Programme will support scaling up capacities for production and
distribution of liquid nitrogen, semen, and embryos. This includes the availability of liquid nitrogen, storage and
quality control equipment, dry ice pilots for conservation of semen, and other specialized equipment. In addition,
the following investment will be supported. In Kenya, the Programme will involve the Kenya Livestock Breeders
Association, which is specialised in extension and training, breed inspection and registration, performance
recording and reporting and feedback. In Rwanda, support will be given for the establishment of semen and
liquid nitrogen storage and distribution centers, as well as to the existing bull centre in Songa Station to acquire
micro-manipulators to enhance semen production operations. Moreover, RAB will be strengthened in record
keeping and continuous updates of the Studbook to identify resilient and high productive crossbreeds. In
Tanzania, support would be given to establish an AI centre in Southern Highland. Also, the feasibility of an LN
unit in Zanzibar will be analysed. In Uganda, this investment will strengthen the NAGRC and Data Bank to
improve the production and access to high-quality semen in small and medium size farms.
152. Sub-activity 2.2.1.3 Scale up the insemination of dairy cattle to make the herd more productive
and climate resilient. The Programme will (i) train AI technicians, who can be private inseminators, para-
veterinarians, lead farmers of L-FFS and District livestock officers (at least 30 percent youth and 40 percent
women); (ii) scale up the insemination of dairy cattle in the Programme intervention area; (iii) include aspects of
the interaction between dairy cattle husbandry and climate change in the L-FFS curriculum. In Kenya, the
Programme will support the National Breeding Strategy and Action Plan, in collaboration with the Kenya Livestock
Breeders Association and the Kenya Animal Genetics Resources Centre (KAGRIC) and ADC. Public and private
partnerships (PPP) will be promoted to have AI services accessible to the farmers. In Rwanda, the breeding
64 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2017. Supporting low emissions development in the Ethiopian
dairy cattle sector – reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 34 pp.
65 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2019. Options for low emission development in the Uganda
dairy sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 39 pp.
https://www.fao.org/3/ca3375en/ca3375en.pdf
66 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2019. Options for low emission development in the Tanzania
dairy sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 34 pp.
https://www.fao.org/3/ca3215en/CA3215EN.pdf
67 Sahiwal, an indigenous breed that is a relatively high producing breed and resilient and has been adopted in Kenian pastoral
communities as a means to improve milk production.
68 Sexed semen is processed bovine semen that increases the likelihood of producing female calves, which are more valuable in dairy
farming for their milk production. This technology is superior to conventional semen as it enhances dairy productivity by expanding
milk-producing herds, improving genetic quality, and offering climate resilience benefits through higher returns and better herd
management.

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
B
programme of RAB will be scaled up including the training of more private AI technicians through Veterinary
Sanitary Mandate. In Tanzania, additional technicians will be trained and equipped with start-up kits. In addition,
bull centers will be established in regions where AI is not available. In Uganda, more AI technicians will be trained
by the NAGRC and will be equipped with AI kits focusing on the regions where AI services are still poorly
developed.
153. Sub-activity 2.2.1.4 Organize awareness campaigns and support breeders’ organizations. The
campaigns will target members of dairy cooperatives and L-FFS groups to create awareness on the use of sexed-
semen, thus impacting the herd’s sex ratio, and further reduce absolute GHG emissions and the emission
intensity per kg of milk produced mainly by replacing many low-productive local cows with a few adapted and
high performant crossbreeds, thus reducing the herd size. In the four countries, support will be given to the
breeders’ associations and societies for animal registration and maintenance of breeding standards.
154. Activity 2.2.2 Provide support for better animal care, herd management and disease prevention. In East
Africa, infectious diseases and parasites rank among the primary causes of livestock productivity and production loss.
Production losses through reduced performance (growth rates, milk yield) or animal loss through morbidity, mortality,
and abortion results in cows with relatively high GHG emission intensities. These losses affect people’s resilience to
CC, livelihoods and nutrition security and can affect human health through zoonotic disease transmission. In addition,
the growing importance of zero-grazing systems has implications for animal welfare, thus farmers will be encouraged
to consider animal well-being aspects. This activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing Entities in each
country (see sections B.3 and A.20), through veterinary services providers like: (i) KALRO and County Governments
in Kenya; (ii) RAB, RCVD and the LGAs in Rwanda through Veterinary Sanitary Mandate; (iii) MLF and LGAs in
Tanzania; and (iv) MAAIF (Directorate of Animal Resources –DAR, District Local Government (DLGs) and the private
sector in Uganda.
155. Sub-activity 2.2.2.1 Organise trainings on animal husbandry, with a specific focus on animal
health, animal welfare, herd management and disease prevention. Updated modules of the L-FFS (and other
applicable modules) training on animal health and welfare, and herd and reproduction management will be
implemented. Dairy farmers, including women and youth who often act managers and animal handlers, will
receive training to better care for the animals and to adopt biosecurity measures to prevent common diseases
and pests that impact the production or suitability of the milk for human consumption. They will also receive
support to better manage their herds, reproduction calendar, and animal nutrition to reduce animal mortality, heat
stress and increase productivity, thus further reducing absolute CH emissions and the emission intensity per
4
unit of milk produced.
156. Sub-activity 2.2.2.2 Scale up the use of digital apps to monitor animal health and herd
performance. Digital record keeping on-farm (e.g., using iCow, DigiCow Africa, My Fugo, i-EDSR, AMIS) will be
scaled up to monitor the productive and health performances of the herd (e.g., records of calf mortality and
causes, number of lame animals), to plan artificial insemination and guide herd management. The app will be
promoted through the L-FFS in interested groups. The support includes: (i) training of L-FFS lead farmers on the
use of the apps; (ii) guiding L-FFS farmers in the use of the technology; (iii) equip the farmers in the pilot with
digital tools, including youth. To implement the sub-activity, the Programme will work with agritech companies
and start-up to develop digital solutions that will enhance transparency in farm data and operations, monitoring
of CH emissions reduction and traceability of milk products.
4
157. Sub-activity 2.2.2.3 Scale-up vaccination campaigns to mitigate the impact of climate change
on the spread of diseases. The Programme will scale up and extend the vaccination campaigns to target in
priority dairy farmers in the Programme area, who are members of various cooperatives and L-FFS. The
vaccination campaign will focus on: (i) the spread of East Coast Fever (ECF), Contagious Bovine
Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) and Heartwater disease to new production areas through an extended vaccination
campaign, in Kenya; (ii) ECF, RVF and FMD amongst others in Rwanda; (iii) ECF, FMD, RVF and CBPP in
Tanzania; (iv) transboundary animal diseases (TADs), e.g. ECF, FMD, CBPP, and LSD in Uganda.
158. Activity 2.2.3 Promote climate-smart forage production and conservation, and water harvesting. The
adoption of climate-resilient forage varieties and conservation technologies is essential to reduce enteric methane

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
B
emissions intensities in the dairy value chain, while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle69,70,71. The benefits are multiple
and encompass CC adaptation through adoption of a resilient forage variety (e.g., Lablab purpureus, Brachiaria sp.,
Cenchrus purpureus (Napier grass), Leucaena, Calliandra, Panicum maximum (Giant Panicum)), improvements in
soil fertility and increased capacity of farmers to meet forage production needs during dry periods and to respond to
climate-induced pests and diseases. This activity will be implemented by the relevant Executing Entities in each
country, through service providers, i.e. (i) KALRO and private seed multiplicators in Kenya; (ii) RAB and LGAs in
Rwanda; (iii) MLF, Tanzania Official Seed Certification Institute (TOSCI), Vikuge pasture seed farm, and LGAs in
Tanzania; and (iv) MAAIF / NARO and private sector e.g. SNV in Uganda.
159. Sub-activity 2.2.3.1 Make certified forage seed available to private and community multipliers.
This sub-activity will (i) support the multiplication of breeder and foundation seeds for climate-smart, emission-
reducing fodder by the national mandated public services; (ii) facilitate a seed certification scheme and sensitize
the private sector to produce certified forage and fodder seeds.
160. Sub-activity 2.2.3.2 Support multiplication of climate-resilient seed for fodder crops and
pastures. This sub-activity will include contracting community and private seed multipliers (including the youth
and women) for multiplication, conservation of forage and pasture seeds. In each country, standard approaches
will be used to promote fodder and pasture seed agri-business through facilitating multiplication of seeds and
making them available to L-FFS, PFS, cooperatives, and other groups.
161. Sub-activity 2.2.3.3 Build capacity of dairy farmers on forage production and conservation on
intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms. The L-FFS will be the knowledge-sharing vehicle to promote
improved forage production and conservation. The L-FFS will focus on (i) training on good forage management
practices (e.g., grass and legume intercropping, agroforestry, weed management, use of biochar); (ii) training
and demonstration on small-scale irrigation to produce forage crops; (iii) training and demonstrations of
mechanization of forage production with fodder choppers/cutters and conservation equipment; (iv) training and
demonstrations on forage conservation practices, to respond to seasonal feed availability and quality (e.g.,
protein content, digestibility) variations. Youth groups will be supported to venture into appropriate commercial
forage production72, e.g. hydroponics.
162. Sub-activity 2.2.3.4 Access to water for animals and forage production in intensive and semi-
intensive dairy systems73. The Programme will provide small-scale equipment for rainwater harvesting and
recycling (e.g. individual dam sheets, 3m3 rooftop water tanks and water distribution kits).
163. Activity 2.2.4 Promote climate-smart feeding practices to reduce enteric methane emissions.
Appropriate diet formulation is key to improve dairy cattle productivity, improve animal welfare, while reducing methane
(CH4) emissions. Balanced diets (more energy-dense or more digestible) decrease retention time in the rumen and
reduce ruminal fermentation and methane yield (kg CH /kg dry matter intake). Better nutrient utilization (e.g., avoiding
4
deficiencies or surpluses) reduces the environmental impact of livestock. The Programme will support the
development of feed packages and plans, build national capacity on feed formulation, and promote these technologies
through L-FFS and others. Implementation will be done by relevant EEs through service providers i.e. (i) KALRO,
SDLD in Kenya; (ii) RAB and the University of Rwanda, College of Agriculture, Animal Science and Veterinary
Medicine (UR-CAVM) and LGAs in Rwanda; (iii) MLF, TALIRI and LGAs in Tanzania; (iv) the MAAIF (NARO), in
collaboration with NGOs (e.g. SNV, Heifer International) and private service providers in Uganda.
164. Sub-activity 2.2.4.1 Develop production system-specific supplementation plans and feed
packages, based on available feed resources (energy or protein depending on the limiting nutrient, e.g. Urea
Molasses Mineral Blocks74). In each country, the national research and academic institutions will develop feed
69 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2017. Supporting low emissions development in the Ethiopian
dairy cattle sector – reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 34 pp.
70 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2019. Options for low emission development in the Uganda
dairy sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 39 pp.
https://www.fao.org/3/ca3375en/ca3375en.pdf
71 FAO & New Zealand Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre. 2019. Options for low emission development in the Tanzania
dairy sector - reducing enteric methane for food security and livelihoods. Rome. 34 pp.
https://www.fao.org/3/ca3215en/CA3215EN.pdf
72 The Uruhimbi Kageyo Cooperative is a successful example.
73 For access to water for extensive/ pastoral and agro-pastoral systems, please look at output 2.3
74 FAO. Feed Supplementation Blocks. FAO Animal Production and Health Division. Paper 164. 2007

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
B
plans and packages for the main national dairy production systems. Biochar as an edible feed supplement will
be promoted. Feed formulation will be included in the curriculum of the L-FFS. This sub-activity will benefit from
the Programme’s partnership with ILRI, as well as its regional knowledge-sharing platform to make existed
training materials available.
165. Sub-activity 2.2.4.2 Build capacity on appropriate feed formulation. In each country, the
Programme will support the capacity development of technical advisors, cooperative management, small feed
processing plants and L-FFS lead farmers on sustainable animal feed formulations such as total mixed rations
(TMR) to enhance productive efficiency and to mitigate GHG emissions.
166. Sub-activity 2.2.4.3 Promote appropriate diet formulation that reduces enteric methane
emissions. In the four countries, the L-FFS and the dairy cooperatives will be the vehicle to reach out to dairy
farmers and promote appropriate feeding of dairy cattle. The Programme will: (i) provide start-up kits for L-FFS
to monitor diet formulation to reduce methane yield (e.g., Rumen8 tool by SNV); (ii) run L-FFS of feed formulation,
including on the use of agroforestry leguminous fodder trees with methane inhibiting properties such as Calliandra
sp. for improved feed supplementation and carbon sequestration. The Programme will also pilot and leverage on
the existing innovative enteric methane inhibitors used as mixtures in feed to be adopted in zero-grazing and
commercial/intensive systems75.
167. Activity 2.2.5 Increase sustainable nutrient recycling of manure and dairy waste to reduce emissions.
Livestock manure is a source of methane (CH ) and nitrous oxide (N O) emissions, as well as of pollutants such as
4 2
ammonia (NH ) and nitrate (NO ). At the same time, manure contains essential nutrients and is often the primary
3 3
source of crop fertilization on smallholder dairy farms, as mineral fertilizers are too expensive or unavailable.76 In
addition, its costs have further increased due to recent events (Ukraine, Palestine and Lebanon wars).77 Many
smallholder farms are limited in nutrients, which limits crop yields78,79. Circular management of agricultural nutrients
via livestock manure is the best scalable option to overcome these limitations, improve soil health, and improve on-
farm productivity. This has a positive effect on livestock productivity, as better manure management also improves the
nutrient availability for feed and forages, which increases their growth, biomass yield and nutritional quality and
ultimately improves milk production. In addition, manure application reduces soil nutrient mining and soil degradation
and prevents additional CO emissions from loss of soil organic carbon. This activity will be implemented by EEs,
2
through relevant service providers, i.e. (i) SDLD, KALRO, KBP in Kenya; (ii) RAB and LGAs in Rwanda; (iii) MLF,
TDB, LGAs in Tanzania; and (iv) MAAIF (NARO), ZARDI, and implementing partners (e.g. SNV, Heifer) in Uganda.
Training materials have been developed by ILRI and NARO (Uganda).
168. Sub-activity 2.2.5.1 Manure management in intensive and semi-intensive dairy production
systems. The Programme will create awareness and build capacity on low-cost manure management for soil
health and soil microbiome improvement. The sub-activity will consist in providing trainings and equipment
through L-FFS and demonstration farms, using existing manuals developed by NARO in Uganda, ILRI, etc. on
scalable and already tested manure management practices (manure separator, manure ponds, use of biochar,
manure covering with banana leaves, compaction, etc.) and manure use applications offering livelihoods
opportunities.
169. Sub-activity 2.2.5.2 Promote adapted animal housing. The Programme will promote adapted
animal housing with the possibility of separating solid and liquid manure. Good example of animal housing
promoted by Heifer International can be scaled up.
170. Sub-activity 2.2.5.3 Manure management in extensive systems (pastoral and agro-pastoral
dairying regions). The Programme will: (i) run L-FFS/PFS for promoting manure collection from communal kraals
75 FAO. 2023. Methane emissions in livestock and rice systems – Sources, quantification, mitigation and metrics. Rome.
https://doi.org/10.4060/cc7607en
76 Sheahan, M., & Barrett, C. B. 2017. Ten striking facts about agricultural input use in Sub-Saharan Africa. Food policy, 67, 12-25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2016.09.010
77 Alexander P, Arneth A, Henry R, et al (2022) High energy and fertilizer prices are more damaging than food export curtailment from
Ukraine and Russia for food prices, health and the environment. Nature Food 2022 4:1 4:84–95. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-
022-00659-9
78 Leitner S, Pelster D. E., Werner C, et al. 2020. Closing maize yield gaps in sub-Saharan Africa will boost soil N2O emissions. Curr
Opin Environ Sustain 47:. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2020.08.018
79 Mueller ND, Gerber JS, Johnston M, et al. 2012. Closing yield gaps through nutrient and water management. Nature 490:254–257.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11420

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
B
for use, sale/ income generation at community level; and (ii) establish community manure sheds to promote
manure collection, storage and covering for better manure management and reduce emissions.
171. Activity 2.2.6 Build capacity for on-farm use of biodigesters and biogas. Biogas digesters utilize
microorganisms to break down organic matter such as livestock manure or other organic waste, during which biogas
and a nutrient-rich by-product (called digestate or bio-slurry) are produced. This technology offers a clean source of
energy for people who do not have access to clean cooking fuels80. In addition, it creates a biofertilizer (for use as
organic fertiliser on nearby fields), reduces methane emissions (up to 70-90 percent compared to liquid manure
storage)81, and ammonia and nitrous oxide emissions82. Biodigesters can reduce deforestation and empower women
by reducing the time they spent collecting firewood83. As part of the low-carbon pathways, the Programme will
encourage the uptake of on-farm biodigesters for intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms. The activity will be
implemented by (i) SDLD, Ministry of Energy and Petroleum (State Department for Energy) in Kenya; (ii) RAB and
REG in Rwanda; (iii) MLU, the Centre for Agricultural Mechanisation and Rural Technology (CAMARTEC), Ministry of
Environment in Tanzania; (iv) the MAAIF (NARO), Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, private sector service
providers to support installation (Biogas National Alliance, Bio Solutions Uganda), and other specialized
implementation partners (e.g. SNV).
172. Sub-activity 2.2.6.1 Support capacity building in biodigester construction and management.
The Programme will support the training and accreditation of biodigester technicians, with a particular focus on
women and youth, in the target districts. In addition to installation-related aspects of biogas valorisation and
quality management, including safe working standards.
173. Sub-activity 2.2.6.2 Support investments in biodigesters at the household level84. The
Programme will support investments in biodigesters for dairy farms in its intervention area.
Output 2.3: Pasture and grasslands management improved
174. Many dairy producers rely on pastures and grasslands as main feed resource, which are constrained by limited
water availability and follow seasonal rainfall patterns. Well-managed and restored pastures and rangelands
increases climate resilience through healthier ecosystems, improved water access, biodiversity conservation, and
mitigate environmental risks – such as land degradation. In addition, to reduce emissions from dairy production
systems, the Programme considers soil carbon sequestration as an important pathway of GHG emission removals to
offset livestock and manure emissions. Well-managed rangelands not only improve the carbon balance of the livestock
production systems, but they are also more productive (increased biomass yield) and improve the animal diet and
reduce enteric CH emissions.
4
175. Activity 2.3.1 Strengthen rangeland governance structures for communal grazing areas. This activity
will finance interventions to improve rangeland management (including access to water), mainly in Kenya, Tanzania
and Uganda. Engagement and awareness raising among local stakeholders involved in landscape management is
essential for locally led adaptation and people-centred planning. The activity will be implemented by relevant EEs,
through: (i) the SDLD, KALRO, County Governments and the NLC in Kenya; (ii) MLF and LGAs in Tanzania; (iii)
MAAIF (DDA, NARO) with DLGs in Uganda. In each country, facilitators specialised in participatory rangeland
management will be mobilized.
176. Sub-activity 2.3.1.1 Participatory rangeland management planning. In selected districts/counties,
the Programme will (i) map and conduct a capacity assessment of existing community governance structures
(including gender aspects), formal (e.g. village land committees, environmental committees, water use
committees, local government, district) and informal entities (grazing committees, traditional committees, clan
80 International Energy Agency (IEA). 2020. The Energy Progress Report, 2020. Paris. https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-sdg7-the-
energy-progress-report-2020
81 Steinfeld H, Gerber P, Wassenaar T, et al. 2006. Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options. FAO
ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/A0701E/A0701E00.pdf 1–377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10666-008-9149-3
82 Mohankumar Sajeev EP, Winiwarter W, Amon B. 2018. Greenhouse Gas and Ammonia Emissions from Different Stages of Liquid
Manure Management Chains: Abatement Options and Emission Interactions. J Environ Qual 47:30–41.
https://doi.org/10.2134/JEQ2017.05.0199
83 Clemens H, Bailis R, Nyambane A, Ndung’u V. 2018. Africa Biogas Partnership Program: A review of clean cooking implementation
through market development in East Africa. Energy for Sustainable Development 46:23–31
84 Scaling up the results achieved by the Tanzania Domestic Biogas Programme part of the overarching Africa Biogas Partnership
Programme, implemented by DGIS, Hivos and SNV

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
B
leaders); (ii) support community governance structures to produce pasture and rangelands management plans,
including land tenure to secure tenure rights to carry out activities on rangelands, water access, as well as
possible conflict resolution over land and water use, and (iii) support the development, revitalization and
strengthening of laws/ charters and by-laws governing the use of communal resources (including water). For this
sub-activity, the Programme will leverage lessons learnt from and (where appropriate) build on the legacy of
TWENDE in Kenya (GCF FP113) and Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation in Rwanda (GCF
FP167).
177. Activity 2.3.2. Restoration of degraded rangelands, including access to water. This activity will finance
interventions to restore rangelands. The sub-activity will be implemented by (i) the SDLD, KALRO, County
Governments and the NLC in Kenya; (ii) RAB and REMA in Rwanda (iii) MLF and LGAs in Tanzania; (iv) MAAIF (DDA,
NARO) with DLGs in Uganda. In each country, service providers specialised in rangelands restoration will be
mobilized.
178. Sub-activity 2.3.2.1 Training on rangeland and pasture management. The Programme will
facilitate L-FFS/PFS aimed at guiding and engaging farmers towards improving the management of rangelands
and pastures. L-FFS will focus on (i) rotational grazing, (ii) management of grazing intensity (destocking and
restocking i.e. sale of animals during the dry season and restocking during seasons of high food availability to
reduce pressure on pastures)85, (iii) integration of sylvo-pastoral practices (multipurpose leguminous trees,
including those that are medicinal or for fruits) for better carbon sequestration and reduction of livestock exposure
to heat stress conditions, by providing shade for animals (more particularly around water harvesting points), and
(iv) biochar production, elaborated from invasive bush species.
179. Sub-activity 2.3.2.2 Rangelands and pastures restoration. This sub-activity, focusing on grazing
areas, will focus on: (i) reseeding and integration of legumes with grasses in natural pastures, (ii) integration of
multipurpose leguminous trees and shrubs (improved agro-forestry systems) and control of invasive tree species,
and (iii) implementation of soil and water conservation practices to increase water availability and biomass
productivity.
180. Sub-activity 2.3.2.3 Water availability. Depending on the country, to enhance access to water for
dairy cattle in extensive systems, the Programme will invest in water harvesting systems such as micro-dams,
small-scale valley dams, charco dams and rock-catchments schemes. Feasibility studies will be carried out
before the start of the work to assess sustainability. The Programme will also enhance the capacity of the
community-based water supply organizations (COWSOs) to better manage and operate all water harvesting and
storage infrastructure. The design of water infrastructure will follow the guidelines of the local government
authorities, making gender considerations such as the provision of animal watering and washing bays for women.
COMPONENT 3: GREEN DAIRY FINANCING FACILITY (GDFF)86
181. To support the achievement of the programme objectives and impact, DaIMA will establish a Green Dairy
Financing Facility (GDFF) that will operate in the four targeted countries. GDFF aims to enhance access to finance for
the target group and support the implementation of climate-smart technologies and practices, thereby facilitating the
transition to climate-resilient, sustainable, and low-carbon dairy value chains. This component will specifically address
the financial and technological barriers identified in the ToC as key obstacles in greening the sector’s operations.
Under Component 3, medium-sized farmer-allied dairy value chain actors, including aggregator- and processor-SMEs,
agro-input and technology providers, and farmers’ cooperatives, will be eligible to access DaIMA-supported financing.
Businesses identified by Component 2 as suitable for GDFF financing will be proactively encouraged to apply for
support under Component 3.
182. GDFF Financial Resources. DaIMA will provide catalytic international financial resources of at least US$ 35
million, including US$ 17.5m from the GCF and minimum US$ 17.5m from IFAD and other partners, to be shared
between the selected four Wholesale Banks for on-lending through the Retail Banks to the programme target group.
The target in later negotiations with the participating Retail Banks is to raise an additional investment capital injection
of US$ 8.75 million (25 percent of retail loans) from the Retail Banks’ local private sector resources. In addition,
85 Feasibility Study, chapter 6 for details on the various strategies to be promoted.
86 Component 3 includes proposed activities that are subject to change or adjustment and estimates for loan volume, interest rate,
and number of borrowers that are based on assumptions which are subject to change.

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
B
substantial grant financing is included under Component 3 to support the GDFF lending and dairy sector development
operations through a US$ 10m technical assistance facility.
183. The GDFF credit capital from DaIMA resources will be lent by IFAD to the four Governments in USD and by
the governments, through the EEs, to the local implementing partners in local currencies, and all the lending operations
to the end borrowers will be conducted in local currencies. The credit capital provided by the international financiers
will revolve in the GDFF operation during the period of the DaIMA project loans and will be paid back by the executing
partners to the Governments according to the repayment schedule of the IFAD DaIMA loans.
184. To achieve its development objectives, Component 3 activities are structured into two outputs: (i) Output 3.1:
Effective Green Financing for Dairy Value Chains; and (ii) Output 3.2: Capacity Building for Green Dairy Investments.
Output 3.1: Effective Green Financing for Dairy Value Chains
185. Activity 3.1.1: GDFF Operationalized. In each of the four participating countries, a GDFF line of credit will
be established to channel green funding to eligible dairy sector borrowers. This line of credit will be managed by a
local Public Development Bank (PDB), which will act as a Wholesale Bank for the GDFF intervention. The Wholesale
Banks will at national level manage the financial DaIMA services to the programme target group based on eligibility
criteria and other terms and conditions, agreed upon in the programme design and included in the financing
agreements between IFAD, the Governments, and the Wholesale Banks. Based on IFAD’s rural finance experience
in East-Africa and reviews of financial markets in the targeted countries as well as interviews with several candidate
banks, the following PDBs were selected as candidates for the Wholesale Banks for GDFF: Agricultural Finance
Corporation (AFC) for Kenya, Uganda Development Bank (UDB) for Uganda, Development Bank of Rwanda (DBR)
for Rwanda, and Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank (TADB) for Tanzania. The criteria for Wholesale Bank
identification included: (i) status of a leading PDB in the targeted countries, (ii) solid institutional and financial
conditions, (iii) strong interest in agriculture and rural finance operations, (iv) corporate objective to develop and scale-
up the bank’s climate finance portfolio, (v) corporate mandate and operational capacity to provide wholesale financing
products, and (vi) strong expressed interest to manage the DaIMA wholesale financing operations in the dairy sector.
186. The Wholesale Banks will provide bulk loans for on-lending to the eligible Retail Banks, which can be
commercial banks or such microfinance banks and commercial development banks that are prudentially supervised.
Financial resources provided as bulk loans by the Wholesale Banks to Retail Banks will be exclusively on-lent to
eligible climate-smart investment projects of dairy sector SMEs. Operating with the targeting guidelines and other
conditions of the wholesale loan agreements between the Wholesale Banks and Retails Banks, the actual lending
methods used for retail loans under GDFF financing will follow each Retail Bank’s operational structure and network,
rural and agriculture finance strategy, and their digital tools development approach.
187. Retail Banks for each country will be selected after programme effectiveness as a joint activity between the
Wholesale Banks and DaIMA/IFAD. Key criteria in the selection of Retail Banks include: (i) operate under prudential
supervision with solid institutional and financial conditions as per central bank standards, and prudentially supervised,
(ii) strong interest in financing operations of rural small and medium size businesses, (iii) corporate objective to develop
and scale-up the bank’s climate finance operations, (iv) an appropriate network to provide services in the DaIMA
programme area in the target country, and (v) a strong expressed interest to partner with DaIMA in the planned dairy
sector financing operation and co-finance 25 percent of each investment. During the period leading to DaIMA
effectiveness, the DaIMA PCUs and the Wholesale Banks will closely co-operate to ensure a smooth take-off of the
programme activities. To support and co-ordinate the start-up phase, experienced Climate Finance Specialists will be
recruited and hosted by each Wholesale Bank (financed by the TA Sub-component 3.2). At the same time the DaIMA
PCU and the Wholesale Banks would finalise the preparations for the selection and training of appropriate Retail
Banks to take part in the GDFF lending and develop the framework and action plans for capacity building at both the
Retail Bank and the borrowing SME level. Each Retail Bank selection will also go through the IFAD no-objection
process.
188. Targeted Borrowers and Key Lending Products. As indicated, the GDFF lending operations under
Component 3 target medium-sized farmer-allied dairy value chain actors, including aggregators and processors, agro-
input and technology providers, and mature dairy farmers’ cooperatives. In all four targeted countries, various projects
supported by donors including IFAD have special lending windows for individual dairy farmers operating in these dairy
value chains. Furthermore, the proposed large Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism (ARCAFIM)
covers the same countries as DaIMA and targets smallholder farmers with CC adaptation finance services including

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
B
the dairy sector. The GDFF financing support to dairy value chain companies will be planned and operated in close
co-operation with these other green financing interventions in the four target countries.
189. Based on the market and demand surveys conducted during the DaIMA design (see attachments to this
Funding Proposal), the following two types of lending approaches/products can be included in GDFF lending,
depending on the scale and maturity of the dairy value chain operations of the borrower (more information on the type
of client companies for each loan category in the Feasibility Study in Annex 2):
190. Green Dairy Investment Partnership Loan Product. These are longer-term partnerships between
mature, well-organised dairy businesses and the GDFF Retail Banks. The GDFF will offer tailored lending
packages to dairy companies at favourable interest rates, with substantial TA to develop the companies. The
financed greening opportunities could include - but are not limited to - to proactive expansion and modernising
of the smallholder outgrower networks of the companies, supporting smallholder farmers to access more
productive cows or energy-efficient fodder, solarising cooling or processing equipment, and developing the
milk transport networks. These investments would require long-term debt finance, supported by working capital
injections. While the exact loan conditions will depend on the identified needs and objectives of the businesses,
the GDFF loans are expected to range between US$ 250,000 and US$ 550,000 with investment loan tenors
of between 5 and 9 years, with the average loan size at US$ 400,000. Eligible businesses will need to exhibit
clear ambitions to invest, develop or distribute climate-smart technologies and productivity-enhancing
technologies, and have a track record and solid plans for intensifying their smallholder partnerships. Based on
the market surveys, it is anticipated that businesses in this borrowing category will be with annual turnover
above US$ 800,000, and investment decisions will be based on a thorough credit assessment by the Retail
Banks using lending criteria agreed for the GDFF operations.
191. Green Dairy Loan Product. These are shorter-term, smaller-sized working capital or capital
expenditure loans that seek to meet a specific financing need of businesses of smaller SMEs and well-
organised dairy cooperatives. The Retail Banks in GDFF will provide standardised Green Dairy Loan Products
with the maximum loan size at US$ 250,000, an estimated average ticket size of US$ 50,000, and loan tenor
of up to three years. Similarly to the Green Dairy Investment Partnerships loans, eligible businesses will need
to exhibit clear ambitions to invest, develop or distribute climate-smart technologies, productivity-enhancing
technologies and have a track record and clear plans of strong smallholder partnerships. However, recognising
that the majority of the dairy sector SMEs will not be operating at a significant scale, these Dairy Loan Products
will target smaller businesses, likely with an annual turnover of less than US$ 800,000. Investees will be eligible
to receive pre-investment TA to translate investment needs into investment requests, and they can be
connected to other DaIMA components to access post-investment TA support as required.
192. End-use of GDFF Finance and Green Dairy Taxonomy. To achieve the development objectives and impact
of DaIMA and its Component 3, it is critically important that there is a clear joint understanding and agreement on what
types of investments can be considered for the end-use of green dairy finance. A significant amount of work has been
carried out in recent years on rural green finance taxonomy in East Africa, particularly during the IFAD/GCF design
process for ARCAFIM and during the start-up phase of the Green Financing Facility of IFAD’s Rural Kenya Financing
Facility project. These taxonomy development processes, including for dairy and livestock sectors, has progressed
through CC risk assessment and adaptation and mitigation models mapping to the assessment of the bankability of
the related investment options for the private sector financial institution implementation. Furthermore, there are various
other green finance taxonomy policy processes ongoing in the targeted countries.
193. The Taxonomy of investments for the GDFF lending will build on the findings of the Market Study carried
out as a part of the DaIMA design (full Study attached to the Funding Proposal), and will include both agri-input supply
investments (e.g. cooling tank producers, AI service producers, dairy meal producers, PV/solar solution producers,
agri-fintech providers, fodder producers, and biodigester providers) and investments in technologies that reduce GHG
emissions and improve productivity (e.g. milking machines, solar milk coolers, bio-digesters, milk pasteurizers, UTH
treatment equipment, milk transfer tanks, renewable energy solutions and water recycling technologies), as well as
biochar production.
194. The guidelines on appropriate dairy sector greening options for private sector finance in the participating four
countries will be included in the Loan Agreements and Implementation Guidelines of the GDFF credit lines. They will
form a core part of the training and capacity building activities with the participating banks and the borrowing SMEs
(see more below in Sub-Component 3.2). As a key development objective during the DaIMA implementation, the
development of the dairy sector green financing taxonomy will continue, based on the documented experiences from

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
B
the GDFF credit line operations. The target will be to distribute the results for wider audience, to support the
mainstreaming of green finance activities in private banking institutions in Africa. It should be noted that the parties
are the PDBs as lenders and retail financial institutions as the recipients of the loans.
195. Lending Terms to End-Users. The DaIMA/GDFF financing package will proactively encourage the Retail
Banks to expand their operations in green dairy financing with the programme target group using appropriate and
favourable loan products. The long loan periods of the IFAD loans to the Governments and via the Governments to
the GDFF implementing partners will make it possible for the Retail Banks to offer appropriate loan and grace periods
to support the SME investments. This will be important particularly in innovative capital investments that improve the
CC resilience and mitigation but require longer repayment periods to attract investors from the business community.
196. The GDFF financing chain is illustrated in the diagram (Figure 17b). Concerning the interest rates throughout
this GDFF financing chain from GCF to end-borrower loans, (i) GCF's USD-lending highly concessional terms (0.25
percent annual interest rate including fee) apply for Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, and the less concessional (1.25
percent annual interest rate including fee) apply for Kenya; (ii) The estimated interest rate on DaIMA funding from the
Governments to the GDFF Wholesale Banks, before final negotiations, is projected at 2-5 percent on local currency
per annum fixed over the programme period; (iii) With this low price for on-lending capital, it is expected that the
interest rates offered by the Wholesale Banks to the Retail Banks would be at the range of 5-8 percent on local
currency per annum; (iv) This will enable the Retail Banks’ pricing to end borrowers to be highly competitive, below
the lowest market-based interest rates charged by commercial banks for this type of loans in the target countries.
Figure 17b. GDFF financial chain diagram

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
B
To define the appropriate market-based interest rate for GDFF lending at SME level, in collaboration with the
GCF/IFAD ARCAFIM project, an interest rate survey will be carried out periodically during the programme
implementation, IFAD annual DaIMA performance assessments will include a review of the materialised GDFF interest
rate structure and provide recommendations for any required revision of the GDFF interest rates for the future
operations. To support the start-up of GDFF, the existing ARCAFIM interest rate survey summary table (Table 2b)
gives indication of the region's interest rate levels, and the full survey is available at the ARCAFIM Funding Proposal
annexes. It should be noted, the lowest indicated interest rates are supported by blended finance instruments similar
to what DaIMA GDFF proposes.
Table 2b. Interest rates
Output 3.2: Capacity Building for Green Dairy Investments
197. GDFF will proactively use the TA facility to (i) build the capacities of the Wholesale Banks and Retail Banks to
understand and implement green dairy sector projects, (ii) maximise both the impact and returns of the financed
investments by enhancing the capacity of borrowers to implement effective strategies, improve their operational
efficiencies, and achieve sustainable growth; and (iii) support the establishment of an effective M&E system and impact
assessment surveys,to enable reporting of the GDFF progress, results, lessons learnt and best practices. In doing so,
the TA facility will address non-financial barriers currently preventing greater climate-smart financing in the GDFF
target countries.
198. The technical support activities of Sub-Component 3.2 with both the participating banks and the SMEs will be
managed and implemented by Technical Assistance Service Providers, to be identified and selected through regional
competitive bidding by the EEs through the PCUs in each of the four DaIMA countries and supervised by IFAD through
the standard no-objection process. The TA will be guided by a Green Dairy Finance Lending Toolkit.
199. Operating with a total TA budget of US$ 10 million (financed by a GCF grant), output 3.2 includes three
activities: (a) Awareness Raising and Capacity Development of Participating Banks in Green Dairy Finance, (b) Green
Dairy Investment Support Services to SMEs, and (c) M&E system and household surveys and evaluations.
200. Activity 3.2.1 Awareness Raising and Capacity Development of Participating Banks in Green Dairy
Finance. The activity will provide top end expertise to the national Wholesale Banks and their Retail Bank partners,
to ensure that the credit provided with GSFF funding will deliver real, effective, and transformational adaptation and
mitigation impact and is channelled to the intended purposes and beneficiaries. Thus, the criteria for the selection of
the beneficiaries can be found in the feasibility study (Annex 2, section 5). The participating Wholesale and Retail
Banks will be sensitized to the importance of adaptation and mitigation taxonomy and targets and receive a demand-
driven package of technical support and innovation services, with the aim to develop and offer appropriate green dairy
financial services, manage risks of this lending, and report on portfolio performance and impact. Initiation of the
Technical Assistance to the Retail Banks is a condition to access to GDFF financing for on-lending.
201. Before the GDFF lending operations commence, the Wholesale Banks will receive international and local TA
support to introduce green dairy wholesale financing products into their mainstream financing operations. The
Wholesale Banks will also receive systematic support to establish effective GDFF management systems, to coordinate
the programme implementation and to report on the performance. Through cost-shared continuous TA, in medium
term, the aim is that DaIMA Wholesale Banks will strengthen their internal capacities to independently mobilize and

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
To define the appropriate market-based interest rate for GDFF lending at SME level, in collaboration with the
GCF/IFAD ARCAFIM project, an interest rate survey will be carried out periodically during the programme
implementation, IFAD annual DaIMA performance assessments will include a review of the materialised GDFF interest
rate structure and provide recommendations for any required revision of the GDFF interest rates for the future
operations. To support the start-up of GDFF, the existing ARCAFIM interest rate survey summary table (Table 2b)
gives indication of the region's interest rate levels, and the full survey is available at the ARCAFIM Funding Proposal
annexes. It should be noted, the lowest indicated interest rates are supported by blended finance instruments similar
to what DaIMA GDFF proposes.

Table 2b. Interest rates

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
B
implement similar green finance projects to support green transformation in dairy and other sectors of the rural
economy.
202. Participating Retail Banks involved in GDFF financing activities will receive technical support packages tailored
for their specific needs under green dairy finance. A preliminary demand analysis for the services was conducted
during the DaIMA design and earlier, during the ARCAFIM design in the same countries, to enable TA action planning
and detailed budgeting. The support will be launched against expressions of demand by Retail Banks after the DaIMA
start-up. Potential technical support areas will include: (i) development of green dairy finance strategy and costing of
its implementation, (ii) development or strengthening of green dairy lending products targeting medium and small
businesses, (iii) support to rural outreach and social inclusion strategies, including CC adaptation and mitigation
finance advisory capacities, (iv) strengthening of Digital Finance Services by inclusion of functions for climate finance,
and (v) support to improved Management Information Systems (MIS) to follow up and report progress achieved in
GDFF lending. Furthermore, the PCU experts, in particular the Climate Finance experts, as well as the Wholesale
Bank will work with the Retail Banks to develop technical assistance packages to be delivered to small and medium
dairy businesses with GDFF grant financing.
203. Activity 3.2.2. Green Dairy Investment Support Services to SMEs. The aim of the GDFF capacity building
services to potential and actual SME borrowers is to strengthen the knowledge of rural businesses of viable CC
mitigation and adaptation options, benefits, and related financial services, and to develop their business planning,
investment start-up, and operational and financial management capacity. These actions aim to increase the demand
for green dairy finance and improve the investment success rate, at the same time lowering the investment risk for the
Retail Banks. With this TA support, bankability assessments and the related loan applications can be completed for
agribusinesses, helping to inform the Retail Banks of the real investment opportunities and risks. The capacity building
packages for dairy sector SMEs will be demand-driven and tailor-made, with the aim to ensure that GDFF financing
will target well planned, productive, and screened investments in the dairy sector, to ensure both the economic growth
impact and the highest possible positive impact on climate change resilience and mitigation.
204. Activity 3.2.3. M&E, household surveys and evaluations. In order to assess the outputs, outcomes and
impacts of the Line of Credit and the TA activities, a dedicated M&E system, incorporating inputs from all partners, will
be established. In addition, one midline and one endline household survey will be conducted, along with collection of
other relevant M&E data as part of in-depth evaluations at the mid-term point to allow for course corrections, as well
as the completion point to assess effectiveness and capture learning.
B.4. Implementation arrangements
Accredited Entity
205. IFAD will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the Programme. In this capacity, IFAD will be responsible for the
overall management of the Programme, including: (i) all aspects of Programme appraisal; (ii) administrative, fiduciary
and technical oversight and supervision throughout the implementation of the Programme towards achievement of the
expected Outputs and Outcomes; and (iii) Programme closure and final evaluation. IFAD will carry out these
responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions set out in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)
between IFAD and the GCF, from relevant offices and divisions in IFAD Headquarters located in Rome, Italy (HQ),
the IFAD East and Southern Africa regional office located in Nairobi, Kenya and the IFAD Country Offices in Kenya,
Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania, and Uganda.
206. To fulfil the AE functions, IFAD will set up a dedicated Programme Task Force (PTF) consisting of IFAD experts
from within its HQ, regional and country offices.
Regional Programme Governance
207. The Regional Steering Committee (RSC) will be constituted by Permanent Secretaries from the Executing
Entities. Each national project steering committee will appoint 6 members to the RSC, including 3-4 Government
representatives and 1 or 2 representatives of beneficiaries and private sector or civil society. The RSC will meet
annually, on rotational basis between countries. Chairmanship will be rotational for one year period, entailing preparing
for the physical RSC meeting in terms of agenda, reports to be reviewed and other preparatory/secretarial functions
as required. A knowledge management event for technical officers will be organized in conjunction with the meeting.
More frequent virtual meetings may be held on a needs basis. The RSC will specifically oversee (i) the progress

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
implement similar green finance projects to support green transformation in dairy and other sectors of the rural
economy.
202. Participating Retail Banks involved in GDFF financing activities will receive technical support packages tailored
for their specific needs under green dairy finance. A preliminary demand analysis for the services was conducted
during the DaIMA design and earlier, during the ARCAFIM design in the same countries, to enable TA action planning
and detailed budgeting. The support will be launched against expressions of demand by Retail Banks after the DaIMA
start-up. Potential technical support areas will include: (i) development of green dairy finance strategy and costing of
its implementation, (ii) development or strengthening of green dairy lending products targeting medium and small
businesses, (iii) support to rural outreach and social inclusion strategies, including CC adaptation and mitigation
finance advisory capacities, (iv) strengthening of Digital Finance Services by inclusion of functions for climate finance,
and (v) support to improved Management Information Systems (MIS) to follow up and report progress achieved in
GDFF lending. Furthermore, the PCU experts, in particular the Climate Finance experts, as well as the Wholesale
Bank will work with the Retail Banks to develop technical assistance packages to be delivered to small and medium
dairy businesses with GDFF grant financing.
203. Activity 3.2.2. Green Dairy Investment Support Services to SMEs. The aim of the GDFF capacity building
services to potential and actual SME borrowers is to strengthen the knowledge of rural businesses of viable CC
mitigation and adaptation options, benefits, and related financial services, and to develop their business planning,
investment start-up, and operational and financial management capacity. These actions aim to increase the demand
for green dairy finance and improve the investment success rate, at the same time lowering the investment risk for the
Retail Banks. With this TA support, bankability assessments and the related loan applications can be completed for
agribusinesses, helping to inform the Retail Banks of the real investment opportunities and risks. The capacity building
packages for dairy sector SMEs will be demand-driven and tailor-made, with the aim to ensure that GDFF financing
will target well planned, productive, and screened investments in the dairy sector, to ensure both the economic growth
impact and the highest possible positive impact on climate change resilience and mitigation.
204. Activity 3.2.3. M&E, household surveys and evaluations. In order to assess the outputs, outcomes and
impacts of the Line of Credit and the TA activities, a dedicated M&E system, incorporating inputs from all partners, will
be established. In addition, one midline and one endline household survey will be conducted, along with collection of
other relevant M&E data as part of in-depth evaluations at the mid-term point to allow for course corrections, as well
as the completion point to assess effectiveness and capture learning.
B.4. Implementation arrangements
Accredited Entity
205. IFAD will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the Programme. In this capacity, IFAD will be responsible for the
overall management of the Programme, including: (i) all aspects of Programme appraisal; (ii) administrative, fiduciary
and technical oversight and supervision throughout the implementation of the Programme towards achievement of the
expected Outputs and Outcomes; and (iii) Programme closure and final evaluation. IFAD will carry out these
responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions set out in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)
between IFAD and the GCF, from relevant offices and divisions in IFAD Headquarters located in Rome, Italy (HQ),
the IFAD East and Southern Africa regional office located in Nairobi, Kenya and the IFAD Country Offices in Kenya,
Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania, and Uganda.
206. To fulfil the AE functions, IFAD will set up a dedicated Programme Task Force (PTF) consisting of IFAD experts
from within its HQ, regional and country offices.
Regional Programme Governance
207. The Regional Steering Committee (RSC) will be constituted by Permanent Secretaries from the Executing
Entities. Each national project steering committee will appoint 6 members to the RSC, including 3-4 Government
representatives and 1 or 2 representatives of beneficiaries and private sector or civil society. The RSC will meet
annually, on rotational basis between countries. Chairmanship will be rotational for one year period, entailing preparing
for the physical RSC meeting in terms of agenda, reports to be reviewed and other preparatory/secretarial functions
as required. A knowledge management event for technical officers will be organized in conjunction with the meeting.
More frequent virtual meetings may be held on a needs basis. The RSC will specifically oversee (i) the progress

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
B
realized of regional aspects of the Programme and that regional added value is achieved; (ii) timeliness and quality of
reporting to GCF, both consolidated annual work plan and budgets (AWPBs), progress reports and M&E reports; (iii)
collaboration and oversight with ILRI, who will be providing technical assistance to all four countries and support
regional initiatives around MRV reporting, and (iv) regional M&E, knowledge management and reporting activities, to
ensure that, for example, data collection is carried out in a streamlined manner and that coherent and high quality
programme level reports are being produced for reporting to IFAD and GCF. The RSC will specifically monitor progress
on Output 1.1 (regional policy harmonization and dairy market integration, harmonization of dairy market protection),
Output 1.3 (MRV GHG capacity building) and Output 1.4 (regional exchange platform, regional knowledge
management and exchange). Regarding Output 1.4, the RSC will oversee the development of learning materials and
knowledge products and support the establishment of a knowledge platform specific to each country. This platform
will provide opportunities for exchange visits (farmers, private sector, and ministries), development and sharing of
studies, technical work, trainings, and financial initiatives between the four countries.
208. A senior regional coordinator and policy dialogue expert would be recruited in each country, with similar TORs
and responsibilities to support the functions of the RSC and any regional activities. As such, the group of the four
regional coordinators will act as a secretariate to the rotating RCS, with particular focus on activities with a regional
focus and where regional harmonization is beneficial.
National Programme Steering Committee
209. In each country, a National Programme Steering Committee (PSC) will be established. The PSCs will: (i)
provide guidance and direction to the Programme at national level, ensuring that it remains within specified constraints,
and escalate issues to RSC as needed (in case a national PSC decision has implications for the strategy of other
countries); (ii) address issues related to the Programme raised by the national Programme Coordinator; (iii) monitor
Programme risks and the effectiveness of mitigation measures, and provide guidance on emerging risks of the
Programme, and agree on possible countermeasures and management actions to address specific risks; (iv) review
the progress and effectiveness of the Programme, and provide guidance and recommendations to ensure that the
agreed deliverables are satisfactorily produced in accordance with plans; (v) review and approve the AWPB and
provide strategic guidance for its implementation; (vi) appraise the annual report on the implementation of the
Programme, including the quality assessment report; (vii) make recommendations for subsequent work plans to build
on achievements and address any shortcomings; (viii) provide ad hoc guidance and advice in exceptional situations;
(ix) ensure coordination/ synergies with other Programmes and Projects focusing on sustainable livestock in the same
areas, and (x) identify lessons learned and good practices. In each country, the PSCs will have to meet formally at
least once every 12 months. Regular meetings will be organized by the National Programme Coordinator;
extraordinary meetings may be requested by any of its members. The composition of each PSC is presented below.
210. In Kenya, the same PSC as INReMP will be used. The Inter-Ministerial/Agency PSC under the leadership of
the Permanent Secretary (PS), SDLD will provide overall policy guidance to implementation. The other members of
the PSC will come from the National Treasury and Economic Planning; State Department for Cooperatives; State
Department of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development; State Department of Environment and Climate
Change; the Agricultural Finance Cooperation, the National Environmental Management Authority as NDA, KDB,
KALRO, and the Council of Governors.
211. In Rwanda, the same PSC as RDDP-2 will be used. The PSC will be chaired by the PS of MINAGRI, co-
chaired by the Director General of RAB. The Programme will add additional members (e.g. Ministry of Finance and
Economic planning, Development Bank of Rwanda, the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority as NDA,
Meteorology services, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Infrastructure, REMA, RNDP, private sector, civil society)
to the RDDP-2 PSC.
212. In Tanzania, the same PSC as C-SDTP will be used. It will be chaired by Permanent Secretary of the MLF,
and co-chaired by Principal Secretary, MAINL, Zanzibar. It will be composed of the Permanent Secretaries of the
Ministries of Finance and Planning, the Vice President’s Office (VPO) and the President Office-Regional
Administration and Local Government (TAMISEMI) for Mainland; and the First Vice President Office in Zanzibar (VP1),
Ministry of Finance and Planning President’s Office for Zanzibar, the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank, TDB,
as well as representatives of private sector Official Seed Certification Institute and farmers’ organizations. Additional
members could be added (e.g. Ministry of Environment as NDA, Meteorological Authority, private sector, civil society).
213. In Uganda, the same PSC as ReLIV will be used. It will be co-chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the EE
(MAAIF) and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED), the GCF National Designated
Authority (NDA). The PSC will comprise of the Director of Animal Resources (DAR), Executive Directors of MAAIF

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
B
Agencies (DDA, the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC&DB) and NARO); Uganda
Development Bank, Director responsible for climate change from the Ministry of Water and Environment as NDA,
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, MoLG and UNMA.
National Executing Entities (EEs)
214. The EEs (or “lead agencies”): in Kenya National Treasury and Economic Planning, MoALD and the Agriculture
Finance Cooperation; in Tanzania, the Ministry of Finance, MLF and the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank; in
Rwanda, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, RAB under MINAGRI and Development Bank of Rwanda;
and in Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, MAAIF and Uganda Development Bank
(for more information see section A.20)
215. In areas where international technical expertise and regional experience is needed, one or more Centers of
Excellence and International Organizations (such as ILRI) would be recruited as service providers by each EE in each
country, with preference to those that have proven capacity and regional presence to ensure regionality of the
interventions.
216. Flow of funds and legal arrangements are described in section G.3 and flow of funds for each country will be as
follows (Figure 17c):
Figure 17c. Flow of funds in the project countries

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
B

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
B
National Programme Coordination and Management
217. In the four countries, the Programme will be managed by national Programme Coordination Units (PCUs),
either stand-alone for the Programme or jointly for other projects or programmes, comprising competitively recruited
Government staff with appropriate project management skills, subject to IFAD No Objection at the key stages of
developing terms of reference, shortlisting, interviewing and contracting. These units will be responsible for overall
coordination and day-to-day management of the Programme, as well as facilitating a conducive environment.
Specifically, the units’ responsibilities will include: (i) development of AWPBs; (ii) the coordination of Programme
activities implementation among EEs and implementing agencies and partners; (iii) the development of operational
strategies and establishment of effective tools (e.g. MIS systems) for Programme implementation, (iv) the fiduciary
management of the Programme; (v) the mobilization, contracting and coordination of implementation partners (vi) the
monitoring, evaluation, knowledge management and learning (M&E–ML) -including dissemination of lessons learned
and good practices and providing guidance for effective Programme implementation, (vii) management of the
environmental and social management framework (ESMF), (viii) the procurement of goods and services in accordance
with financing agreements, (ix) communication and visibility of the Programme.
218. In Kenya (Figure 18), at national level, a PCU will be established within SDLD in the MoALD. To steer
implementation at County level in accordance with the Government decentralization principles, a County Programme
Coordination Committee (CPCC) and a County Programme Implementation Team (CPIT) will be established with the
responsibility to steer and lead implementation within each County, in accordance with the MoUs established with the
national PCU. The CPCC and CPIT will also ensure coordination with other Projects, for example synergies with the
“Transforming Livelihoods through Climate Resilient, Low Carbon, Sustainable Agricultural Value Chains in the Lake
Region Economic Bloc” Project proposed by FAO to the GCF. At the sub-county level, a Subcounty Programme
Implementation Team (SCPIT) composed of officials from the sub-counties of the relevant departments, as outlined
for the CPIT will be established to coordinate the implementation of activities.
219. In Rwanda (Figure 19), the Programme will be an integral part of the RDDP-2. It be implemented through the
SPIU under the authority of RAB. The SPIU will build on its long-standing partnership with IFAD. At local level, the
Programme will create partnerships with the Local Government Authorities in each targeted District, building on the
existing networks established through the ongoing RDDP-2.

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
B
220. In Tanzania (Figure 20), the Programme is an integral part of the C-SDTP, which will establish a Programme
Management Unit (PMU) withing the MLF. At the District level, the Programme will adhere to the existing C-SDTP
structures by working with the District Facilitation team. The activities will be carried out by implementing partners
contracted by the PMU.
221. In Uganda (Figure 21), the Programme will be an integral part of the ReLIV project under MAAIF and DaIMA
will be managed within the same Programme Management Unit (PMU) under MAAIF. At district level, a District
Coordination and Implementation Unit will be formed and chaired by the Chief Administrative Officer. Members will
include relevant Departments such as Production and Marketing, Veterinary, Environment, the Department
responsible for gender, youth and social development, representatives of farmers’ organization, the private sector,
and NGOs.
222. The detailed responsibilities and mandates of the partners, as well as composition of the teams involved in
the coordination and management of the Programme are presented in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2, Chapter 7).
Figure 18. Programme implementation and coordination arrangements in Kenya
Figure 19. Programme implementation and coordination arrangements in Rwanda

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
B
Figure 20. Programme implementation and coordination arrangements in Tanzania
Figure 21. Programme implementation and coordination arrangements in Uganda
223. Implementation of Component 3. This component will be implemented as four separate lines of credit in
the target countries, under the coordination and supervision of DaIMA regional management and the National
PCUs. The green dairy sector financing operations will be managed by a local Public Development Bank (PDB),
which will act as a Wholesale Bank for the GDFF intervention. The Wholesale Banks will at national level manage the
financial DaIMA services to the programme target group based on eligibility criteria and other terms and conditions,
agreed upon in the programme design and included in the financing agreements between IFAD, the Governments,
and the Wholesale Banks. The Wholesale Banks will report quarterly, semi-annually, and annually on the financing
progress of GDFF to the PCUs and IFAD in each country based on a pre-defined reporting schedule, indicators, and
formats.
224. From the bulk loans provided by the Wholesale Banks, on-lending to the eligible borrowers will be conducted
and managed by Retail Banks, which can be commercial banks or such microfinance banks and commercial
development banks that are prudentially supervised. Operating with the targeting guidelines and other conditions of
the wholesale loan agreements between the Wholesale Banks and Retails Banks, the actual lending methods used
for retail loans under GDFF financing will follow each Retail Bank’s operational structure and network, rural and
agriculture finance strategy, and their digital tools development approach.
225. The technical support activities of Sub-Component 3.2 with both the participating banks and the
borrowing SMEs will be managed and implemented by experienced Technical Assistance Service Providers,
to be identified and selected through regional competitive bidding organised by DaIMA PMU staff for each of
the four DaIMA countries and supervised by IFAD through the standard no-objection process. Practices used
and experiences gained from using private TA service providers in the four target countries in IFAD-supported rural
finance programmes will be fully utilised when organising the bidding processes. In the planned ARCAFIM operation,

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
B
mapping of service providers with direct experience in climate finance TA provision will provide guidance to this
selections process.
Partnerships
226. During implementation the Programme will involve relevant and specialized government agencies, academia
and research institutions. Several partners (NGOs/ non-profit organizations, service providers, private sector (including
informal/formal milk collectors and processors), financial intermediaries, ILRI, FAO, and other international
development organizations, etc.) will also participate in the Programme to ensure complementarity with their activities,
provide technical assistance and/or the provision of goods, works and services. The PCUs, on behalf of the EEs, will
enter into Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) and/or subsidiary agreements with the implementing partners (also
referred as “project parties”) for implementation of the respective activities. Pre-identified Government and private
entities are provided below; others will be identified and/or procured on a competitive basis, based on performance,
needs and comparative advantage. The list of implementing partners is described in the components, in the Feasibility
Study.
227. In Kenya, implementation will be supported by KDB, the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research
Organization (KALRO), the Kenya Animal Genetic Resources Centre (KAGRC), among others.
228. In Uganda, implementation will be supported by DDA, NAGRC&DB, NARO, the Ministry of Local Government
(MoLG), universities, private sector and NGOs, amongst others.
229. In Rwanda, implementation will be supported by RAB, RNDP, REMA, RCVD, the Ministry of Environment, the
University of Rwanda; Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences (UR-CAVM), among others.
230. In Tanzania, implementation will be supported by TDB, TALIRI, the Vice President Office, Regional
Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG), the Ministry of Lands, the National Land Use commission (MoL
NLUC), the Ministry of Water (MoW), the Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Special Groups, NGOs,
universities, the Livestock Training Agency.
Programme Co-financing
231. The co-financiers (Table 3a) are responsible for reporting of co-financing activities and the amount of their
disbursement to the AE in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the GCF policies as well as in AMA, the
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between IFAD and GCF and the co-financing agreement signed between the co-
financier and IFAD in its capacity of AE. The amounts of co-financing are detailed in Section C.1.
232. In Kenya, the Programme will be co-financed by INReMP to the amount of US$24.75 million from IFAD. IFAD
funds will be used to cofinance Component 1 and 2, as well as Programme management, and M&E.
233. In Rwanda, the Programme will be co-financed by RDDP-2 for US$ 26.61 million provided by IFAD. In addition,
Government of Rwanda will provide US$14.75 million cofinancing to Outputs 2.1 and 2.2. IFAD funds will be used to
cofinance Component 1, 2 and 3, as well as for Programme management and M&E. This will include: under
Component 1 the activities related to the development of veterinary and extension services, dairy consumption and
food safety aspects, and knowledge management. Under Component 2, IFAD funds will be used to finance
cooperative development and business linkages. Under Component 3, credit lines will be provided to finance Output
3.1.
234. In Tanzania, the Programme will be co-financed by the C-SDTP in an amount of US$ 50.81 million provided
by IFAD. These IFAD funds will co-finance Components 1 and 2, as well as for Programme management and M&E.
This will include: under Output 1.1, the activities related to policy review, stakeholder participation, as well as dairy
consumption and food safety aspects; under Output 1.2 the activities related to the development of veterinary and
extension services (except for the development of specific training modules and training of facilitators); under Output
2.1, the development of dairy cooperatives (except for the activity related to renewable energy); under Output 2.2, the
vaccination campaign, as well as the investments in improved cowsheds. Programme Management will be financed
using IFAD and Government Funds.
235. In Uganda, the Programme will be co-financed by the IFAD-funded ReLIV project for a total amount of
US$ 94.23 million. The IFAD proceeds will be used to cofinance Component 1 and 2, as well as Programme
management and M&E. In addition, IFAD will cofinance Output 3.1.

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
B
Table 3a. Programme activities and sub-activities by financier in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request
236. The Programme will be implemented in four countries in East Africa, three of which are classified Least
Developed Countries (LDCs). They have limited budgetary space to devote to the public service activities of a
Programme of this nature. These LDCs are the most vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, as their
economic development, growth and food security are highly dependent on climate-sensitive sectors, such as livestock
and dairy. The wars in Ukraine, Lebanon, Palestine and Syria have deeply affected these countries, through
contractions in supply and demand both in domestic and export markets. The public debt-to-GNI ratio has risen
considerably in all four countries. Half of public debt is external. Between 2015 and 2021, external debt relative to
gross national income GNI (%) increased from 31.3 to 37.9 percent in Kenya; from 30 to 48.3 percent in Uganda; from

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
Table 3a. Programme activities and sub-activities by financier in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request
236. The Programme will be implemented in four countries in East Africa, three of which are classified Least
Developed Countries (LDCs). They have limited budgetary space to devote to the public service activities of a
Programme of this nature. These LDCs are the most vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, as their
economic development, growth and food security are highly dependent on climate-sensitive sectors, such as livestock
and dairy. The wars in Ukraine, Lebanon, Palestine and Syria have deeply affected these countries, through
contractions in supply and demand both in domestic and export markets. The public debt-to-GNI ratio has risen
considerably in all four countries. Half of public debt is external. Between 2015 and 2021, external debt relative to
gross national income GNI (%) increased from 31.3 to 37.9 percent in Kenya; from 30 to 48.3 percent in Uganda; from

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
B
41.2 to 82.9 percent in Rwanda; and from 39 to 42.2 percent in Tanzania87. High debt limits their ability to finance the
investments to meet climate change mitigation and adaptation needs in the dairy sector.
237. The implementing of NDCs, NAPs and NAMAs will remain slow without GCF support, due to few alternative
options for climate finance. Low-income Countries received only 8 percent of all climate finance, compared to 70
percent invested in Middle Income Countries (UNEP 2022 Adaptation Gap Report). In addition, according to the
Climate Policy Initiative, climate finance in Africa stands at US$ 29.5 billion annually, well below the US$ 277 billion
needed each year for countries to meet their NDCs by 2030. In East Africa, annual flows amount to US$ 10 billion
against a demand of US$ 82 billion. Climate finance on the continent is more balanced between adaptation and
mitigation than in other regions: mitigation activities amounted for 49 percent (US$ 14.6 billion) of climate finance
flows, compared to 39 percent (US$ 11.4 billion) for adaptation and 12 percent (USD 3.5 billion) for activities
generating dual benefits. Adaptation finance would need to be increased six-fold to meet the estimated annual needs
of US$ 62 billion. Private sector investments, which are urgently needed to scale adaptation solutions, accounted for
only 14 percent (US$ 4.2 billion) of climate finance in Africa. This is lower than in other regions and was invested
primarily in mitigation projects (81 per cent)88.
238. The public service activities of the Programme – e.g., regulatory reform, improvements in veterinary and
extension services, knowledge management, capacity development – will be financed by GCF grants. The proposed
level of GCF grant support is highly justified due to the significant unmet demand for CCA&M financing among the
target groups of the Programme, and the need to develop new technical approaches that can be replicated elsewhere
to significantly increase private sector participation in the dairy sector.
239. Furthermore, as noted in the Market Study (Appendix to Feasibility Study), the adoption of low-carbon and
climate-resilient solutions and practices by dairy SMEs is constrained by challenges in access to finance paired with
technical barriers (Table 3b). Dairy value chain actors are typically cash constrained that makes them reliant on debt
capital to invest in climate-smart technologies. The Market Study finds there is a lack of affordable debt within the
market with high collateral needs that smaller businesses cannot fulfil. Alongside this, cash-constrained businesses
are more likely to prioritise investments that improve productivity over climate mitigation or adaptation. The GDFF is
designed to overcome these challenges through its affordable local currency loan funding, providing result-based
incentives to businesses to invest in climate-smart technologies in the form of concessional loans.
Table 3b. Summary of barriers to accessing finance for climate-smart practices and technologies and GDFF’s response
Barrier GDFF’s solution
Real and perceived high risks of financing
investments into dairy value chain actors lead to • Impact-focused investment loans with a
Financial
high costs of borrowing passed onto the borrower mandate to invest in dairy value chain actors89
barriers
through high interest rates and high collateral • Competitive interest rates
requirements
• GDFF Green dairy loans are developed in
collaboration with businesses to ensure debt
Financial products are standard and not tailored to
financing terms enable achievement of long-
the needs of the dairy value chain actors
term greening ambitions, with adequate loan
and grace periods
• Longer tenor loans with repayment holidays to
Enterprises are operating at low margins with reduce immediate burden of repayment for
cashflow challenges that reduce project businesses. Two kinds of products, smaller
invertibility with low ability to repay loans for shorter-term investment and longer-
term holistic greening partnerships
Internationally financed operators often do not
• Lending in local currency to all SME
offer a local currency debt option. Especially
borrowers, with the GDFF absorbing the costs
smaller entities cannot absorb the costs of FX
of FX hedging.
volatility if they are selling in domestic markets.
87 See The World Bank, international debt statistics,
https://datatopics.worldbank.org/debt/ids/countryanalytical/tza/counterpartarea/wld
88 ARCAFIM Funding Proposal. gcf-b37-02-add11-funding-proposal-package-fp220.pdf (greenclimate.fund)
89 There is currently no dairy-specific funding facility in the market focussing on green investments direct to businesses specifically.
Recently Pearl Capital Partners have launched a fund lending to SACCOs and MFIs in diary.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
 | Barrier | GDFF’s solution
Financial
barriers | Real and perceived high risks of financing
investments into dairy value chain actors lead to
high costs of borrowing passed onto the borrower
through high interest rates and high collateral
requirements | • Impact-focused investment loans with a
mandate to invest in dairy value chain actors89
• Competitive interest rates
 | Financial products are standard and not tailored to
the needs of the dairy value chain actors | • GDFF Green dairy loans are developed in
collaboration with businesses to ensure debt
financing terms enable achievement of long-
term greening ambitions, with adequate loan
and grace periods
 | Enterprises are operating at low margins with
cashflow challenges that reduce project
invertibility with low ability to repay | • Longer tenor loans with repayment holidays to
reduce immediate burden of repayment for
businesses. Two kinds of products, smaller
loans for shorter-term investment and longer-
term holistic greening partnerships
 | Internationally financed operators often do not
offer a local currency debt option. Especially
smaller entities cannot absorb the costs of FX
volatility if they are selling in domestic markets. | • Lending in local currency to all SME
borrowers, with the GDFF absorbing the costs
of FX hedging.

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
B
• Local presence by local implementing partner
Agri-businesses require high levels of
Technical financial institutions (see implementation)
engagement and support per investment which
barriers • Specialist technical assistance support with
drives up the transaction costs of lending to them
dairy-specific expertise
• Provide effective pre-deal technical
assistance to support businesses to identify
investment opportunities and understand the
For businesses prioritizing the use of debt capital, productivity benefits of climate-smart
investments into climate-smart practices and investments
technologies are often deprioritized compared with • Better understanding in the participating
fast productivity-enhancing investments banks and borrowing SMEs about CC options
an incentive to invest in greening the dairy
value chain by providing affordable finance in
return for delivery of outcomes
240. A central offering that is critical to the delivery of the GDFF’s impact is lending in local currency to dairy SMEs.
This is a significant challenge faced by enterprises in the sector, and it poses risks to SME viability and sustainability90.
The capital protection within the GDFF’s finance structure enables it to assume the currency risks on behalf of dairy
SMEs, with a two-fold justification: (a) without FX hedges, it allows for lower interest rates for the all borrower SMEs,
and (b) it helps crowd investors into serving smaller, domestically oriented SMEs that are unable to borrow in foreign
currencies.
241. Justification for technical assistance grant: The proposal includes a US$ 10 million technical assistance
grant request that is critical for GDFF for supporting businesses to effectively adopt and sustain the adoption of climate
smart technologies. This equates to 28 percent of the loan capital allocated to GDFF. With this funding, GDFF will
proactively use the TA facility of Sub-Component 3.2 to (a) build the capacities of the Wholesale Banks and Retail
Banks to understand and finance green dairy sector projects, and (b) maximise both the impact and returns of the
financed investments by enhancing the capacity of borrowers to implement effective strategies, improve their
operational efficiencies, and achieve sustainable growth. In doing so, the TA facility will address non-financial barriers
currently preventing greater climate-smart financing in the GDFF target countries.
B.6. Exit strategy
242. The design of the Programme includes several elements aimed at improving the sustainability of its results
and maintaining the paradigm shift after implementation. The exit strategy and sustainability are based on: (i) the full
engagement and ownership of governments, regional institutions, national dairy boards, and other stakeholders
(private sector, development partners); (ii) policy solutions to create an enabling environment for low-carbon, climate-
resilient investments in the dairy sector, in line with NDCs and NAMAs; (iii) capacity development of key institutions,
public services, dairy processors and dairy farmers on practices (animal health, feeding, breeding, manure
management) that effectively reduce GHG emissions and build climate resilience, without compromising milk
productivity; (iv) instruments to mobilise more public and private climate finance for the dairy sector, such as GHG
MRV systems; (v) value chain strengthening to enhance service delivery, avoid losses and increase dairy consumption
for better nutrition; and (vi) sustainable access to green finance through innovative blended-finance instruments and
products under the GDFF for the benefit of the private sector. Thus, in relation to point (vi), it is anticipated that
equipment purchased with GCF proceeds for groups of smallholder farmers (cooperatives), e.g., Milk Collection
Centers and Milk Collection Points, will be sustained through improved access to finance, i.e., the GDFF financing.
243. In terms of engagement and ownership, the Programme was designed with the participation of a wide range
of national and regional public institutions, private sector representatives and operators, civil society, and development
partners. The validation of the GCF Project Preparation Facility (PPF) at the COP27 also raised awareness of the
Programme globally and at high level, and engagement of parties beyond the participating countries. The
Programme’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) provides detailed information on how these stakeholders have
been and will continue to be involved during implementation. M&E and knowledge management and learning (KM&L)
will ensure that lessons learned, documents prepared, and activities financed during the implementation of the
Programme are archived (in the Programme monitoring information system), disseminated and replicated for the
benefit of similar Programmes, including in Latin America and Asia.
90 https://acumen.org/blog/we-need-new-fx-solutions-in-africa-now/

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
• Local presence by local implementing partner
Agri-businesses require high levels of
Technical financial institutions (see implementation)
engagement and support per investment which
barriers • Specialist technical assistance support with
drives up the transaction costs of lending to them
dairy-specific expertise
• Provide effective pre-deal technical
assistance to support businesses to identify
investment opportunities and understand the
For businesses prioritizing the use of debt capital, productivity benefits of climate-smart
investments into climate-smart practices and investments
technologies are often deprioritized compared with • Better understanding in the participating
fast productivity-enhancing investments banks and borrowing SMEs about CC options
an incentive to invest in greening the dairy
value chain by providing affordable finance in
return for delivery of outcomes
240. A central offering that is critical to the delivery of the GDFF’s impact is lending in local currency to dairy SMEs.
This is a significant challenge faced by enterprises in the sector, and it poses risks to SME viability and sustainability90.
The capital protection within the GDFF’s finance structure enables it to assume the currency risks on behalf of dairy
SMEs, with a two-fold justification: (a) without FX hedges, it allows for lower interest rates for the all borrower SMEs,
and (b) it helps crowd investors into serving smaller, domestically oriented SMEs that are unable to borrow in foreign
currencies.
241. Justification for technical assistance grant: The proposal includes a US$ 10 million technical assistance
grant request that is critical for GDFF for supporting businesses to effectively adopt and sustain the adoption of climate
smart technologies. This equates to 28 percent of the loan capital allocated to GDFF. With this funding, GDFF will
proactively use the TA facility of Sub-Component 3.2 to (a) build the capacities of the Wholesale Banks and Retail
Banks to understand and finance green dairy sector projects, and (b) maximise both the impact and returns of the
financed investments by enhancing the capacity of borrowers to implement effective strategies, improve their
operational efficiencies, and achieve sustainable growth. In doing so, the TA facility will address non-financial barriers
currently preventing greater climate-smart financing in the GDFF target countries.
B.6. Exit strategy
242. The design of the Programme includes several elements aimed at improving the sustainability of its results
and maintaining the paradigm shift after implementation. The exit strategy and sustainability are based on: (i) the full
engagement and ownership of governments, regional institutions, national dairy boards, and other stakeholders
(private sector, development partners); (ii) policy solutions to create an enabling environment for low-carbon, climate-
resilient investments in the dairy sector, in line with NDCs and NAMAs; (iii) capacity development of key institutions,
public services, dairy processors and dairy farmers on practices (animal health, feeding, breeding, manure
management) that effectively reduce GHG emissions and build climate resilience, without compromising milk
productivity; (iv) instruments to mobilise more public and private climate finance for the dairy sector, such as GHG
MRV systems; (v) value chain strengthening to enhance service delivery, avoid losses and increase dairy consumption
for better nutrition; and (vi) sustainable access to green finance through innovative blended-finance instruments and
products under the GDFF for the benefit of the private sector. Thus, in relation to point (vi), it is anticipated that
equipment purchased with GCF proceeds for groups of smallholder farmers (cooperatives), e.g., Milk Collection
Centers and Milk Collection Points, will be sustained through improved access to finance, i.e., the GDFF financing.
243. In terms of engagement and ownership, the Programme was designed with the participation of a wide range
of national and regional public institutions, private sector representatives and operators, civil society, and development
partners. The validation of the GCF Project Preparation Facility (PPF) at the COP27 also raised awareness of the
Programme globally and at high level, and engagement of parties beyond the participating countries. The
Programme’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) provides detailed information on how these stakeholders have
been and will continue to be involved during implementation. M&E and knowledge management and learning (KM&L)
will ensure that lessons learned, documents prepared, and activities financed during the implementation of the
Programme are archived (in the Programme monitoring information system), disseminated and replicated for the
benefit of similar Programmes, including in Latin America and Asia.

--- Table 2 on Page 67 ---
Technical
barriers | Agri-businesses require high levels of
engagement and support per investment which
drives up the transaction costs of lending to them | • Local presence by local implementing partner
financial institutions (see implementation)
• Specialist technical assistance support with
dairy-specific expertise
 | For businesses prioritizing the use of debt capital,
investments into climate-smart practices and
technologies are often deprioritized compared with
fast productivity-enhancing investments | • Provide effective pre-deal technical
assistance to support businesses to identify
investment opportunities and understand the
productivity benefits of climate-smart
investments
• Better understanding in the participating
banks and borrowing SMEs about CC options
an incentive to invest in greening the dairy
value chain by providing affordable finance in
return for delivery of outcomes

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
B
244. Regarding the enabling environment, by deeply integrating low carbon, climate-resilient dairy interventions
into national and regional policies and regulations, the legacy of Component 1 will be an enhanced enabling
environment and enable the replication and scaling of CCA&M solutions through other projects and programmes– for
impact and sustainability at scale. In particular, the policy and regulatory review (Output 1.1) ensures an enabling
framework for dairy value chain development and market integration at national and regional level. Improvements in
veterinary and extension services (Output 1.2) strengthen the capacity of public services to continue to support similar
extension interventions within and outside the targeted areas, beyond the duration of the Programme. In addition, the
increase in MRV capacities (Output 1.3) will enable Governments and private operators to effectively monitor GHG
emissions, to improve inventories and reporting to the UNFCCC, and to mobilise more public and private finance to
address climate change.
245. The Programme will strengthen the capacity of dairy cooperatives to provide dairy farmers with consistent and
stable access to outlets for their milk with fair prices and timely payment (Output 2.1). They will also receive support
to formulate better business plans and financing applications for climate resilient and low-carbon investments. When
dairy farmers have access to a stable market for their milk, they will be less risk-averse and more willing to adopt the
technology packages, needed to make the dairy value chain climate-resilient and profitable. Output 2.2 will build on
the well-established L-FFS approach to encourage farmers to adopt practices in the long term. L-FFS is one of FAO’s
flagship innovations, implemented sustainably in more than 90 countries. An estimated 20 million farmers worldwide
have participated in FFS since their inception. The four participating countries are not an exception, and the extension
methodology is being implemented in many projects sponsored by the IFIs and development partners such as FAO.
The Programme will take advantage of the approach and combine it with digital and extension innovations, so that
dairy farmers have direct and technical knowledge of the different low carbon practices being promoted.
246. The GDFF will mobilize long-term capital for additional climate financing together with related top end technical
support to participating banks for climate-resilient investments in support of the dairy value chain over its 12-year life,
supporting the adoption of climate-smart technologies and practices beyond the DaIMA programme period. By using
GDFF funding, in the long term, the GDFF will reduce the perceived risk of the banks in investing in dairy SMEs and
catalyze additional private capital into the sector. The GDFF will bridge the gap between demand and supply of finance
for climate-resilient and low-carbon dairy and create a sustainable and scalable mechanism that can be replicated
across other value chains and regions. The GDFF’s embedded M&E function (see Annex 2, Chapter 10 for detail on
GDFF’s M&E) will ensure that learnings are captured throughout delivery, which will facilitate replication and scaling.

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested
Total amount Currency
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv
150.00 million USD ($)
+ v + vi + vii)
GCF financial
Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrument
(i) Senior loans 17.5 Enter years Enter years Enter %
(ii) Subordinated
0
loans
(iii) Equity 0
(iv) Guarantees 0
(v) Reimbursable
0
grants
(vi) Grants 132.50
(vii) Results-
Enter amount
based payments
(b) Co- Total amount Currency
financing
208.26 million USD ($)
information
Financial
Name of Tenor &
instrume Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
institution grace
nt
Senior Enter years Enter% Options
IFAD in Kenya 24.75 million USD ($)
Loans Enter years
Senior Enter years Enter% Options
IFAD in Rwanda 22.24 million USD ($)
Loans Enter years
IFAD in Senior Enter years Enter% Options
50.81 million USD ($)
Tanzania Loans Enter years
Senior Enter years Enter% Options
IFAD in Uganda 77.98 million USD ($)
Loans Enter years
IFAD, Uganda, Enter years Enter% Options
Loan 13.125 million USD ($)
POLG Enter years
IFAD, Rwanda, Enter years Enter% Options
Loan 4.375 million USD ($)
POLG Enter years
Government Enter years Enter% Options
In kind 0.23 million USD ($)
Kenya Enter years
Government Enter years Enter% Options
In kind 14.75 million USD ($)
Rwanda Enter years
(a) Total Amount Currency
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 358.26 million USD ($)
(d) Other
N/A
financing
arrangements
Note: POLG is the Programme of Loans and Grants
and
contributions
C.2. Financing by component91
91 Tentative budget subject to revisions

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(a) Requested
GCF funding
(i + ii + iii + iv
+ v + vi + vii) | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  | 
 | 150.00 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  | 
GCF financial
instrument | Amount |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
(i) Senior loans | 17.5 |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter % |  | 
(ii) Subordinated
loans | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) Equity | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iv) Guarantees | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(v) Reimbursable
grants | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) Grants | 132.50 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vii) Results-
based payments | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(b) Co-
financing
information |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  | 
 | 208.26 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of
institution |  | Financial |  | Amount |  | Currency |  | Tenor &
grace |  |  | Pricing |  | Seniority | 
 |  | instrume |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | nt |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
IFAD in Kenya | Senior
Loans |  |  | 24.75 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
IFAD in Rwanda | Senior
Loans |  |  | 22.24 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
IFAD in
Tanzania | Senior
Loans |  |  | 50.81 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
IFAD in Uganda | Senior
Loans |  |  | 77.98 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
IFAD, Uganda,
POLG | Loan |  |  | 13.125 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
IFAD, Rwanda,
POLG | Loan |  |  | 4.375 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
Government
Kenya | In kind |  |  | 0.23 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
Government
Rwanda | In kind |  |  | 14.75 |  | million USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  | Options | 
(a) Total
financing
(c) = (a)+(b) | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 358.26 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other | N/A
Note: POLG is the Programme of Loans and Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
arrangements |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
contributions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
C.2. Financing by component91 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 69 ---
Tenor &
grace

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
C
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD million USD Instrument million Instrument Institutions
($)
($) USD ($)
Output 1.1 $17.50 $3.47 Grants $14.03 Loan IFAD
Output 1.2 $26.32 $3.75 Grants $22.57 Loan IFAD
Component 1
Output 1.3 $8.03 $7.16 Grants $0.87 Loan IFAD
Output 1.4 $6.35 $2.90 Grants $3.45 Loan IFAD
Loan IFAD
Output 2.1 $83.72 $18.78 Grants $64.94
/in kind /GoR
Loan IFAD
Component 2 Output 2.2 $98.79 $40.63 Grants $58.15
/in kind /GoR
Loan IFAD
Output 2.3 $52.47 $41.29 Grants $11.18
/in kind /GoR
Output 3.1 $35.00 $17.50 Loan $17.50 Loan IFAD
Component 3
Output 3.2 $10.00 $10.00 Grants 0 Loan
Monitoring and M&E Loan
$6.72 $1.46 Grants $5.26 IFAD
Evaluation
Programme PMC Loan
IFAD
Management $13.36 $3.05 Grants $10.31 /in kind
/GoK
Cost
Indicative total cost (USD)
$358.26 $150.00 $208.26
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☒ No ☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology
Yes ☒ No ☐
development/transfer?
247. Capacity building and dairy CC adaptation and mitigation technology transfer are integral parts of the
Programme. Firstly, GCF funding is used to insert the CC aspect into the L-FFS training modules and to train trainers
and lead farmers in these technologies, in addition to organizing large-scale technology transfer to smallholder dairy
farmers. These technologies include all the ones that are needed for a sustainable pathway to increase productivity
of dairy cows, while reducing emission intensity per kg of milk produced. Secondly, the management of dairy
cooperatives will be trained in the use and management of renewable energy sources, in addition to waste
management. Thirdly, stakeholders in the dairy value chain will receive TA support and capacity building to prepared
business plans for green investments. Fourthly, substantial capacity building support are at the core for making the
GDFF financial services to reach objectives and impact and will target both the participating banks and borrowing
businesses.

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD million USD Instrument million Instrument Institutions
($)
($) USD ($)
Output 1.1 $17.50 $3.47 Grants $14.03 Loan IFAD
Output 1.2 $26.32 $3.75 Grants $22.57 Loan IFAD
Component 1
Output 1.3 $8.03 $7.16 Grants $0.87 Loan IFAD
Output 1.4 $6.35 $2.90 Grants $3.45 Loan IFAD
Loan IFAD
Output 2.1 $83.72 $18.78 Grants $64.94
/in kind /GoR
Loan IFAD
Component 2 Output 2.2 $98.79 $40.63 Grants $58.15
/in kind /GoR
Loan IFAD
Output 2.3 $52.47 $41.29 Grants $11.18
/in kind /GoR
Output 3.1 $35.00 $17.50 Loan $17.50 Loan IFAD
Component 3
Output 3.2 $10.00 $10.00 Grants 0 Loan
Monitoring and M&E Loan
$6.72 $1.46 Grants $5.26 IFAD
Evaluation
Programme PMC Loan
IFAD
Management $13.36 $3.05 Grants $10.31 /in kind
/GoK
Cost
Indicative total cost (USD)
$358.26 $150.00 $208.26 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component | Output | Indicative
cost
million USD
($) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | million USD |  |  | Instrument |  |  |  |  | million |  |  |  | Institutions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 1 | Output 1.1 | $17.50 | $3.47 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $14.03 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 |  | Output 1.2 | $26.32 | $3.75 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $22.57 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 |  | Output 1.3 | $8.03 | $7.16 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $0.87 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 |  | Output 1.4 | $6.35 | $2.90 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $3.45 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 | Component 2 | Output 2.1 | $83.72 | $18.78 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $64.94 |  |  | Loan
/in kind | IFAD
/GoR |  |  | 
 |  | Output 2.2 | $98.79 | $40.63 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $58.15 |  |  | Loan
/in kind | IFAD
/GoR |  |  | 
 |  | Output 2.3 | $52.47 | $41.29 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $11.18 |  |  | Loan
/in kind | IFAD
/GoR |  |  | 
 | Component 3 | Output 3.1 | $35.00 | $17.50 |  |  | Loan |  |  |  |  | $17.50 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 |  | Output 3.2 | $10.00 | $10.00 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | 0 |  |  | Loan |  |  |  | 
 | Monitoring and
Evaluation | M&E | $6.72 | $1.46 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $5.26 |  |  | Loan | IFAD |  |  | 
 | Programme
Management
Cost | PMC | $13.36 | $3.05 |  |  | Grants |  |  |  |  | $10.31 |  |  | Loan
/in kind | IFAD
/GoK |  |  | 
 | Indicative total cost (USD) |  | $358.26 | $150.00 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | $208.26 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
247. Capacity building and dairy CC adaptation and mitigation technology transfer are integral parts of the
Programme. Firstly, GCF funding is used to insert the CC aspect into the L-FFS training modules and to train trainers
and lead farmers in these technologies, in addition to organizing large-scale technology transfer to smallholder dairy
farmers. These technologies include all the ones that are needed for a sustainable pathway to increase productivity
of dairy cows, while reducing emission intensity per kg of milk produced. Secondly, the management of dairy
cooperatives will be trained in the use and management of renewable energy sources, in addition to waste
management. Thirdly, stakeholders in the dairy value chain will receive TA support and capacity building to prepared
business plans for green investments. Fourthly, substantial capacity building support are at the core for making the
GDFF financial services to reach objectives and impact and will target both the participating banks and borrowing
businesses. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 70 ---
Indicative
cost
million USD
($)

--- Table 3 on Page 70 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential
248. The Programme will guide smallholder dairy producers and private sector value-chain operators on a
transformational path to a low-emission and climate-resilient dairy sector. As part of this transformation, dairy production
and value chains will be streamlined for maximum efficiency, financial services will be made available, and the sector's
institutional framework will be enhanced. This transformation will result in increased dairy production, dairy productivity,
climate resilience of the sector, reduced emissions intensity of milk, and reduced total emissions.
249. To achieve mitigation targets, the Programme will provide technical assistance for the establishment and
improvement of low-emission dairy processing, the optimization of efficiency and the reduction of losses in milk
processing facilities, as well as the promotion of adaptive livestock breeding, integrated rangeland and pasture
management, and animal health systems. Moreover, the Programme aims to facilitate the establishment of the GDDF,
aiming to blend GCF proceeds with other investors, including IFAD’s. In this way, businesses and dairy farmers receive
financial incentives to reduce their carbon emissions, providing them with potential sources of income.
250. The Programme objective of promoting climate resilience and sustainable livestock production will be achieved
by supporting local private sector actors, such as dairy cooperatives, aggregators and milk processors, to overcome
technological and financial obstacles. By expanding rural employment opportunities and strengthening the resilience
of local households to climate shocks, the Programme will help them increase their productivity and expand their
businesses. By building the management capacity of smallholder farmers, improving their creditworthiness, fueling their
demand for alternative technologies, and providing them with access to finance through the GDDF, smallholders will
be able to significantly reduce their emissions and maximize their efficiency. These intertwined components contribute
significantly to the creation of a climate-resilient and sustainable landscape in target countries. The Programme is
expected to make a significant contribution to GCF MRA 4 "Forestry and Land Use," ARA 1 "Most vulnerable people
and communities" and ARA 4 "Ecosystems and ecosystem services". It will directly contribute to results of the GCF’s
Updated Strategic Plan (USP-2), i.e. T1 (by supporting the Country’s adaptation and mitigation goals), T4 Food and T5
Ecosystems, through T9 locally-led adaptation approach. The Programme will also support dissemination of climate
information and MRV system, directly contributing to T3 CIEWS. The Programme also aligns with T10 (by supporting
resilient market chains) and T11 (by developing GDFF).
251. The total number of direct beneficiaries will be about 2.5 million individuals and value chain actors vulnerable
to climate change (467,105 in Kenya, 614,013 in Rwanda, 757,652 in Tanzania and 665,097 in Uganda). The
Programme will invest in a total of 94 districts/counties (12 in Kenya, 27 in Rwanda, 25 in Tanzania, and 30 in Uganda).
A total of about 2.7 million dairy cattle will be reached. Approximately 178,362 ha of rangelands and natural pastures
will be brought under improved management. 15.4 million individuals (indirect beneficiaries) will be likely to receive an
adaptation benefit due to strengthened veterinary services (for better resilience of dairy farmers in the context of
diseases exacerbated by climate change), enhanced extension and breeding services, and improved access to climate
information. See Feasibility Study (sections 5 and 6) for more details.
252. The efforts of the Programme to strengthen adaptation to climate change will result in a sustainable increase
in milk production in East Africa. Within the same horizon of 20 years and relative to the baseline, the Programme is
expected to significantly increase milk production of the targeted dairy farms 34 percent, of which 31 percent in Kenya,
73 percent in Rwanda, 36 percent in Tanzania, and 30 percent in Uganda (see Annex 22). This increase in milk
production will contribute to the agricultural GDP in the four countries, marking a substantial impact on the economy
and climate resilience of the region.
253. As a mitigation benefit, over a 20-year horizon and relative to the BAU, the Programme targets a decrease of
milk emission intensities by 29 percent, of which 28 percent in Kenya, 50 percent in Rwanda, 29 percent in Tanzania
and 33 percent in Uganda.
254. Over the same period, total GHG emissions on the targeted dairy farms are expected to decrease (relative to
BAU) by about 4.01 percent at the level of the Programme, or (i) by 2.02 percent (-61,967 tCO2-eq) in Kenya, (ii) by
9.56 percent (-56,507 tCO2-eq) in Rwanda, (iii) by 4.69 percent (-65,718 tCO2-eq) in Tanzania and, (iv) by 5.22 percent
(-82,372 tCO2-eq) in Uganda. Methane from enteric fermentation is expected to decrease by 4.61 percent overall, while
methane from manure management would decrease by 5.93 percent. The Programme is also expected to generate
54,435 tCO2eq/yr savings from energy generation and access. More details about the analysis, which used – among

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  | 
This section refers to the performance of the programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. |  | 
D.1. Impact potential |  | 
 | 248. The Programme will guide smallholder dairy producers and private sector value-chain operators on a | 
 | transformational path to a low-emission and climate-resilient dairy sector. As part of this transformation, dairy production | 
 | and value chains will be streamlined for maximum efficiency, financial services will be made available, and the sector's | 
 | institutional framework will be enhanced. This transformation will result in increased dairy production, dairy productivity, | 
 | climate resilience of the sector, reduced emissions intensity of milk, and reduced total emissions. | 
 |  | 
 | 249. To achieve mitigation targets, the Programme will provide technical assistance for the establishment and | 
 | improvement of low-emission dairy processing, the optimization of efficiency and the reduction of losses in milk | 
 | processing facilities, as well as the promotion of adaptive livestock breeding, integrated rangeland and pasture | 
 | management, and animal health systems. Moreover, the Programme aims to facilitate the establishment of the GDDF, | 
 | aiming to blend GCF proceeds with other investors, including IFAD’s. In this way, businesses and dairy farmers receive | 
 | financial incentives to reduce their carbon emissions, providing them with potential sources of income. | 
 |  | 
 | 250. The Programme objective of promoting climate resilience and sustainable livestock production will be achieved | 
 | by supporting local private sector actors, such as dairy cooperatives, aggregators and milk processors, to overcome | 
 | technological and financial obstacles. By expanding rural employment opportunities and strengthening the resilience | 
 | of local households to climate shocks, the Programme will help them increase their productivity and expand their | 
 | businesses. By building the management capacity of smallholder farmers, improving their creditworthiness, fueling their | 
 | demand for alternative technologies, and providing them with access to finance through the GDDF, smallholders will | 
 | be able to significantly reduce their emissions and maximize their efficiency. These intertwined components contribute | 
 | significantly to the creation of a climate-resilient and sustainable landscape in target countries. The Programme is | 
 | expected to make a significant contribution to GCF MRA 4 "Forestry and Land Use," ARA 1 "Most vulnerable people | 
 | and communities" and ARA 4 "Ecosystems and ecosystem services". It will directly contribute to results of the GCF’s | 
 | Updated Strategic Plan (USP-2), i.e. T1 (by supporting the Country’s adaptation and mitigation goals), T4 Food and T5 | 
 | Ecosystems, through T9 locally-led adaptation approach. The Programme will also support dissemination of climate | 
 | information and MRV system, directly contributing to T3 CIEWS. The Programme also aligns with T10 (by supporting | 
 | resilient market chains) and T11 (by developing GDFF). | 
 |  | 
 | 251. The total number of direct beneficiaries will be about 2.5 million individuals and value chain actors vulnerable | 
 | to climate change (467,105 in Kenya, 614,013 in Rwanda, 757,652 in Tanzania and 665,097 in Uganda). The | 
 | Programme will invest in a total of 94 districts/counties (12 in Kenya, 27 in Rwanda, 25 in Tanzania, and 30 in Uganda). | 
 | A total of about 2.7 million dairy cattle will be reached. Approximately 178,362 ha of rangelands and natural pastures | 
 | will be brought under improved management. 15.4 million individuals (indirect beneficiaries) will be likely to receive an | 
 | adaptation benefit due to strengthened veterinary services (for better resilience of dairy farmers in the context of | 
 | diseases exacerbated by climate change), enhanced extension and breeding services, and improved access to climate | 
 | information. See Feasibility Study (sections 5 and 6) for more details. | 
 |  | 
 | 252. The efforts of the Programme to strengthen adaptation to climate change will result in a sustainable increase | 
 | in milk production in East Africa. Within the same horizon of 20 years and relative to the baseline, the Programme is | 
 | expected to significantly increase milk production of the targeted dairy farms 34 percent, of which 31 percent in Kenya, | 
 | 73 percent in Rwanda, 36 percent in Tanzania, and 30 percent in Uganda (see Annex 22). This increase in milk | 
 | production will contribute to the agricultural GDP in the four countries, marking a substantial impact on the economy | 
 | and climate resilience of the region. | 
 |  | 
 | 253. As a mitigation benefit, over a 20-year horizon and relative to the BAU, the Programme targets a decrease of | 
 | milk emission intensities by 29 percent, of which 28 percent in Kenya, 50 percent in Rwanda, 29 percent in Tanzania | 
 | and 33 percent in Uganda. | 
 |  | 
 | 254. Over the same period, total GHG emissions on the targeted dairy farms are expected to decrease (relative to | 
 | BAU) by about 4.01 percent at the level of the Programme, or (i) by 2.02 percent (-61,967 tCO2-eq) in Kenya, (ii) by | 
 | 9.56 percent (-56,507 tCO2-eq) in Rwanda, (iii) by 4.69 percent (-65,718 tCO2-eq) in Tanzania and, (iv) by 5.22 percent | 
 | (-82,372 tCO2-eq) in Uganda. Methane from enteric fermentation is expected to decrease by 4.61 percent overall, while | 
 | methane from manure management would decrease by 5.93 percent. The Programme is also expected to generate | 
 | 54,435 tCO2eq/yr savings from energy generation and access. More details about the analysis, which used – among | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
D
others - the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model interactive (GLEAM-i), are provided in Annex 22.
Impact metrics can be found in E.3 and Annex 11.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential
255. The Programme's comprehensive approach to the paradigm shift in the dairy sector will reduce GHG emissions
while improving the livelihoods of dairy producers in East Africa. By improving policy, institutional, and service delivery
environments, building climate adaptation capacity, and enabling access to finance and climate-smart solutions for
smallholder dairy farmers, the Programme aims to transform all aspects of the dairy value chain (refer to section
B.2.(a)). This holistic and transformative approach, providing support to the private sector and financial access to the
dairy sector has the potential to foster sustainable, low-emission growth in the dairy market to create a lasting impact
beyond the initial investment in the Programme. This is due to the scalability of its components, the generation and
dissemination of knowledge, the creation of an enabling environment for the widespread adoption of climate-resilient
solutions, and the improvement of national regulatory policies in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and Rwanda.
256. Through the integration of two key strategies into its programming, the Programme has a strong potential for
scalability. Firstly, it improves access to veterinary services and offers gender-inclusive advisory services, enabling
male and female farmers to improve animal health, feed quality, and herd management, thereby increasing the adoption
of climate-smart practices. Second, it improves access to finance and alternative technologies, enabling local private
sector actors such as dairy cooperatives and milk processors to overcome technological and financial constraints (refer
to section B.3. for more details). The dual approach not only improves productivity, but also facilitates the transition to
sustainable, low-carbon livestock production, demonstrating both substantial and scalable impact.
257. The two main components of the Programme are expected to contribute significantly to the creation of
knowledge and lessons learned. First, the Programme generates detailed data on TIER2 emissions by enhancing
national MRV capacities, which are critical to improving national inventories and informing evidence-based policies,
planning, and investments. Through the implementation of this robust MRV framework, data gaps will be addressed,
and climate scenarios and assessments will be strengthened. In addition, the Programme will facilitate knowledge
transfer through regional and SSTC to replicate transformative practices to build a climate-resilient and low-carbon
dairy sector. A key component of this effort is supporting Regional Centres of Excellence for technology validation, as
well as maintaining a regional database on practices, GHG emissions, and adaptation indicators. In addition, the
creation of regional platforms for cooperation as well as participation in global networks facilitate the exchange of
knowledge and the development of policy initiatives (refer to section B.3. for more details).
258. In addition, the Programme plays an important role in creating a conducive environment for the adoption
of climate-resilient solutions, including through the strengthening of market structures. To this end, a comprehensive
review of the dairy sector will be conducted in addition to conducting farmer awareness campaigns and improving
supply chain traceability. Through these efforts, market formalization and development will be fostered. The provision
of tailored financial products and technical assistance will facilitate this process and improve access to financing and
affordable credit for on-farm investments. The Programme also facilitates access to the carbon market and supports
the development of a certification program for low-carbon production. This not only creates financial incentives for
mitigation efforts but also accelerates the transition to low-carbon practices by offering potential revenue streams for
dairy farmers and businesses that achieve low-carbon certification (refer to section B.2(a)).
259. In addition, the Programme will advance regional, national, and local legislative and regulatory
frameworks that encourage investment in low-emission or climate-resilient development (refer to section B.2(a)). In
Rwanda, it will focus on the regulatory framework and standard operating procedures for dairy value chain operators,
working directly with the Rwanda Food and Drugs Authority as well as the Rwanda Standards Board to address milk
quality, standards, safety, and energy efficiency issues. As part of the Programme, the formation of a national regulatory
framework for private veterinary practice and the development of a Dairy Value Chain (DVC) regulatory law will be
supported. Tanzania and Uganda will benefit from the program by assisting in the review and approval of policies such
as the Animal Health Act and the Dairy Act, which will focus on aspects such as raw milk trade regulations and disease
control plans (refer to section B.3. for more details). This will allow for the finalization of policies aligned climate change
priorities, which will enable private sector investment policies and research strategies (e.g. on the development of
climate-resilient feed germplasm, the improved genetic resources of dairy breeds, etc.).
D.3. Sustainable development
260. The Programme will contribute significantly to social and health benefits in the targeted regions. It encompasses
a comprehensive approach, such as market formalization, awareness campaigns and product traceability to improve
nutrition and health awareness, with a focus on the consumption of safe and high-quality dairy products, thereby

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 | others - the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model interactive (GLEAM-i), are provided in Annex 22. | 
 | Impact metrics can be found in E.3 and Annex 11. | 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential |  | 
 | 255. The Programme's comprehensive approach to the paradigm shift in the dairy sector will reduce GHG emissions | 
 | while improving the livelihoods of dairy producers in East Africa. By improving policy, institutional, and service delivery | 
 | environments, building climate adaptation capacity, and enabling access to finance and climate-smart solutions for | 
 | smallholder dairy farmers, the Programme aims to transform all aspects of the dairy value chain (refer to section | 
 | B.2.(a)). This holistic and transformative approach, providing support to the private sector and financial access to the | 
 | dairy sector has the potential to foster sustainable, low-emission growth in the dairy market to create a lasting impact | 
 | beyond the initial investment in the Programme. This is due to the scalability of its components, the generation and | 
 | dissemination of knowledge, the creation of an enabling environment for the widespread adoption of climate-resilient | 
 | solutions, and the improvement of national regulatory policies in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and Rwanda. | 
 |  | 
 | 256. Through the integration of two key strategies into its programming, the Programme has a strong potential for | 
 | scalability. Firstly, it improves access to veterinary services and offers gender-inclusive advisory services, enabling | 
 | male and female farmers to improve animal health, feed quality, and herd management, thereby increasing the adoption | 
 | of climate-smart practices. Second, it improves access to finance and alternative technologies, enabling local private | 
 | sector actors such as dairy cooperatives and milk processors to overcome technological and financial constraints (refer | 
 | to section B.3. for more details). The dual approach not only improves productivity, but also facilitates the transition to | 
 | sustainable, low-carbon livestock production, demonstrating both substantial and scalable impact. | 
 |  | 
 | 257. The two main components of the Programme are expected to contribute significantly to the creation of | 
 | knowledge and lessons learned. First, the Programme generates detailed data on TIER2 emissions by enhancing | 
 | national MRV capacities, which are critical to improving national inventories and informing evidence-based policies, | 
 | planning, and investments. Through the implementation of this robust MRV framework, data gaps will be addressed, | 
 | and climate scenarios and assessments will be strengthened. In addition, the Programme will facilitate knowledge | 
 | transfer through regional and SSTC to replicate transformative practices to build a climate-resilient and low-carbon | 
 | dairy sector. A key component of this effort is supporting Regional Centres of Excellence for technology validation, as | 
 | well as maintaining a regional database on practices, GHG emissions, and adaptation indicators. In addition, the | 
 | creation of regional platforms for cooperation as well as participation in global networks facilitate the exchange of | 
 | knowledge and the development of policy initiatives (refer to section B.3. for more details). | 
 |  | 
 | 258. In addition, the Programme plays an important role in creating a conducive environment for the adoption | 
 | of climate-resilient solutions, including through the strengthening of market structures. To this end, a comprehensive | 
 | review of the dairy sector will be conducted in addition to conducting farmer awareness campaigns and improving | 
 | supply chain traceability. Through these efforts, market formalization and development will be fostered. The provision | 
 | of tailored financial products and technical assistance will facilitate this process and improve access to financing and | 
 | affordable credit for on-farm investments. The Programme also facilitates access to the carbon market and supports | 
 | the development of a certification program for low-carbon production. This not only creates financial incentives for | 
 | mitigation efforts but also accelerates the transition to low-carbon practices by offering potential revenue streams for | 
 | dairy farmers and businesses that achieve low-carbon certification (refer to section B.2(a)). | 
 |  | 
 | 259. In addition, the Programme will advance regional, national, and local legislative and regulatory | 
 | frameworks that encourage investment in low-emission or climate-resilient development (refer to section B.2(a)). In | 
 | Rwanda, it will focus on the regulatory framework and standard operating procedures for dairy value chain operators, | 
 | working directly with the Rwanda Food and Drugs Authority as well as the Rwanda Standards Board to address milk | 
 | quality, standards, safety, and energy efficiency issues. As part of the Programme, the formation of a national regulatory | 
 | framework for private veterinary practice and the development of a Dairy Value Chain (DVC) regulatory law will be | 
 | supported. Tanzania and Uganda will benefit from the program by assisting in the review and approval of policies such | 
 | as the Animal Health Act and the Dairy Act, which will focus on aspects such as raw milk trade regulations and disease | 
 | control plans (refer to section B.3. for more details). This will allow for the finalization of policies aligned climate change | 
 | priorities, which will enable private sector investment policies and research strategies (e.g. on the development of | 
 | climate-resilient feed germplasm, the improved genetic resources of dairy breeds, etc.). | 
D.3. Sustainable development |  | 
 | 260. The Programme will contribute significantly to social and health benefits in the targeted regions. It encompasses | 
 | a comprehensive approach, such as market formalization, awareness campaigns and product traceability to improve | 
 | nutrition and health awareness, with a focus on the consumption of safe and high-quality dairy products, thereby | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
D
improving the individual health of rural and urban consumers (sustainable development goal (SDG) 3: Good Health and
Well-being). In addition, by strengthening veterinary services, the Programme aims to improve animal health, which will
lead to higher milk productivity and reduced losses, which will decrease GHG emissions and increase farmers’ incomes.
This will incentivize famers to adopt better measures on animal health and welfare (SDG 12: Responsible Consumption
and Production). By improving nutrition and food safety through increased consumption of high-quality dairy products,
the Programme contributes to ending hunger, achieving food security, and improving nutrition.
261. In addition, the Programme contributes to positive environmental impacts, in particular soil quality and
conservation. A key element is the promotion of biodiversity conservation and healthier ecosystems, through better
management and restoration of rangelands. This approach is essential to maintain biodiversity and combat climate
change (SDG 15: Life on Land). The holistic strategy to build climate resilience and reduce emissions along the dairy
value chain includes support for rangeland management and restoration. This restores carbon in soils and encourages
farmers and processors to adopt more efficient and climate-resilient practices. The Programme also focuses on
improved pasture management and circular economy principles, with a focus on pathway-specific integrated solutions
such as improving manure management for biogas production and nutrient cycling, which improves soil health. In
addition, the Programme advocates for the circular management of agricultural nutrients through livestock manure,
improving soil health and on-farm productivity (SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production). These strategies
collectively reinforce the Programme's commitment to environmental sustainability.
262. The Programme is expected to generate significant positive economic impacts, including job creation, poverty
reduction, attracting private finance, increasing productivity, and strengthening income-generating capacities in the
dairy sector. Smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain actors will have access to essential
financial services, enabling them to transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy production, and value chain
development. This approach aims to increase dairy farmers’ incomes, motivate them to adopt more efficient practices,
while reducing production costs. In addition, the Programme will facilitate the adoption of climate-smart technologies,
leading to increased productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers (SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure).
Capacity building and adoption of integrated solutions will improve sustainable and resilient production, thereby
improving the incomes and productivity of smallholder dairy farmers (SDG 1: No Poverty).
263. The Programme reduces gender inequalities. By actively promoting women’s participation in L-FFS and
building gender awareness among dairy farming households through the GALS+, the Programme addresses
knowledge, social, and gender barriers by equipping male and female farmers with the tools to understand the impact
of climate change and adopt alternative technologies and practices. By focusing on gender-inclusive practices and
promoting inclusive participatory planning for rangeland management, the Programme plays a crucial role in mitigating
the disproportionate impacts of climate change on women, thereby contributing to gender equality in climate action
(SDG 5: Gender Equality).
D.4. Needs of recipient
264. The Climate Impact Potential Assessment, conducted under the Programme indicates that East African
countries such as Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda face significant challenges related to the dairy value chain92.
The impacts of climate change threaten the sustainability of dairy farming as it contributes significantly to GHG
emissions. Smallholder farmers make up most dairy producers, yet they face limitations due to low productivity,
inadequate training, limited supplies, and climate vulnerability.
265. Kenya is the driest among the four countries, with annual rainfall ranging from 400 to 600mm in some areas. It
has the highest number of climate-related disasters, with 78 recorded since 1971. The central parts of Kenya have the
lowest number of people affected by floods each year, with less than 100 people per administrative boundary affected.
However, exposure to drought is more significant in the southwest, especially around cities like Kisumu, Nakuru, and
Nairobi.
266. In Uganda, people are most affected by flooding in the northern, eastern, and central regions along the course
of the White Nile. The annual average number of people affected varies from 10,000 to 25,000 per administrative
boundary, rising to 36,000 in the Northern region. Uganda, along with Kenya and Tanzania, falls under the “alert THI
class” for most areas, indicating increased exposure and vulnerability of animals to climate extremes.
267. Rwanda is one of the countries with the highest total annual rainfall (1000 to 1600mm). Due to the high
population density, there are also many people exposed to drought, especially in areas with high population density.
92 Kirungu, C., Alvar-Beltrán, J., & Soldan, R. (2023). DaIMA (GCF-IFAD) - Study 3 - Climate Impact Potential Assessment. Office of
Climate Change Biodiversity and Environment (OCB), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 | improving the individual health of rural and urban consumers (sustainable development goal (SDG) 3: Good Health and | 
 | Well-being). In addition, by strengthening veterinary services, the Programme aims to improve animal health, which will | 
 | lead to higher milk productivity and reduced losses, which will decrease GHG emissions and increase farmers’ incomes. | 
 | This will incentivize famers to adopt better measures on animal health and welfare (SDG 12: Responsible Consumption | 
 | and Production). By improving nutrition and food safety through increased consumption of high-quality dairy products, | 
 | the Programme contributes to ending hunger, achieving food security, and improving nutrition. | 
 |  | 
 | 261. In addition, the Programme contributes to positive environmental impacts, in particular soil quality and | 
 | conservation. A key element is the promotion of biodiversity conservation and healthier ecosystems, through better | 
 | management and restoration of rangelands. This approach is essential to maintain biodiversity and combat climate | 
 | change (SDG 15: Life on Land). The holistic strategy to build climate resilience and reduce emissions along the dairy | 
 | value chain includes support for rangeland management and restoration. This restores carbon in soils and encourages | 
 | farmers and processors to adopt more efficient and climate-resilient practices. The Programme also focuses on | 
 | improved pasture management and circular economy principles, with a focus on pathway-specific integrated solutions | 
 | such as improving manure management for biogas production and nutrient cycling, which improves soil health. In | 
 | addition, the Programme advocates for the circular management of agricultural nutrients through livestock manure, | 
 | improving soil health and on-farm productivity (SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production). These strategies | 
 | collectively reinforce the Programme's commitment to environmental sustainability. | 
 |  | 
 | 262. The Programme is expected to generate significant positive economic impacts, including job creation, poverty | 
 | reduction, attracting private finance, increasing productivity, and strengthening income-generating capacities in the | 
 | dairy sector. Smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain actors will have access to essential | 
 | financial services, enabling them to transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy production, and value chain | 
 | development. This approach aims to increase dairy farmers’ incomes, motivate them to adopt more efficient practices, | 
 | while reducing production costs. In addition, the Programme will facilitate the adoption of climate-smart technologies, | 
 | leading to increased productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers (SDG 9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure). | 
 | Capacity building and adoption of integrated solutions will improve sustainable and resilient production, thereby | 
 | improving the incomes and productivity of smallholder dairy farmers (SDG 1: No Poverty). | 
 |  | 
 | 263. The Programme reduces gender inequalities. By actively promoting women’s participation in L-FFS and | 
 | building gender awareness among dairy farming households through the GALS+, the Programme addresses | 
 | knowledge, social, and gender barriers by equipping male and female farmers with the tools to understand the impact | 
 | of climate change and adopt alternative technologies and practices. By focusing on gender-inclusive practices and | 
 | promoting inclusive participatory planning for rangeland management, the Programme plays a crucial role in mitigating | 
 | the disproportionate impacts of climate change on women, thereby contributing to gender equality in climate action | 
 | (SDG 5: Gender Equality). | 
D.4. Needs of recipient |  | 
 | 264. The Climate Impact Potential Assessment, conducted under the Programme indicates that East African | 
 | countries such as Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda face significant challenges related to the dairy value chain92. | 
 | The impacts of climate change threaten the sustainability of dairy farming as it contributes significantly to GHG | 
 | emissions. Smallholder farmers make up most dairy producers, yet they face limitations due to low productivity, | 
 | inadequate training, limited supplies, and climate vulnerability. | 
 |  | 
 | 265. Kenya is the driest among the four countries, with annual rainfall ranging from 400 to 600mm in some areas. It | 
 | has the highest number of climate-related disasters, with 78 recorded since 1971. The central parts of Kenya have the | 
 | lowest number of people affected by floods each year, with less than 100 people per administrative boundary affected. | 
 | However, exposure to drought is more significant in the southwest, especially around cities like Kisumu, Nakuru, and | 
 | Nairobi. | 
 |  | 
 | 266. In Uganda, people are most affected by flooding in the northern, eastern, and central regions along the course | 
 | of the White Nile. The annual average number of people affected varies from 10,000 to 25,000 per administrative | 
 | boundary, rising to 36,000 in the Northern region. Uganda, along with Kenya and Tanzania, falls under the “alert THI | 
 | class” for most areas, indicating increased exposure and vulnerability of animals to climate extremes. | 
 |  | 
 | 267. Rwanda is one of the countries with the highest total annual rainfall (1000 to 1600mm). Due to the high | 
 | population density, there are also many people exposed to drought, especially in areas with high population density. | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
D
Despite this, strategies based on centuries of exposure to droughts and floods are becoming less effective due to
difficulties in implementing coping strategies.
268. In Tanzania, the provinces of Tanga, Morogoro, and Pwani have the highest number of people affected by
flooding, with 10,000 to 25,000 people affected per administrative boundary on average per year. Exposure to drought
is comparatively lower in places such as the Kizigo Rungwa and Usungu Game Reserves, where population density is
lower.
269. Each of these countries suffers from a significant development deficit, which negatively impacts their ability to
steer the dairy sector on a path to low-emission and climate-resilient development. In all four countries, public fiscal
space is limited (see section B.5), and governments rely heavily on official development assistance (ODA) and
concessional financing to fund their dairy sector programs. As a result, vulnerable populations, such as smallholders,
women, and youth in the dairy sector are highly exposed to climate risks due to technological, organizational, and policy
constraints.
270. The lack of funding for climate-smart agriculture and climate-resilient practices is a significant barrier in the
region. Small-scale dairy pastoralists struggle to access credit and financial services, which is crucial for investing in
modern equipment, infrastructure, and better farming practices. This limitation exacerbates the vulnerability of the dairy
sector to climate-induced changes like unpredictable weather patterns, prolonged droughts and increased exposure to
disease, leading to reduced productivity and environmental degradation.
271. In addition, poor communication between climate information suppliers and agricultural extension services,
limited institutional arrangements, insufficient resources to maintain observation networks, gaps in technical skills, and
underdeveloped communication networks in East Africa hinder the effective dissemination of climate information and
response to climate-related challenges in the region.
D.5. Country ownership
272. Country ownership of the Programme is ensured through alignment with national policies and ongoing GCF
investments, as well as a participatory design process of the Programme.
273. Participating countries’ NDCs focus on reducing GHG emissions and increasing resilience to CC. Support to
the dairy sector can benefit a variety of factors, including climate and environment, nutrition, sustainable rural
livelihoods, and social inclusion. Therefore, the Programme aligns with the national strategies of the participating
countries by supporting and complementing existing plans, policies and strategies related to agriculture, livestock, and
climate change. In Kenya, for example, the Programme aligns with the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (2019-
2029), National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP), Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework
(2018‒2027), and Kenya National Strategy on Climate Change and Low Carbon Development. In Uganda, the
Programme aligns with the Livestock Development Strategy and Investment Plan (LDSIP), NAP, and National Climate
Change Strategy. In Rwanda, the Programme aligns with Rwanda's NDC, National Climate Change and Environment
Policy, Rwanda Livestock Master Plan, National Adaptation Plan for the Agricultural Sector, and National Livestock
Policy.
274. In addition, the Programme aims to integrate climate change adaptation and mitigation by reviewing and
developing national dairy policies, such as the Dairy Industry Strategy and Investment Plan, and the Dairy Industry Act
(1958) in Kenya. The Dairy Act to update regulations on raw milk trade; the formulation of disease contingency and
control plans; the draft Tanzania Dairy Development Strategy in Tanzania. In Rwanda, the Programme will work closely
with Rwanda Food and Drugs to review the regulatory framework and standard operating procedures (SOP’s). In
Uganda, the program will engage DDA to review the Dairy Industry Act and the Animal Disease and Health act and the
Animal Breeding Act (refer to section B.3.).
275. The Programme complements several planned and ongoing GCF programs in East Africa. At the regional level,
the objectives of the Programme complement the GCF regional program, Strengthening Climate Information Systems
for Climate Change Adaptation in the Greater Horn of Africa (GCF Concept note), aimed at strengthening climate
resilience in eight countries (IGAD members) through the establishment of early warning and climate dissemination
information system. It is also aligned with the ARCAFIM project, which covers the same countries. At a country level,
the Programme is aligned with several ongoing projects described in section B.1. (section Synergy with other projects).
276. The Programme was designed following an extensive consultation process with local stakeholders, ensuring
that the needs of recipients are considered and ensuring full country ownership of the Programme. The NDAs in each

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 | Despite this, strategies based on centuries of exposure to droughts and floods are becoming less effective due to | 
 | difficulties in implementing coping strategies. | 
 |  | 
 | 268. In Tanzania, the provinces of Tanga, Morogoro, and Pwani have the highest number of people affected by | 
 | flooding, with 10,000 to 25,000 people affected per administrative boundary on average per year. Exposure to drought | 
 | is comparatively lower in places such as the Kizigo Rungwa and Usungu Game Reserves, where population density is | 
 | lower. | 
 |  | 
 | 269. Each of these countries suffers from a significant development deficit, which negatively impacts their ability to | 
 | steer the dairy sector on a path to low-emission and climate-resilient development. In all four countries, public fiscal | 
 | space is limited (see section B.5), and governments rely heavily on official development assistance (ODA) and | 
 | concessional financing to fund their dairy sector programs. As a result, vulnerable populations, such as smallholders, | 
 | women, and youth in the dairy sector are highly exposed to climate risks due to technological, organizational, and policy | 
 | constraints. | 
 |  | 
 | 270. The lack of funding for climate-smart agriculture and climate-resilient practices is a significant barrier in the | 
 | region. Small-scale dairy pastoralists struggle to access credit and financial services, which is crucial for investing in | 
 | modern equipment, infrastructure, and better farming practices. This limitation exacerbates the vulnerability of the dairy | 
 | sector to climate-induced changes like unpredictable weather patterns, prolonged droughts and increased exposure to | 
 | disease, leading to reduced productivity and environmental degradation. | 
 |  | 
 | 271. In addition, poor communication between climate information suppliers and agricultural extension services, | 
 | limited institutional arrangements, insufficient resources to maintain observation networks, gaps in technical skills, and | 
 | underdeveloped communication networks in East Africa hinder the effective dissemination of climate information and | 
 | response to climate-related challenges in the region. | 
D.5. Country ownership |  | 
 | 272. Country ownership of the Programme is ensured through alignment with national policies and ongoing GCF | 
 | investments, as well as a participatory design process of the Programme. | 
 |  | 
 | 273. Participating countries’ NDCs focus on reducing GHG emissions and increasing resilience to CC. Support to | 
 | the dairy sector can benefit a variety of factors, including climate and environment, nutrition, sustainable rural | 
 | livelihoods, and social inclusion. Therefore, the Programme aligns with the national strategies of the participating | 
 | countries by supporting and complementing existing plans, policies and strategies related to agriculture, livestock, and | 
 | climate change. In Kenya, for example, the Programme aligns with the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (2019- | 
 | 2029), National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP), Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework | 
 | (2018‒2027), and Kenya National Strategy on Climate Change and Low Carbon Development. In Uganda, the | 
 | Programme aligns with the Livestock Development Strategy and Investment Plan (LDSIP), NAP, and National Climate | 
 | Change Strategy. In Rwanda, the Programme aligns with Rwanda's NDC, National Climate Change and Environment | 
 | Policy, Rwanda Livestock Master Plan, National Adaptation Plan for the Agricultural Sector, and National Livestock | 
 | Policy. | 
 |  | 
 | 274. In addition, the Programme aims to integrate climate change adaptation and mitigation by reviewing and | 
 | developing national dairy policies, such as the Dairy Industry Strategy and Investment Plan, and the Dairy Industry Act | 
 | (1958) in Kenya. The Dairy Act to update regulations on raw milk trade; the formulation of disease contingency and | 
 | control plans; the draft Tanzania Dairy Development Strategy in Tanzania. In Rwanda, the Programme will work closely | 
 | with Rwanda Food and Drugs to review the regulatory framework and standard operating procedures (SOP’s). In | 
 | Uganda, the program will engage DDA to review the Dairy Industry Act and the Animal Disease and Health act and the | 
 | Animal Breeding Act (refer to section B.3.). | 
 |  | 
 | 275. The Programme complements several planned and ongoing GCF programs in East Africa. At the regional level, | 
 | the objectives of the Programme complement the GCF regional program, Strengthening Climate Information Systems | 
 | for Climate Change Adaptation in the Greater Horn of Africa (GCF Concept note), aimed at strengthening climate | 
 | resilience in eight countries (IGAD members) through the establishment of early warning and climate dissemination | 
 | information system. It is also aligned with the ARCAFIM project, which covers the same countries. At a country level, | 
 | the Programme is aligned with several ongoing projects described in section B.1. (section Synergy with other projects). | 
 |  | 
 | 276. The Programme was designed following an extensive consultation process with local stakeholders, ensuring | 
 | that the needs of recipients are considered and ensuring full country ownership of the Programme. The NDAs in each | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
D
target countries were directly involved in all stages of Programme ideation, concept, preparation. In each country,
National Programme Preparation Teams (comprising a wide range of stakeholder from ministries of livestock and dairy
boards) were established in 2023, at the regional workshop in Kigali (September 2023). Through regional (Arusha,
February 2023; Kigali, September 2023) and national workshops (July and September 2023), stakeholders
engagement meetings were organised to ensure that the preparation of the Funding Proposal (CN process included)
involved a wide array of national and regional public institutions, private sector representatives and operators, civil
society, research institutions and development partners. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) details the list
of stakeholders and their involvement in the Programme design. The Programme benefited from high-level exposure
and engagement with Parties beyond the target countries during the validation of the GCF Project Preparation Facility
(PPF) at COP27.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness
277. The ex-ante financial and economic viability of the Programme is demonstrated by an economic and financial
analysis (EFA). Economic analysis looks at the profitability of investments for the entire Programme from the
perspective of society, while financial analysis considers the profitability of these investments from the perspective of
Programme participants. The Livestock Sector Investment Policy Toolkit (LSIPT) was used to develop the dairy
production models in all four countries. All the models estimate the “with” and “without” Programme situation over a 20-
years period. For cattle models, the ECORUM module of the LSIPT for simulating bio-economic performance of herd
of tropical domestic ruminants have been used. The parameters of the dairy herd models reflect the activities proposed
by the Programme. Five dairy herd models were developed for each of the countries. The national parameters and
ponderation between models are derived from the characteristics and national structure of the dairy herd in the
Programme intervention area, as presented in the pre-feasibility studies. The dairy herd models were: (i) small scale
intensive system/ zero grazing with cross breed and exotic animals; (ii) small scale intensive system/ zero grazing with
exotic animals; (iii) semi-intensive with cross breeds; (iv) semi-intensive with local breeds; and (v) extensive systems
with local breed. In addition, financial models were developed for MCPs; MCCs; dairy processing units, all powered by
solar panels, as well as service providers such as para-veterinary services. The Programme GHG mitigation impact
was evaluated using the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model, Interactive – GLEAM-i (Annex 22).
278. The Programme net cash flows are based on the incremental approach, which results from comparing the With
Programme Situation and Without Programme situation93. The financial models have been calculated at 17.5 percent
discount rate94, the average lending rate in Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Kenya. The selection criterion for the IRR
is to accept all Programmes for which the IRR is above the opportunity cost of capital. The financial analysis indicates
that the investments proposed by the Programme are profitable for the dairy farmers and cooperatives.
279. At the regional level, the analysis shows that DaIMA represents an economically viable investment for the
society. Economic performance indicators for Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Kenya, individually confirm economic
viability. At regional level, the aggregated ENPV of the countries’ incremental net benefit streams, discounted at 13.25
percent (social discount rate), is US$ 181.20 million, with an ERR of 25.0 percent for the baseline scenario. Additionally,
two additional economic performance scenarios are included, by integrating the economic value of the Programme’s
GHG emissions balance with a low carbon market price (LCP) assumption and a high carbon market price (HCP)
assumption. Under the LCP scenario, the ERR is 27.9 percent and the ENPV is US$ 217.87 million. Under the HCP
scenario, the ERR is 30.3 percent and the ENPV is US$ 254.64 million. The sensitivity analysis confirms that DAIMA
represents a robust economically worthwhile investment. For more information see Annex 3.
93 IFAD, 2015, Economic and Financial analysis of rural investment projects, basic concepts, and rationale.
94 World Bank data -average 2017 to 2020.

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 | target countries were directly involved in all stages of Programme ideation, concept, preparation. In each country, | 
 | National Programme Preparation Teams (comprising a wide range of stakeholder from ministries of livestock and dairy | 
 | boards) were established in 2023, at the regional workshop in Kigali (September 2023). Through regional (Arusha, | 
 | February 2023; Kigali, September 2023) and national workshops (July and September 2023), stakeholders | 
 | engagement meetings were organised to ensure that the preparation of the Funding Proposal (CN process included) | 
 | involved a wide array of national and regional public institutions, private sector representatives and operators, civil | 
 | society, research institutions and development partners. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7) details the list | 
 | of stakeholders and their involvement in the Programme design. The Programme benefited from high-level exposure | 
 | and engagement with Parties beyond the target countries during the validation of the GCF Project Preparation Facility | 
 | (PPF) at COP27. | 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness |  | 
 | 277. The ex-ante financial and economic viability of the Programme is demonstrated by an economic and financial | 
 | analysis (EFA). Economic analysis looks at the profitability of investments for the entire Programme from the | 
 | perspective of society, while financial analysis considers the profitability of these investments from the perspective of | 
 | Programme participants. The Livestock Sector Investment Policy Toolkit (LSIPT) was used to develop the dairy | 
 | production models in all four countries. All the models estimate the “with” and “without” Programme situation over a 20- | 
 | years period. For cattle models, the ECORUM module of the LSIPT for simulating bio-economic performance of herd | 
 | of tropical domestic ruminants have been used. The parameters of the dairy herd models reflect the activities proposed | 
 | by the Programme. Five dairy herd models were developed for each of the countries. The national parameters and | 
 | ponderation between models are derived from the characteristics and national structure of the dairy herd in the | 
 | Programme intervention area, as presented in the pre-feasibility studies. The dairy herd models were: (i) small scale | 
 | intensive system/ zero grazing with cross breed and exotic animals; (ii) small scale intensive system/ zero grazing with | 
 | exotic animals; (iii) semi-intensive with cross breeds; (iv) semi-intensive with local breeds; and (v) extensive systems | 
 | with local breed. In addition, financial models were developed for MCPs; MCCs; dairy processing units, all powered by | 
 | solar panels, as well as service providers such as para-veterinary services. The Programme GHG mitigation impact | 
 | was evaluated using the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model, Interactive – GLEAM-i (Annex 22). | 
 |  | 
 | 278. The Programme net cash flows are based on the incremental approach, which results from comparing the With | 
 | Programme Situation and Without Programme situation93. The financial models have been calculated at 17.5 percent | 
 | discount rate94, the average lending rate in Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Kenya. The selection criterion for the IRR | 
 | is to accept all Programmes for which the IRR is above the opportunity cost of capital. The financial analysis indicates | 
 | that the investments proposed by the Programme are profitable for the dairy farmers and cooperatives. | 
 |  | 
 | 279. At the regional level, the analysis shows that DaIMA represents an economically viable investment for the | 
 | society. Economic performance indicators for Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, and Kenya, individually confirm economic | 
 | viability. At regional level, the aggregated ENPV of the countries’ incremental net benefit streams, discounted at 13.25 | 
 | percent (social discount rate), is US$ 181.20 million, with an ERR of 25.0 percent for the baseline scenario. Additionally, | 
 | two additional economic performance scenarios are included, by integrating the economic value of the Programme’s | 
 | GHG emissions balance with a low carbon market price (LCP) assumption and a high carbon market price (HCP) | 
 | assumption. Under the LCP scenario, the ERR is 27.9 percent and the ENPV is US$ 217.87 million. Under the HCP | 
 | scenario, the ERR is 30.3 percent and the ENPV is US$ 254.64 million. The sensitivity analysis confirms that DAIMA | 
 | represents a robust economically worthwhile investment. For more information see Annex 3. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
E.1. Programme Focus
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Assessmen Current state (baseline) Potential target scenario How the project/programme will contribute
t Dimension Description Rating (Description) (Description)
Livestock, especially cattle, are the main Implementing a set of integrated and
source of methane emissions in the East transformative interventions (animal health,
Africa region, representing about 70 feed and feeding strategies, artificial
percent of total emissions from livestock Paradigm shift will involve a move away from the insemination, herd management, methane
and the second highest source, current state of growing absolute emissions, low inhibitors, manure management, renewable
representing about 14 percent from production efficiencies, informal and climate- energies etc.), combined with strengthened
agriculture, forestry and other land uses. vulnerable dairy sector, with limited access to national capacities (veterinary and extension
Without a major shift to low-carbon services, including extension, finance and milk support services), and enabling conditions
practices and mitigation pathways across markets. (including better access to finance, at
all dairy production systems, trends in concessional terms) that are required to
absolute and emission intensities will Shift from low production efficiencies to improved, make dairy food system more efficient,
continue to rise by 2050, in the context of gender-sensitive, integrated and NDC-aligned climate resilient and on a sustainable
a growing demand and growth of the dairy practices that reduce emissions at farm and food pathway to decarbonization.
cattle population in the region. system levels (including interventions that reduce Scaling-up of pasture management practices
Scale Medium
milk losses and increase milk collection, decarbonize (rotational grazing, agroforestry,
Exacerbated climate hazards are reported processing, formalize marketing chains for milk and management of grazing intensity etc.)
to cause serious impacts on and risks to enhance partnerships with the private sector), as well through gender-sensitive public and private
as interventions which increase rangelands extension, ensuring availability of high-quality
the dairy sector with direct and indirect
ecosystems resilience and services, and promote feeds and fodder, breeds to reduce emission
effects being heat stresses, droughts,
circularity. intensities, while sustaining production levels
flooding and other extreme weather
throughout the year, and enhancing soil
among others affecting productivity,
Paradigm shift will be accompanied by measures that carbon sequestration.
changes in disease patterns, availability
strengthen low-carbon climate-resilient dairy policies,
and quality of animal feeds, and regulation and institutional capacities. The Programme will advance regional,
ecosystem services (degradation of national and local legislative and regulatory
pastures for grazing, reduced soil carbon frameworks that encourage investment in
sequestration). low-emission or climate-resilient dairy sector
development.

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.1. Programme Focus |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessmen
t Dimension |  |  | Current state (baseline) |  |  |  |  | Potential target scenario
(Description) | How the project/programme will contribute
(Description) | 
 |  |  | Description |  |  | Rating |  |  |  | 
Scale |  | Livestock, especially cattle, are the main
source of methane emissions in the East
Africa region, representing about 70
percent of total emissions from livestock
and the second highest source,
representing about 14 percent from
agriculture, forestry and other land uses.
Without a major shift to low-carbon
practices and mitigation pathways across
all dairy production systems, trends in
absolute and emission intensities will
continue to rise by 2050, in the context of
a growing demand and growth of the dairy
cattle population in the region.
Exacerbated climate hazards are reported
to cause serious impacts on and risks to
the dairy sector with direct and indirect
effects being heat stresses, droughts,
flooding and other extreme weather
among others affecting productivity,
changes in disease patterns, availability
and quality of animal feeds, and
ecosystem services (degradation of
pastures for grazing, reduced soil carbon
sequestration). |  |  | Medium |  |  | Paradigm shift will involve a move away from the
current state of growing absolute emissions, low
production efficiencies, informal and climate-
vulnerable dairy sector, with limited access to
services, including extension, finance and milk
markets.
Shift from low production efficiencies to improved,
gender-sensitive, integrated and NDC-aligned
practices that reduce emissions at farm and food
system levels (including interventions that reduce
milk losses and increase milk collection, decarbonize
processing, formalize marketing chains for milk and
enhance partnerships with the private sector), as well
as interventions which increase rangelands
ecosystems resilience and services, and promote
circularity.
Paradigm shift will be accompanied by measures that
strengthen low-carbon climate-resilient dairy policies,
regulation and institutional capacities. | Implementing a set of integrated and
transformative interventions (animal health,
feed and feeding strategies, artificial
insemination, herd management, methane
inhibitors, manure management, renewable
energies etc.), combined with strengthened
national capacities (veterinary and extension
support services), and enabling conditions
(including better access to finance, at
concessional terms) that are required to
make dairy food system more efficient,
climate resilient and on a sustainable
pathway to decarbonization.
Scaling-up of pasture management practices
(rotational grazing, agroforestry,
management of grazing intensity etc.)
through gender-sensitive public and private
extension, ensuring availability of high-quality
feeds and fodder, breeds to reduce emission
intensities, while sustaining production levels
throughout the year, and enhancing soil
carbon sequestration.
The Programme will advance regional,
national and local legislative and regulatory
frameworks that encourage investment in
low-emission or climate-resilient dairy sector
development. | 

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
E
Low-carbon climate-resilient practices in
At local level, the Programme will facilitate
the dairy sector are supported by other
knowledge transfer through public (e.g. L-
projects and partially implemented locally
FFS) and private (through cooperatives or
through dairy farmers’ indigenous/
aggregators) extension.
traditional knowledge, but these practices
are currently not adopted and replicated at If well demonstrated (through public and private
The GDFF financing and technical assistance
scale. Post-farm gate adoption of extension and robust business models), if
facility (with concessional terms) will have a
renewable energies (e.g. solar) remains accompanied by appropriate concessional financing
catalytic effect on adoption of climate smart
low, despite considerable interest from the solutions, and if well-promoted locally and regionally,
practices. In addition, the establishment of
private sector in decarbonizing their paradigm shift can be replicated by farmers outside
regional Centers of Excellence for technology
operations. the project areas, to other countries in the region,
validation, regional cooperation platforms as
and even internationally.
well as participation in global networks
Dairy farmers and processors have limited
facilitates the replication of knowledge and
incentives to adopt practices and
practices across the region and
Replicability technologies due to institutional, Medium
internationally.
knowledge, social, natural, financial
(including government spending and
The Programme will generate detailed Tier2
commercial lending) and technological
emissions data by enhancing MRV
barriers.
capacities, which are crucial to improving
Appropriate reporting on emissions with a well-
national inventories and informing evidence-
This is in addition to missing national data functioning MRV system for the livestock sector
based policies, planning, and investments. A
on herd, numbers, parameters, production allows to enhance the quality and precision of
regional database on practices, GHG
needed to accurately conduct GHG inventories and mobilize more climate finance for
emissions, and adaptation indicators will be
emission assessments, analyze technical replication across the EAC region, and even other
established. With the implementation of MRV
improvements, and ascertain countries.
framework, data gaps are bridged, and
measurement, reporting and verification
climate scenarios and assessments are
(MRVs). This limitation in reporting
strengthened, hence allowing more access to
prevents leveraging more climate finance,
climate finance, including private.
hence replication across the region.
Paradigm shift would see sustainable governmental To ensure sustainability, the Programme will
and private sector support to implement work closely with the relevant government
transformative interventions for a climate-resilient and regional institutions and enhance their
The commitment of the governments of
and low carbon dairy sector. capacity and delivery of services (extension,
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
animal health etc.).
for implementing low-carbon and climate-
Implement interventions in line with the nationally
resilient pathways for livestock are
owned NDCs, as well as regional policies. The Programme will also work closely with
Sustainability evidenced in their NDCs, NAMA and Medium
Given that many dairy farmers are small-scale, farmers organizations (cooperatives for milk
sectoral policies, and livestock master
farmers cooperatives to better meet the requirements collection), the private operators
plans (when applicable). Regionally, the
of national financing institutions will be explored, (aggregators, processors, supporting
East Africa Commission (EAC) also has a
while catering for specific circumstances of the enterprises such as agri-inputs – AI, dairy
framework on low emission livestock.
cooperative members. It should also promote key meals, fodder seed, PV solar solution
incentives for adoption, leading to increased revenue providers, climate smart and digital tech) to
or reduced production costs.

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
Replicability | Low-carbon climate-resilient practices in
the dairy sector are supported by other
projects and partially implemented locally
through dairy farmers’ indigenous/
traditional knowledge, but these practices
are currently not adopted and replicated at
scale. Post-farm gate adoption of
renewable energies (e.g. solar) remains
low, despite considerable interest from the
private sector in decarbonizing their
operations.
Dairy farmers and processors have limited
incentives to adopt practices and
technologies due to institutional,
knowledge, social, natural, financial
(including government spending and
commercial lending) and technological
barriers.
This is in addition to missing national data
on herd, numbers, parameters, production
needed to accurately conduct GHG
emission assessments, analyze technical
improvements, and ascertain
measurement, reporting and verification
(MRVs). This limitation in reporting
prevents leveraging more climate finance,
hence replication across the region. | Medium | If well demonstrated (through public and private
extension and robust business models), if
accompanied by appropriate concessional financing
solutions, and if well-promoted locally and regionally,
paradigm shift can be replicated by farmers outside
the project areas, to other countries in the region,
and even internationally.
Appropriate reporting on emissions with a well-
functioning MRV system for the livestock sector
allows to enhance the quality and precision of
inventories and mobilize more climate finance for
replication across the EAC region, and even other
countries. | At local level, the Programme will facilitate
knowledge transfer through public (e.g. L-
FFS) and private (through cooperatives or
aggregators) extension.
The GDFF financing and technical assistance
facility (with concessional terms) will have a
catalytic effect on adoption of climate smart
practices. In addition, the establishment of
regional Centers of Excellence for technology
validation, regional cooperation platforms as
well as participation in global networks
facilitates the replication of knowledge and
practices across the region and
internationally.
The Programme will generate detailed Tier2
emissions data by enhancing MRV
capacities, which are crucial to improving
national inventories and informing evidence-
based policies, planning, and investments. A
regional database on practices, GHG
emissions, and adaptation indicators will be
established. With the implementation of MRV
framework, data gaps are bridged, and
climate scenarios and assessments are
strengthened, hence allowing more access to
climate finance, including private.
Sustainability | The commitment of the governments of
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
for implementing low-carbon and climate-
resilient pathways for livestock are
evidenced in their NDCs, NAMA and
sectoral policies, and livestock master
plans (when applicable). Regionally, the
East Africa Commission (EAC) also has a
framework on low emission livestock. | Medium | Paradigm shift would see sustainable governmental
and private sector support to implement
transformative interventions for a climate-resilient
and low carbon dairy sector.
Implement interventions in line with the nationally
owned NDCs, as well as regional policies.
Given that many dairy farmers are small-scale,
farmers cooperatives to better meet the requirements
of national financing institutions will be explored,
while catering for specific circumstances of the
cooperative members. It should also promote key
incentives for adoption, leading to increased revenue
or reduced production costs. | To ensure sustainability, the Programme will
work closely with the relevant government
and regional institutions and enhance their
capacity and delivery of services (extension,
animal health etc.).
The Programme will also work closely with
farmers organizations (cooperatives for milk
collection), the private operators
(aggregators, processors, supporting
enterprises such as agri-inputs – AI, dairy
meals, fodder seed, PV solar solution
providers, climate smart and digital tech) to

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
E
demonstrate the switch towards climate-smart
practices.
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
IRMF Means of Verification Target
GCF Result Area Baseline Assumptions / Note
Indicator (MoV) Mid-term Final95
Surveys at mid-term(years -324,234 tCO2 eq. (final)
3) and end-line (year 6) -1,080,780 tCO2 eq. (end of
lifespan period)
Monitoring with the Global
-162,217 tCO2 eq.
(see Annex 22 for details) Consolidated values from (i)
Livestock Environmental (see Annex 22 for details)
reduced emissions from dairy
Assessment Model,
Of which: cattle, (ii) soil carbon
interactive (GLEAM-i) Of which:
MRA4 la F n o d r e u s s t e ry and C r o e re r m e d o u 1 v c : e e G d d H / , s a G e v q o e u i m e d s e is t d e s r i o o e r n d s T fr I o E m R t 2 h e d a M ta R g V e s n y e s ra te te m d 0 - C (C 3 H 7 H 4 ,6 4 ) 0 ; m 2 -4 a t , C n 3 u 7 O r 4 e 2 e ) tC ; q - . O 1 ( 2 , e 2 e n 9 q t 6 e . ric - t C C 7 H 5 O 4 ,2 2 ) e 0 ; q 4 -8 . , t , C 7 2 4 0 O 7 2 y e e tC q a . O r s ( 2 - ) 2 e ( 5 q e 0 . n ( , t 6 - e 8 ri 2 c s r s e e e l q q y u u o e e n s s t t e r r a m a t t i i is o o s n n i . o T T n ie h a r is n 2 d i n f a d c ic to a r t s o r will
under component 1 (output
tCO2eq. (CO2); 3,288
29,157 tCO2eq., 20 years) generated under sub-activity
1.3) will be used to run (CH4 manure); 1.3.1.1 (respiratory chambers,
tCO2eq. (N2O)
GLEAM-i and estimate +6,575 tCO2eq. (+21,918 flux towers).
sequestration in each tCO2eq.,20 years) (N2O);-
country. 2,593 tCO2eq. (-8,642
tCO2eq., 20 years) (CO2)
Electricity meters to track
amount of grid/ diesel
electricity displaced 326,612 tCO2eq. (end of
project)
Measure annual biogas
1,088,705 (end of total Project will successfully displace
MRA1 Energy Core 1: GHG emissions production from cattle 163,306 tCO2eq. lifespan period) a significant percentage of
manure using volumetric
generation and access reduced, avoided or 0 (see Annex 22 for details) (see Annex 22 for details) electricity consumed in milk
flow meters
removed/sequestered collection center, milk processing
Calculate emission savings centers and farms.
based on evidence/ activity
data from surveys in years
3 and 6
95 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | demonstrate the switch towards climate-smart
practices. |  |  | 
 | E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result Area |  |  | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification
(MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  |  |  |  | Assumptions / Note | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final95 |  |  |  | 
MRA4 Forestry and
land use |  |  | Core 1: GHG emissions
reduced, avoided or
removed/sequestered | Surveys at mid-term(years
3) and end-line (year 6)
Monitoring with the Global
Livestock Environmental
Assessment Model,
interactive (GLEAM-i)
TIER 2 data generated
from the MRV system
under component 1 (output
1.3) will be used to run
GLEAM-i and estimate
sequestration in each
country. |  |  | 0 | -162,217 tCO2 eq.
(see Annex 22 for details)
Of which:
-37,602 tCO2eq. (enteric
CH4); -4,374 tCO2eq.
(CH4 manure); -1,296
tCO2eq. (CO2); 3,288
tCO2eq. (N2O) |  |  | -324,234 tCO2 eq. (final)
-1,080,780 tCO2 eq. (end of
lifespan period)
(see Annex 22 for details)
Of which:
-75,204 tCO2eq. (-250,682
tCO2eq., 20 years) (enteric
CH4); -8,747 tCO2eq. (-
29,157 tCO2eq., 20 years)
(CH4 manure);
+6,575 tCO2eq. (+21,918
tCO2eq.,20 years) (N2O);-
2,593 tCO2eq. (-8,642
tCO2eq., 20 years) (CO2) |  |  |  | Consolidated values from (i)
reduced emissions from dairy
cattle, (ii) soil carbon
sequestration. This indicator will
rely on emission and
sequestration Tier 2 factors
generated under sub-activity
1.3.1.1 (respiratory chambers,
flux towers). | 
MRA1 Energy
generation and access |  |  | Core 1: GHG emissions
reduced, avoided or
removed/sequestered | Electricity meters to track
amount of grid/ diesel
electricity displaced
Measure annual biogas
production from cattle
manure using volumetric
flow meters
Calculate emission savings
based on evidence/ activity
data from surveys in years
3 and 6 |  |  | 0 | 163,306 tCO2eq.
(see Annex 22 for details) |  |  | 326,612 tCO2eq. (end of
project)
1,088,705 (end of total
lifespan period)
(see Annex 22 for details) |  |  |  | Project will successfully displace
a significant percentage of
electricity consumed in milk
collection center, milk processing
centers and farms. | 

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
E
Total: Total:
1,016,000 direct 2.5 million direct Direct beneficiaries include dairy
beneficiaries (40% beneficiaries (40% women, farmers and other value-chain
women, 30% youth) 30% youth) actors (e.g. MCPs, MCCs,
SMEs…). Dairy farmers
Reports disaggregated by Reports disaggregated by (individuals) calculated based on
country, type of country, type of beneficiary (i) the number of dairy animals in
beneficiary (direct or (direct or indirect) gender targeted areas
Yearly progress reports indirect) gender and youth. and youth. (districts/counties), (ii) number of
ARA1 Most
Core 2: Direct and indirect animals per household and per
vulnerable people and Mid-term (year 3) and end- 0 5.6 million indirect 15.4 million indirect
beneficiaries reached production system (based on
communities line surveys (year 6) beneficiaries beneficiaries
GLEAM database). See
Feasibility Study (Chapter V) for
more details.
Indirect beneficiaries based on
the total rural population keeping
livestock in the targeted project
areas
Rangeland restoration proceeds
Mid-term and completion as planned.
Core 4: Hectares of
surveys in years 3 and 6, This indicator, combined with the
natural resources brought
ARA4 Ecosystems using remote sensing (e.g. sequestration factor under
under improved low-
and ecosystem NDVI) and ground truthing, 0 89,181 hectares 178,362 hectares MRA4, will provide an estimate
emission and/or climate-
services and data from MIS system. of impacts of the restoration
resilient management
activities.
practice
Beneficiaries are dairy farmers
using rangelands and pastures
as a main feed source, as well as
850,600 direct About 2,13 million direct
farmers in other systems
ARA4 Ecosystems beneficiaries beneficiaries
Core 2: Direct and indirect Mid-term and completion practicing the ‘cut and carry'.
and ecosystem 0
services beneficiaries reached study in years 3 and 6 1.4 million indirect About 5.7 million indirect
Indirect beneficiaries are based
beneficiaries beneficiaries
on the total rural population
keeping livestock in grazing/
extensive and semi-grazing

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
ARA1 Most
vulnerable people and
communities | Core 2: Direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached | Yearly progress reports
Mid-term (year 3) and end-
line surveys (year 6) | 0 | Total:
1,016,000 direct
beneficiaries (40%
women, 30% youth)
Reports disaggregated by
country, type of
beneficiary (direct or
indirect) gender and youth.
5.6 million indirect
beneficiaries | Total:
2.5 million direct
beneficiaries (40% women,
30% youth)
Reports disaggregated by
country, type of beneficiary
(direct or indirect) gender
and youth.
15.4 million indirect
beneficiaries | Direct beneficiaries include dairy
farmers and other value-chain
actors (e.g. MCPs, MCCs,
SMEs…). Dairy farmers
(individuals) calculated based on
(i) the number of dairy animals in
targeted areas
(districts/counties), (ii) number of
animals per household and per
production system (based on
GLEAM database). See
Feasibility Study (Chapter V) for
more details.
Indirect beneficiaries based on
the total rural population keeping
livestock in the targeted project
areas
ARA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | Core 4: Hectares of
natural resources brought
under improved low-
emission and/or climate-
resilient management
practice | Mid-term and completion
surveys in years 3 and 6,
using remote sensing (e.g.
NDVI) and ground truthing,
and data from MIS system. | 0 | 89,181 hectares | 178,362 hectares | Rangeland restoration proceeds
as planned.
This indicator, combined with the
sequestration factor under
MRA4, will provide an estimate
of impacts of the restoration
activities.
ARA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | Core 2: Direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached | Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6 | 0 | 850,600 direct
beneficiaries
1.4 million indirect
beneficiaries | About 2,13 million direct
beneficiaries
About 5.7 million indirect
beneficiaries | Beneficiaries are dairy farmers
using rangelands and pastures
as a main feed source, as well as
farmers in other systems
practicing the ‘cut and carry'.
Indirect beneficiaries are based
on the total rural population
keeping livestock in grazing/
extensive and semi-grazing

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
E
areas (within targeted districts
and counties).
Total: 800,000 dairy Total: about 2,700,000 Number of dairy cows calculated,
Supplementary 4.2: Surveys in years 3 and 6 to animals dairy animals with GLEAM.
ARA4 Ecosystems
Number of livestock monitor the total number of Reports disaggregated by Reports disaggregated by
and ecosystem brought under sustainable cows under sustainable 0 country, type of farming country, type of farming
services management practices management practices. system system
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Baseline context Rating for current state Target scenario How the Programme will
Core Indicator Coverage
(description) (baseline) (description) contribute
Ministries responsible for
livestock, National Dairy
Boards, and dairy A climate-responsive policy
cooperatives are and regulatory
spearheading the environment created
transformation of the dairy through the review of the
sector to a low carbon and Ministries responsible for dairy sector's institutional
climate resilient industry, in livestock, National Dairy frameworks in a
line with their mandates Boards, large-scale participatory and country-
Core Indicator 5: Degree to and NDCs. However, these processors, and dairy driven manner.
which GCF investments championing institutions cooperatives develop the
contribute to strengthening need more and better required skills and Through regional
institutional and regulatory understanding of climate capacities to align their cooperation and
highmedium Multi-countries
frameworks for low change adaptation and policies and regulations knowledge sharing,
emission climate-resilient mitigation risks, and and enhance their capacity coordinated strategies will
development pathways in a investment opportunities to to carry out climate be ensured, individual
country-driven manner address them. vulnerability assessments country efforts will be
Countries’ policies and and run MRV systems and amplified, and joint
regulations need to be better report their learning on CCA and CCM
updated (and aligned with emissions. will be fostered.
regional/ EAC policies/
regulation) to enable Improving GHG MRV
access to agro-inputs and capacities and monitoring
technology for more climate vulnerabilities.
efficiency in dairy
production.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | areas (within targeted districts
and counties).
ARA4 Ecosystems
and ecosystem
services | Supplementary 4.2:
Number of livestock
brought under sustainable
management practices | Surveys in years 3 and 6 to
monitor the total number of
cows under sustainable
management practices. | 0 | Total: 800,000 dairy
animals
Reports disaggregated by
country, type of farming
system | Total: about 2,700,000
dairy animals
Reports disaggregated by
country, type of farming
system | Number of dairy cows calculated,
with GLEAM.

--- Table 2 on Page 80 ---
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator | Baseline context
(description) | Rating for current state
(baseline) | Target scenario
(description) | How the Programme will
contribute | Coverage
Core Indicator 5: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to strengthening
institutional and regulatory
frameworks for low
emission climate-resilient
development pathways in a
country-driven manner | Ministries responsible for
livestock, National Dairy
Boards, and dairy
cooperatives are
spearheading the
transformation of the dairy
sector to a low carbon and
climate resilient industry, in
line with their mandates
and NDCs. However, these
championing institutions
need more and better
understanding of climate
change adaptation and
mitigation risks, and
investment opportunities to
address them.
Countries’ policies and
regulations need to be
updated (and aligned with
regional/ EAC policies/
regulation) to enable
access to agro-inputs and
technology for more
efficiency in dairy
production. | highmedium | Ministries responsible for
livestock, National Dairy
Boards, large-scale
processors, and dairy
cooperatives develop the
required skills and
capacities to align their
policies and regulations
and enhance their capacity
to carry out climate
vulnerability assessments
and run MRV systems and
better report their
emissions. | A climate-responsive policy
and regulatory
environment created
through the review of the
dairy sector's institutional
frameworks in a
participatory and country-
driven manner.
Through regional
cooperation and
knowledge sharing,
coordinated strategies will
be ensured, individual
country efforts will be
amplified, and joint
learning on CCA and CCM
will be fostered.
Improving GHG MRV
capacities and monitoring
climate vulnerabilities. | Multi-countries

--- Table 3 on Page 80 ---
Baseline context
(description)

--- Table 4 on Page 80 ---
Rating for current state
(baseline)

--- Table 5 on Page 80 ---
Target scenario
(description)

--- Table 6 on Page 80 ---
How the Programme will
contribute

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
E
Moreover, activity data on
herds, numbers,
parameters, and milk
production is lacking to
conduct accurate GHG
emission assessments,
analyze technical
improvements, improve
emissions inventories, and
“feed” MRV systems.
The Programme will invest
in proximity veterinary and
para veterinary and
breeding services, as well
as extension services
(through L-FFS and other
approaches) to reach out
Lack of incentives (for
to dairy farmers for
dairy farmers,
technology deployment,
communities, and the
dissemination,
broader private sector) and
Dairy farmers are informed development and transfer
collective learning
and adopt climate and innovation.
mechanisms to invest in
Core Indicator 6: Degree to adaptation and mitigation Participatory learning
adaptation and mitigation
which GCF investments practices, based on (including women) and
opportunities.
contribute to technology traditional/ local promotion of sustainable
highmedium Multi-countries
deployment, dissemination, knowledge, and based on grazing practices and land
Wide range of emissions
development or transfer latest evidence from management which will
intensities (GHG per kg of
and innovation science/ research on low- help rehabilitate degraded
milk produced), reflecting
carbon climate resilient rangelands, promote
the wide range in adoption
livestock (e.g. ILRI, FAO). fodder access, and
of improved technologies
address the natural barrier
by dairy farmers in
to rangeland degradation.
intensive, semi-intensive
Technologies that increase
and extensive systems.
operations’ efficiencies and
decarbonization, organized
marketing chains for milk
ensuring efficient offtake
and development of cold
chain infrastructure along
the entire supply chain

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 | Moreover, activity data on
herds, numbers,
parameters, and milk
production is lacking to
conduct accurate GHG
emission assessments,
analyze technical
improvements, improve
emissions inventories, and
“feed” MRV systems. |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator 6: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to technology
deployment, dissemination,
development or transfer
and innovation | Lack of incentives (for
dairy farmers,
communities, and the
broader private sector) and
collective learning
mechanisms to invest in
adaptation and mitigation
opportunities.
Wide range of emissions
intensities (GHG per kg of
milk produced), reflecting
the wide range in adoption
of improved technologies
by dairy farmers in
intensive, semi-intensive
and extensive systems. | highmedium | Dairy farmers are informed
and adopt climate
adaptation and mitigation
practices, based on
traditional/ local
knowledge, and based on
latest evidence from
science/ research on low-
carbon climate resilient
livestock (e.g. ILRI, FAO). | The Programme will invest
in proximity veterinary and
para veterinary and
breeding services, as well
as extension services
(through L-FFS and other
approaches) to reach out
to dairy farmers for
technology deployment,
dissemination,
development and transfer
and innovation.
Participatory learning
(including women) and
promotion of sustainable
grazing practices and land
management which will
help rehabilitate degraded
rangelands, promote
fodder access, and
address the natural barrier
to rangeland degradation.
Technologies that increase
operations’ efficiencies and
decarbonization, organized
marketing chains for milk
ensuring efficient offtake
and development of cold
chain infrastructure along
the entire supply chain | Multi-countries

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
E
leading to reduced
emissions from food loss
and waste and better
returns.
The financing and
technical assistance facility
(with concessional terms)
will have a catalytic effect
on the adoption of
practices and innovations.
Specialized livestock
extension services are
strengthened to provide
effective support on good
The Programme will invest
There is a need to practices for greater
Core indicator 8: Degree to in regional cooperation and
enhance and update efficiency, climate
which GCF investments knowledge sharing,
knowledge at local, resilience and GHG
contribute to effective institutional strengthening
national and regional levels emissions reduction. As
knowledge generation and for improved livestock
about practices and medium mentioned under Core 6, Multi-countries
learning processes, and services, and in farmer-led
technologies for climate dairy farmers are informed
use of good practices, adaptation and mitigation
change mitigation and and adopt climate
methodologies and approaches (FFS).
adaptation in the dairy adaptation and mitigation
standards
sector. practices, based on
traditional/ local
knowledge, and based on
latest evidence from
science.
E.5. Programme specific indicators (programme outcomes and outputs)
Target
Programme results Means of Verification
Programme specific Indicator Baseline Assumptions / Note
(outcomes/ outputs) (MoV) Mid-term Final

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
 |  |  |  | leading to reduced
emissions from food loss
and waste and better
returns.
The financing and
technical assistance facility
(with concessional terms)
will have a catalytic effect
on the adoption of
practices and innovations. | 
Core indicator 8: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to effective
knowledge generation and
learning processes, and
use of good practices,
methodologies and
standards | There is a need to
enhance and update
knowledge at local,
national and regional levels
about practices and
technologies for climate
change mitigation and
adaptation in the dairy
sector. | medium | Specialized livestock
extension services are
strengthened to provide
effective support on good
practices for greater
efficiency, climate
resilience and GHG
emissions reduction. As
mentioned under Core 6,
dairy farmers are informed
and adopt climate
adaptation and mitigation
practices, based on
traditional/ local
knowledge, and based on
latest evidence from
science. | The Programme will invest
in regional cooperation and
knowledge sharing,
institutional strengthening
for improved livestock
services, and in farmer-led
adaptation and mitigation
approaches (FFS). | Multi-countries

--- Table 2 on Page 82 ---
E.5. Programme specific indicators (programme outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Programme results
(outcomes/ outputs) | Programme specific Indicator | Means of Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  | Assumptions / Note
 |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final | 

--- Table 3 on Page 82 ---
Programme results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 4 on Page 82 ---
Means of Verification
(MoV)

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
E
Core Indicator 5: Degree to which
See E.4 above
Mid-term and final review,
GCF projects/ programmes
qualitative and quantitative
Outcome 1: Systemic contribute to strengthening
assessments in years 3
and institutional institutional and regulatory
and 6
capacities of the frameworks for low-emission climate-
Programme completion
livestock sector are resilient development pathways in a
report.
strengthened to enable country-driven manner
smallholder dairy
producers and local Mid-term and final review, See E.4 above
Core Indicator 6: Degree to which
value chain actors to qualitative and quantitative
GCF projects/ programmes contribute
reduce CH4 and other assessments in years 3
GHG emissions to market development / and 6
transformation at the sectoral, local or
national level
Programme completion
report.
National Governments
National policies/ strategic Mid-term and final review, and National Dairy Boards
frameworks /regulations revised- qualitative assessments, 0 8 23 are willing to adopt a more
Output 1.1: Climate- Number Completion report formal dairy market
responsive policy and regulation framework.
regulatory environment National Governments
established Regional policy dialogues to Mid-term and final review, and Dairy Boards are
mainstream CC A&M in dairy policies qualitative assessments, 0 2 6 willing to invest in regional
- Number Completion report market integration.
Partnership with ECA
Veterinarians and para veterinarians
trained – Number by category, age 6-monthly progress reports 0 600 1,800 40% women, 30% youth
Output 1.2: Improved
and gender
service delivery to the
Extension officers / L-FFS facilitators
dairy sector
trained – Number by category, age 6-monthly progress reports 0 300 1,000 40% women, 30% youth
and gender
Willingness of national
MRV system for livestock in place
Output 1.3: Improved Governments to engage in
with Tier2 dairy emission factors 6-monthly progress reports No Yes Yes
GHG MRV capacities & capacity building and
generated - Yes/No
monitoring climate regional cooperation.
vulnerabilities National feed balances produced per
6-monthly progress reports 0 8 8
year – Number of FBS

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
Outcome 1: Systemic
and institutional
capacities of the
livestock sector are
strengthened to enable
smallholder dairy
producers and local
value chain actors to
reduce CH4 and other
GHG emissions | Core Indicator 5: Degree to which
GCF projects/ programmes
contribute to strengthening
institutional and regulatory
frameworks for low-emission climate-
resilient development pathways in a
country-driven manner |  |  | Mid-term and final review,
qualitative and quantitative
assessments in years 3
and 6
Programme completion
report. |  |  | See E.4 above |  |  |  |  | 
 | Core Indicator 6: Degree to which
GCF projects/ programmes contribute
to market development /
transformation at the sectoral, local or
national level |  |  |  | Mid-term and final review, |  | See E.4 above |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | qualitative and quantitative |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | assessments in years 3 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | and 6 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Programme completion |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | report. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.1: Climate-
responsive policy and
regulatory environment
established | National policies/ strategic
frameworks /regulations revised-
Number |  |  | Mid-term and final review,
qualitative assessments,
Completion report |  |  | 0 | 8 | 23 |  | National Governments | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and National Dairy Boards | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | are willing to adopt a more | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | formal dairy market | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regulation framework. | 
 | Regional policy dialogues to
mainstream CC A&M in dairy policies
- Number |  |  | Mid-term and final review,
qualitative assessments,
Completion report |  |  | 0 | 2 | 6 |  | National Governments | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and Dairy Boards are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | willing to invest in regional | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | market integration. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Partnership with ECA | 
Output 1.2: Improved
service delivery to the
dairy sector | t | Veterinarians and para veterinarians |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 600 | 1,800 | 40% women, 30% youth |  | 
 |  | rained – Number by category, age |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and gender |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | t | Extension officers / L-FFS facilitators |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 300 | 1,000 | 40% women, 30% youth |  | 
 |  | rained – Number by category, age |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and gender |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.3: Improved
GHG MRV capacities &
monitoring climate
vulnerabilities | MRV system for livestock in place
with Tier2 dairy emission factors
generated - Yes/No |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | No | Yes | Yes |  | Willingness of national | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Governments to engage in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity building and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regional cooperation. | 
 |  | National feed balances produced per |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 8 | 8 |  |  | 
 |  | year – Number of FBS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 83 ---

See E.4 above

--- Table 3 on Page 83 ---
Core Indicator 5: Degree to which
GCF projects/ programmes
contribute to strengthening
institutional and regulatory
frameworks for low-emission climate-
resilient development pathways in a
country-driven manner

--- Table 4 on Page 83 ---
Mid-term and final review,
qualitative and quantitative
assessments in years 3
and 6
Programme completion
report.

--- Table 5 on Page 83 ---
Outcome 1: Systemic
and institutional
capacities of the
ivestock sector are
strengthened to enable
smallholder dairy
producers and local
value chain actors to
educe CH4 and other
GHG emissions

--- Table 6 on Page 83 ---
Core Indicator 6: Degree to which
GCF projects/ programmes contribute
o market development /
ransformation at the sectoral, local or
national level

--- Table 7 on Page 83 ---
National policies/ strategic
rameworks /regulations revised-
Number

--- Table 8 on Page 83 ---
Mid-term and final review,
qualitative assessments,
Completion report

--- Table 9 on Page 83 ---
Output 1.1: Climate-
esponsive policy and
egulatory environment
established

--- Table 10 on Page 83 ---
Regional policy dialogues to
mainstream CC A&M in dairy policies
Number

--- Table 11 on Page 83 ---
Mid-term and final review,
qualitative assessments,
Completion report

--- Table 12 on Page 83 ---
Output 1.2: Improved
service delivery to the
dairy sector

--- Table 13 on Page 83 ---
MRV system for livestock in place
with Tier2 dairy emission factors
generated - Yes/No

--- Table 14 on Page 83 ---
Output 1.3: Improved
GHG MRV capacities &
monitoring climate
vulnerabilities

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
E
Regional repository on practices, Mid-term and final review, Willingness of national
Output 1.4: Knowledge GHG emissions per sources and qualitative assessments, 0 1 1 Governments to
management and systems - Number Completion report participate
enhanced regional Functional Regional knowledge Mid-term and final review, Willingness of national
cooperation sharing platform on climate-smart qualitative assessments, 0 1 1 Governments to
dairy sector transformation -Number Completion report participate
Kenya: - Kenya: -
Global Livestock 0.4 % 0.7% TIER 2 data generated
Environmental Kenya: 0% Rwanda: - Rwanda: - from the MRV system
Outcome 2: Smallholder GHG emissions from dairy production Assessment Model, Rwanda: 0% 1.8% 3.5% under component 1 (see
dairy producers and relative to BAU - percentage interactive (GLEAM-i) Tanzania: 0% Tanzania: - Tanzania: - output 1.3) will be used to
private sector value Mid-term and completion Uganda: 0% 0.9% 1.6% run the GLEAM-i model in
chain players operate study in years 3 and 6 Uganda: - Uganda: - each country.
within a low-emission, 1% 1.9%
climate-resilient, and Mid-term and completion Kenya:
Kenya:
sustainable pathway study in years 3 and 6 4.6%
9.3%
through increased Kenya: 0% Rwanda:
Rwanda:
production and market Milk production increase relative to Rwanda: 0% 10.9%
21.9% Activity data available
knowledge and tools BAU - Percentage Tanzania: 0% Tanzania:
Tanzania:
Uganda: 0% 5.4 %
10.8%
Uganda:
Uganda: 9%
4.5%
Dairy cooperatives legally established
6-monthly progress reports 0 200 650
Output 2.1: and functioning - Number
Smallholders’ and Dairy sector willingness to
Business alliances / linkages created
cooperative technical 6-monthly progress reports 0 50 106 invest in business
- Number
and business capacity alliances.
development Cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs with
strengthened. investments in renewable energy - 6-monthly progress reports 0 50 190
Number
70% of dairy farmers
Output 2.2: Breeding, Farmers using breeding services -
6-monthly progress reports 0 661,000 1.6 million 40% women and 30%
feed and fodder, manure Number
youth
management improved.
All animals will be covered
Farmers accessing animal health About 2.36 by vaccination campaigns.
When relevant, 6-monthly progress reports 0 0.94 million
services (vaccination) - Number million 40% women and 30%
indicators disaggregated
youth
by (i) type of recipient,
FFS covering climate-smart forage 40% women and 30%
(ii) gender, (iii) age 6-monthly progress reports 0 5,000 9,700
production, breeding, improved youth

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
Output 1.4: Knowledge
management and
enhanced regional
cooperation |  | Regional repository on practices, |  |  | Mid-term and final review, |  | 0 | 1 |  |  | 1 |  |  |  | Willingness of national | 
 |  | GHG emissions per sources and |  |  | qualitative assessments, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Governments to | 
 |  | systems - Number |  |  | Completion report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participate | 
 |  | Functional Regional knowledge |  |  | Mid-term and final review, |  | 0 | 1 |  |  | 1 |  |  |  | Willingness of national | 
 |  | sharing platform on climate-smart |  |  | qualitative assessments, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Governments to | 
 |  | dairy sector transformation -Number |  |  | Completion report |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participate | 
Outcome 2: Smallholder
dairy producers and
private sector value
chain players operate
within a low-emission,
climate-resilient, and
sustainable pathway
through increased
production and market
knowledge and tools | GHG emissions from dairy production
relative to BAU - percentage |  |  | Global Livestock
Environmental
Assessment Model,
interactive (GLEAM-i)
Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6 |  |  | Kenya: 0%
Rwanda: 0%
Tanzania: 0%
Uganda: 0% |  | Kenya: - |  |  | Kenya: - |  | TIER 2 data generated
from the MRV system
under component 1 (see
output 1.3) will be used to
run the GLEAM-i model in
each country. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0.4 % |  |  | 0.7% |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Rwanda: - |  |  | Rwanda: - |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1.8% |  |  | 3.5% |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Tanzania: - |  |  | Tanzania: - |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0.9% |  |  | 1.6% |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Uganda: - |  |  | Uganda: - |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1% |  |  | 1.9% |  |  |  | 
 | Milk production increase relative to
BAU - Percentage |  |  | Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6 |  |  | Kenya: 0%
Rwanda: 0%
Tanzania: 0%
Uganda: 0% |  | Kenya: |  | Kenya:
9.3%
Rwanda:
21.9%
Tanzania:
10.8%
Uganda: 9% |  |  | Activity data available |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4.6% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Rwanda: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 10.9% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Tanzania: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 5.4 % |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Uganda: |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4.5% |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2.1:
Smallholders’ and
cooperative technical
and business capacity
development
strengthened. |  | Dairy cooperatives legally established |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 200 |  |  | 650 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | and functioning - Number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Business alliances / linkages created
- Number |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 50 |  |  | 106 |  |  |  | Dairy sector willingness to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | invest in business | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | alliances. | 
 |  | Cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs with |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 50 |  |  | 190 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | investments in renewable energy - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2.2: Breeding,
feed and fodder, manure
management improved.
When relevant,
indicators disaggregated
by (i) type of recipient,
(ii) gender, (iii) age | Farmers using breeding services -
Number |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 661,000 |  |  | 1.6 million |  |  |  | 70% of dairy farmers | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 40% women and 30% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth | 
 | Farmers accessing animal health
services (vaccination) - Number |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 0.94 million |  |  | About 2.36
million |  |  |  | All animals will be covered | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | by vaccination campaigns. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 40% women and 30% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth | 
 |  | FFS covering climate-smart forage |  | 6-monthly progress reports |  |  | 0 | 5,000 |  |  | 9,700 |  |  |  | 40% women and 30% | 
 |  | production, breeding, improved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth | 

--- Table 2 on Page 84 ---
Output 1.4: Knowledge
management and
enhanced regional
cooperation

--- Table 3 on Page 84 ---
Global Livestock
Environmental
Assessment Model,
interactive (GLEAM-i)
Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6

--- Table 4 on Page 84 ---
TIER 2 data generated
from the MRV system
under component 1 (see
output 1.3) will be used to
run the GLEAM-i model in
each country.

--- Table 5 on Page 84 ---
Kenya: 0%
Rwanda: 0%
Tanzania: 0%
Uganda: 0%

--- Table 6 on Page 84 ---
Outcome 2: Smallholder
dairy producers and
private sector value
chain players operate
within a low-emission,
climate-resilient, and
sustainable pathway
hrough increased
production and market
knowledge and tools

--- Table 7 on Page 84 ---
GHG emissions from dairy production
elative to BAU - percentage

--- Table 8 on Page 84 ---
Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6

--- Table 9 on Page 84 ---
Kenya:
9.3%
Rwanda:
21.9%
Tanzania:
10.8%
Uganda: 9%

--- Table 10 on Page 84 ---
Kenya: 0%
Rwanda: 0%
Tanzania: 0%
Uganda: 0%

--- Table 11 on Page 84 ---
Milk production increase relative to
BAU - Percentage

--- Table 12 on Page 84 ---
Output 2.1:
Smallholders’ and
cooperative technical
and business capacity
development
strengthened.

--- Table 13 on Page 84 ---
Business alliances / linkages created
Number

--- Table 14 on Page 84 ---
Output 2.2: Breeding,
eed and fodder, manure
management improved.

When relevant,
ndicators disaggregated
by (i) type of recipient,
ii) gender, (iii) age

--- Table 15 on Page 84 ---
Farmers using breeding services -
Number

--- Table 16 on Page 84 ---
Farmers accessing animal health
services (vaccination) - Number

--- Table 17 on Page 84 ---
About 2.36
million

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
E
(youth vs non-youth), (iv) feeding and manure management -
country Number
40% women and 30%
Seed producers trained - Number 6-monthly progress reports 0 3,200 9,500
youth
Investments in water points/ water-
Individual and collective
harvesting systems for cattle – 6-monthly progress reports 0 20,000 59,945
types of water points
Number
Biodigesters installed - Number 6-monthly progress reports 0 2,310 6,930
The estimation of the area
of rangeland to be
rehabilitated was based
Natural resource areas brought under
on the annual amount of
improved low-emission and/or Mid-term and completion
0 89,181 178,362 biomass (fresh mixture
Output 2.3: Pasture and climate-resilient management study in years 3 and 6
and hay or silage of grass
grasslands management practices - Ha
and legumes) required to
improved.
meet the animal feed
intake for improved diet .
Number of farmers trained in pastures 40% women and 30%
and grasslands management - 6-monthly progress reports 0 113,165 339,500 youth. Farmers in grazing/
Number semi-grazing systems
Outcome 3: Financial
institutions make
available the
appropriate investment
resources to make the When relevant, indicators
necessary transition to Number of green dairy loans (DL) and 0 350 DL 1,000 DL disaggregated by (i) type
low-carbon, climate- Mid-term and completion
green dairy partnership loans (DP) of recipient, (ii) gender, (iii)
resilient, and study in years 3 and 6
approved 0 30 DP 90 DP age (youth vs non-youth),
sustainable dairy
(iv) country
production and
strengthen value chain
linkages and improved
productivity.
Output 3.1 Effective Volume of green partnership 6 monthly progress reports 0 US$17.5M US$ The split between
Green Financing for investments in the dairy value chain – 17.5 million partnership investments
Dairy Value Chains Million US and smaller dairy loan
products is tentative and
depends on market
demand.

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
(youth vs non-youth), (iv)
country |  |  | f | eeding and manure management - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Seed producers trained - Number |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports | 0 | 3,200 | 9,500 |  | 40% women and 30% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth | 
 |  |  | I | nvestments in water points/ water- |  | 6-monthly progress reports | 0 | 20,000 | 59,945 | Individual and collective
types of water points |  | 
 |  |  |  | harvesting systems for cattle – |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Biodigesters installed - Number |  |  | 6-monthly progress reports | 0 | 2,310 | 6,930 |  |  | 
Output 2.3: Pasture and
grasslands management
improved. |  |  | Natural resource areas brought under
improved low-emission and/or
climate-resilient management
practices - Ha |  |  | Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6 | 0 | 89,181 | 178,362 |  | The estimation of the area | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of rangeland to be | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | rehabilitated was based | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | on the annual amount of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | biomass (fresh mixture | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and hay or silage of grass | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and legumes) required to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | meet the animal feed | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | intake for improved diet . | 
 |  |  |  | Number of farmers trained in pastures |  | 6-monthly progress reports | 0 | 113,165 | 339,500 |  | 40% women and 30% | 
 |  |  |  | and grasslands management - |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth. Farmers in grazing/ | 
 |  |  |  | Number |  |  |  |  |  |  | semi-grazing systems | 
 | Outcome 3: Financial |  | Number of green dairy loans (DL) and
green dairy partnership loans (DP)
approved |  |  | Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6 | 0
0 | 350 DL
30 DP | 1,000 DL
90 DP | When relevant, indicators
disaggregated by (i) type
of recipient, (ii) gender, (iii)
age (youth vs non-youth),
(iv) country |  | 
 | institutions make |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | available the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | appropriate investment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | resources to make the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | necessary transition to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | low-carbon, climate- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | resilient, and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | sustainable dairy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | strengthen value chain |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | linkages and improved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | productivity. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 3.1 Effective
Green Financing for
Dairy Value Chains | Output 3.1 Effective |  | Volume of green partnership
investments in the dairy value chain –
Million US |  |  | 6 monthly progress reports | 0 | US$17.5M | US$
17.5 million |  | The split between | 
 | Green Financing for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | partnership investments | 
 | Dairy Value Chains |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | and smaller dairy loan | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | products is tentative and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | depends on market | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | demand. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 85 ---
youth vs non-youth), (iv)
country

--- Table 3 on Page 85 ---
Individual and collective
types of water points

--- Table 4 on Page 85 ---
Natural resource areas brought under
mproved low-emission and/or
climate-resilient management
practices - Ha

--- Table 5 on Page 85 ---
Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6

--- Table 6 on Page 85 ---
Output 2.3: Pasture and
grasslands management
mproved.

--- Table 7 on Page 85 ---
When relevant, indicators
disaggregated by (i) type
of recipient, (ii) gender, (iii)
age (youth vs non-youth),
(iv) country

--- Table 8 on Page 85 ---
Number of green dairy loans (DL) and
green dairy partnership loans (DP)
approved

--- Table 9 on Page 85 ---
0

0

--- Table 10 on Page 85 ---
350 DL

30 DP

--- Table 11 on Page 85 ---
1,000 DL

90 DP

--- Table 12 on Page 85 ---
Mid-term and completion
study in years 3 and 6

--- Table 13 on Page 85 ---
Volume of green partnership
nvestments in the dairy value chain –
Million US

--- Table 14 on Page 85 ---
US$
17.5 million

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
Volume of smaller dairy loan 6 monthly progress reports 0 US$17.5 M US$35M The investments will
products – Million US$ revolve twice during the 6
years’ period. The split
between partnership
investments and smaller
dairy loan products is
tentative and depends on
market demand
Performance of the GDFF Reports from the PDBs n/a Average Average IFAD will have a
participating Public Development NPL below NPL below comprehensive set of
Reports from the Retail
Banks and of the GDFF Retail 5% 5% financial performance and
Financial Institutions financial Financial Institutions development outcome
services offered to SMEs investing in indicators collected from
Green Dairy value chain. the PDBs and Retail FIs. .
Output 3.2 Capacity TA assessments for Green Dairy 6 monthly progress reports 0 30 67
Building for Green Dairy Loan Partnerships Approved Number
Investments
Programme co-benefit indicators
Co-benefit 1: Increased Surveys in year 6
food security and food (Programme completion No major external shocks
safety and quality for report) (i.e political or exogenous)
% of households that have increased
rural/urban consumers 0 20% 40% with impact on
their food security
beneficiaries and
programme sites.
% of women reporting increased Women members interest,
Surveys in year 6
Co-benefit 2: Improved decision-making power in dairy- ability and agreement to
(Programme completion 60%
women’s empowerment related investments & revenues 0 20% better manage the
report)
in dairy value chains (including access to and control over additional income
dairy production inputs or assets) generated.
E.6. Programme activities and deliverables
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate Ministries responsible for livestock and 1.1.1.1: Support the review and preparation
23 national dairy policies, strategies
Dairy Sector policies, strategies and National Dairy Boards will support an enabling of national dairy policies, strategies, and and regulations review and amended.
regulations for climate change regulatory environment for climate-sensitive regulations for climate-change adaptation and
8 regional policies supported.
adaptation and mitigation dairy value chain development. mitigation

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 |  |  | Volume of smaller dairy loan
products – Million US$ |  |  |  | 6 monthly progress reports |  | 0 | US$17.5 M | US$35M |  | The investments will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | revolve twice during the 6 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | years’ period. The split | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | between partnership | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | investments and smaller | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | dairy loan products is | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | tentative and depends on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | market demand | 
 |  |  |  | Performance of the GDFF |  |  | Reports from the PDBs
Reports from the Retail
Financial Institutions |  | n/a | Average
NPL below
5% | Average |  | IFAD will have a | 
 |  |  |  | participating Public Development |  |  |  |  |  |  | NPL below |  | comprehensive set of | 
 |  |  |  | Banks and of the GDFF Retail |  |  |  |  |  |  | 5% |  | financial performance and | 
 |  |  |  | Financial Institutions financial |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | development outcome | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | services offered to SMEs investing in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | indicators collected from | 
 |  |  |  | Green Dairy value chain. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the PDBs and Retail FIs. . | 
I | Output 3.2 Capacity |  | TA assessments for Green Dairy
Loan Partnerships Approved Number | TA assessments for Green Dairy |  |  | 6 monthly progress reports |  | 0 | 30 | 67 |  |  | 
 | Building for Green Dairy |  |  | Loan Partnerships Approved Number |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | nvestments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
f
r | Co-benefit 1: Increased |  | % of households that have increased
their food security |  |  |  | Surveys in year 6
(Programme completion
report) |  | 0 | 20% | 40% | No major external shocks
(i.e political or exogenous)
with impact on
beneficiaries and
programme sites. |  | 
 | ood security and food |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | safety and quality for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ural/urban consumers |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 2: Improved
women’s empowerment
in dairy value chains |  |  | r
( | % of women reporting increased |  |  | Surveys in year 6
(Programme completion
report) |  | 0 | 20% | 60% |  | Women members interest, | 
 |  |  |  | decision-making power in dairy- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ability and agreement to | 
 |  |  |  | elated investments & revenues |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | better manage the | 
 |  |  |  | including access to and control over |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | additional income | 
 |  |  |  | dairy production inputs or assets) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | generated. | 
E.6. Programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities |  |  |  |  | Description |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate
Dairy Sector policies, strategies and
regulations for climate change
adaptation and mitigation |  |  |  |  | Ministries responsible for livestock and
National Dairy Boards will support an enabling
regulatory environment for climate-sensitive
dairy value chain development. |  |  | 1.1.1.1: Support the review and preparation
of national dairy policies, strategies, and
regulations for climate-change adaptation and
mitigation |  |  | 23 national dairy policies, strategies
and regulations review and amended.
8 regional policies supported. |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 86 ---
Volume of smaller dairy loan
products – Million US$

--- Table 3 on Page 86 ---
Reports from the PDBs
Reports from the Retail
Financial Institutions


--- Table 4 on Page 86 ---
Average
NPL below
5%

--- Table 5 on Page 86 ---
Surveys in year 6
(Programme completion
report)

--- Table 6 on Page 86 ---
No major external shocks
(i.e political or exogenous)
with impact on
beneficiaries and
programme sites.

--- Table 7 on Page 86 ---
% of households that have increased
heir food security

--- Table 8 on Page 86 ---
Surveys in year 6
(Programme completion
report)


--- Table 9 on Page 86 ---
Co-benefit 2: Improved
women’s empowerment
n dairy value chains

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
Dairy Boards and local government are 1.1.1.2: Support the regional policy dialogue
increasingly aware of the challenges and to mainstream climate-change adaptation and In each country, dairy value chain
opportunities in climate change and the dairy mitigation in regional dairy policies, strategies stakeholders have inserted climate
value chain. and regulations change in the dairy value change
1.1.1.3: National dairy value chain governance and planning.
governance and awareness creation
1.1.1.4: District/regional/county level dairy
value chain governance and planning
Support to milk consumption and nutrition 1.1.2.1: Public awareness on the contribution
awareness, accompanied by nutrition of milk to nutrition and resilience, with focus 189 awareness campaigns on milk and
Activity 1.1.2: Launch awareness
education and social behavior change, aims on climate vulnerable populations nutrition
campaigns on nutritional benefits of
at improving nutritionally vulnerable group’s 1.1.2.2: Build capacity of dairy inspection to 60 inspectors trained on milk quality
milk and food safety aspects
consumption of milk, therefore enhancing ensure milk quality and safety and reduce and safety
their individual’s health and climate resilience. waste
The Programme will adopt a fit-for-purpose
approach to identify and mitigate tenure risks,
which are key barriers to sustainability, and Tenure governance capacity
adopt climate resilient and low carbon 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and assessments carried out in each
preparation of training materials country
practices. In Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda,
Activity 1.1.3: Improve land tenure
the main risk for intensive/zero-grazing is 1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure Capacity development on tenure
security for sustainable dairy farming
tenure insecurity, i.e. occupancy rights or land at decentralized level. carried out at local level (district/
ownership. In Rwanda, the focus will be on county)
optimizing land production and productivity
through land consolidation and land use
planning.
Proximity veterinary and para veterinary
capacity will be enhanced to be able to reach 1.2.1.1: Support installation of both private 1,800 veterinarians, para veterinarians
out to dairy farmers, using the One Health and public veterinarians and veterinary and LEWs trained and equipped.
Activity 1.2.1: Strengthen veterinary
Approach. paraprofessionals Reference laboratories in Kenya (7),
services for better animal health,
1.2.1.2: Strengthening diagnostic capacity of Rwanda (4), Tanzania (10) and Uganda
higher milk yields and reduced losses
Reference veterinary laboratories equipped veterinary laboratories and capacity to test (10), equipped for diagnostic analysis of
with modern diagnostic technologies in quality of animal feed animal diseases and feed testing.
regional centers.
1.2.2.1 Preparation of training modules for Training modules prepared on climate-
Improving delivery of public and private
extension in climate mitigation and adaptation smart milk production and handling,
Activity 1.2.2: Strengthen extension extension services at farm and cooperative
measures. including fodder production, feeding,
services for a low-carbon and climate level, by district or county livestock officers
1.2.2.2: Training of master trainers (ToTs) reproductive and health management,
resilient dairy sector and L-FFS who coordinate the community-
and the L-FFS facilitators in climate-change manure management, and animal
based extension system related topics welfare.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
 | Dairy Boards and local government are
increasingly aware of the challenges and
opportunities in climate change and the dairy
value chain. | 1.1.1.2: Support the regional policy dialogue
to mainstream climate-change adaptation and
mitigation in regional dairy policies, strategies
and regulations
1.1.1.3: National dairy value chain
governance and awareness creation
1.1.1.4: District/regional/county level dairy
value chain governance and planning | In each country, dairy value chain
stakeholders have inserted climate
change in the dairy value change
governance and planning.
Activity 1.1.2: Launch awareness
campaigns on nutritional benefits of
milk and food safety aspects | Support to milk consumption and nutrition
awareness, accompanied by nutrition
education and social behavior change, aims
at improving nutritionally vulnerable group’s
consumption of milk, therefore enhancing
their individual’s health and climate resilience. | 1.1.2.1: Public awareness on the contribution
of milk to nutrition and resilience, with focus
on climate vulnerable populations
1.1.2.2: Build capacity of dairy inspection to
ensure milk quality and safety and reduce
waste | 189 awareness campaigns on milk and
nutrition
60 inspectors trained on milk quality
and safety
Activity 1.1.3: Improve land tenure
security for sustainable dairy farming | The Programme will adopt a fit-for-purpose
approach to identify and mitigate tenure risks,
which are key barriers to sustainability, and
adopt climate resilient and low carbon
practices. In Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda,
the main risk for intensive/zero-grazing is
tenure insecurity, i.e. occupancy rights or land
ownership. In Rwanda, the focus will be on
optimizing land production and productivity
through land consolidation and land use
planning. | 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and
preparation of training materials
1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure
at decentralized level. | Tenure governance capacity
assessments carried out in each
country
Capacity development on tenure
carried out at local level (district/
county)
Activity 1.2.1: Strengthen veterinary
services for better animal health,
higher milk yields and reduced losses | Proximity veterinary and para veterinary
capacity will be enhanced to be able to reach
out to dairy farmers, using the One Health
Approach.
Reference veterinary laboratories equipped
with modern diagnostic technologies in
regional centers. | 1.2.1.1: Support installation of both private
and public veterinarians and veterinary
paraprofessionals
1.2.1.2: Strengthening diagnostic capacity of
veterinary laboratories and capacity to test
quality of animal feed | 1,800 veterinarians, para veterinarians
and LEWs trained and equipped.
Reference laboratories in Kenya (7),
Rwanda (4), Tanzania (10) and Uganda
(10), equipped for diagnostic analysis of
animal diseases and feed testing.
Activity 1.2.2: Strengthen extension
services for a low-carbon and climate
resilient dairy sector | Improving delivery of public and private
extension services at farm and cooperative
level, by district or county livestock officers
and L-FFS who coordinate the community-
based extension system | 1.2.2.1 Preparation of training modules for
extension in climate mitigation and adaptation
measures.
1.2.2.2: Training of master trainers (ToTs)
and the L-FFS facilitators in climate-change
related topics | Training modules prepared on climate-
smart milk production and handling,
including fodder production, feeding,
reproductive and health management,
manure management, and animal
welfare.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
1.2.2.3: Promote innovative extension tools. 1,000 extension agents and L-FFS
facilitators trained.
9,700 L-FFS supported.
4 extension innovations promoted
System development for Tier 2 GHG 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and
emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers, development in capturing, recording, tracking,
Four (4) operational Tier2 GHG
Activity 1.3.1: Develop capacity in the weights, productivity, feed rations, animal and reporting data on dairy GHG emissions.
emission system and capacity to
country on MRV system health interventions, manure management 1.3.1.2: Developing MRV systems and
manage in each country.
and grassland management) and develop a engage in policy dialogue to align with
data management system national MRV for the livestock sub-sector
1.3.2.1: Collect activity data on farm to
calculate Tier 2 dairy emissions under various
herd, feed, animal health and manure
management situations
Collection on-farm activity data for baseline 1.3.2.2: Conduct experiments and run models
Four (4) national MRV systems have
and “with-project” situation, using digital tools to generate Tier 2 emission factors (EF) for
been finetuned and parameters tested.
to finetune the GHG emission measurements baseline and improved dairy, under various
Activity 1.3.2: Improve GHG emission in each country. herd, feed, animal health and manure Four (4) national systems manage their
measurements in dairy value chains national MRV systems and provide
Training of national teams to manage their management situations
information to the Programme M&E
MRV systems and monitoring of Programme 1.3.2.3: Training on the Global Livestock
system.
Outcomes and Impact. Environmental Assessment Model –
interactive (GLEAM-i) and IPCC assessment
tool to calculate GHG emissions biannually,
and to inform the national MRV system and
inventories
This will include building the capacity of
devolved climate change units and
1.3.3.1: Climate risk and vulnerability
decentralized meteorological offices to
assessments, including impact on the dairy
develop and disseminate climate information 4 climate risk assessments undertaken.
Activity 1.3.3: Climate risk and sector, at local level.
services, including (i) impacts of climate 8 national feed balances prepared per
vulnerability assessments 1.3.3.2: Review and enhancement of national
change on livestock/ dairy sector, and (ii) annum.
feed balance mechanisms, and support to
information about the availability of feed,
early warning systems
through tools like national feed balance
sheets.
Activity 1.3.4: Facilitate low-carbon 1.3.4.1 Develop a carbon certification
This indicator will give dairy farmers access to Qualitative assessment (yes/no)
certification and reduce barriers to system for the dairy sector
carbon finance.
access carbon finance Yes/No

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
 |  | 1.2.2.3: Promote innovative extension tools. | 1,000 extension agents and L-FFS
facilitators trained.
9,700 L-FFS supported.
4 extension innovations promoted
Activity 1.3.1: Develop capacity in the
country on MRV system | System development for Tier 2 GHG
emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers,
weights, productivity, feed rations, animal
health interventions, manure management
and grassland management) and develop a
data management system | 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and
development in capturing, recording, tracking,
and reporting data on dairy GHG emissions.
1.3.1.2: Developing MRV systems and
engage in policy dialogue to align with
national MRV for the livestock sub-sector | Four (4) operational Tier2 GHG
emission system and capacity to
manage in each country.
Activity 1.3.2: Improve GHG emission
measurements in dairy value chains | Collection on-farm activity data for baseline
and “with-project” situation, using digital tools
to finetune the GHG emission measurements
in each country.
Training of national teams to manage their
MRV systems and monitoring of Programme
Outcomes and Impact. | 1.3.2.1: Collect activity data on farm to
calculate Tier 2 dairy emissions under various
herd, feed, animal health and manure
management situations
1.3.2.2: Conduct experiments and run models
to generate Tier 2 emission factors (EF) for
baseline and improved dairy, under various
herd, feed, animal health and manure
management situations
1.3.2.3: Training on the Global Livestock
Environmental Assessment Model –
interactive (GLEAM-i) and IPCC assessment
tool to calculate GHG emissions biannually,
and to inform the national MRV system and
inventories | Four (4) national MRV systems have
been finetuned and parameters tested.
Four (4) national systems manage their
national MRV systems and provide
information to the Programme M&E
system.
Activity 1.3.3: Climate risk and
vulnerability assessments | This will include building the capacity of
devolved climate change units and
decentralized meteorological offices to
develop and disseminate climate information
services, including (i) impacts of climate
change on livestock/ dairy sector, and (ii)
information about the availability of feed,
through tools like national feed balance
sheets. | 1.3.3.1: Climate risk and vulnerability
assessments, including impact on the dairy
sector, at local level.
1.3.3.2: Review and enhancement of national
feed balance mechanisms, and support to
early warning systems | 4 climate risk assessments undertaken.
8 national feed balances prepared per
annum.
Activity 1.3.4: Facilitate low-carbon
certification and reduce barriers to
access carbon finance | This indicator will give dairy farmers access to
carbon finance. | 1.3.4.1 Develop a carbon certification
system for the dairy sector
Yes/No | Qualitative assessment (yes/no)

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
1.4.1.1: Support to regional Centers of
The Programme will provide scientific support
Activity 1.4.1: Support to Regional Excellence in technology validation and A regional database on best practices,
combined with capacity development to
Centers of Excellence for technology dissemination and their impact on GHG emissions per
“regional centers of excellence” to export
validation and for maintaining a 1.4.1.2: Develop and maintain a regional sources and livestock production
knowledge (regionally and globally) on climate
regional database on practices, GHG database/ repository on practices, GHG systems, and adaptation indicators is
emissions and adaptation indicators change and GHG emissions for the dairy emissions per sources and systems, and operational.
value-chain.
climate change adaptation
A regional platform – involving the above-
1.4.2.1: Regional platform for knowledge
Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional mentioned entities - will be organized on a sharing and policy dialogue to enhance low-
cooperation platforms and rotational basis in each of the participating emission, climate resilient dairy development. Participation in at least 10 regional and
participation to regional/ global countries to share experiences and scientific 1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global global climate policy events.
networks for knowledge exchange on innovations and best practices implemented climate policy mechanisms 23 south-south cooperation events.
climate-smart dairy sector on farm. The regional platform will function as
1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular
transformation the knowledge management mechanism for
Cooperation
the Programme.
2.1.1.1: Strengthen the governance and 650 dairy cooperatives are
management structure of dairy cooperatives. strengthened and ensure that dairy
This activity aims to strengthen cooperative, farmers have a stable outlet to less
2.1.1.2: Strengthen capacity to reduce milk
Activity 2.1.1: Strengthen dairy organizational, and technical capacities of losses and ensure milk quality and safety. their milk.
groups and cooperatives on dairy cooperatives, and raise their climate- 2.1.1.3: Expand the outreach and capacity of 650 dairy cooperatives have a better
organizational management and change and gender awareness of their cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs capacity to manage milk in a safer way
service delivery management team. Support will be provided and upgraded equipment for milk
2.1.1.4: Create awareness on gender collection.
to enhance their network of MCCs and MCPs.
transformative approaches among Management of 650 dairy cooperatives
households of dairy farmers is more gender sensitive.
Management of 650 dairy cooperatives
This activity supports productive alliances 2.1.2.1: Strengthen cooperative capacity in
received business training.
between farmer cooperatives and enterprises business and financial management.
Activity 2.1.2: Build and enhance 300 business links established or
with farmer-allied engagement models, 2.1.2.2: Build linkages along the dairy value
productive alliances along the dairy strengthened.
particularly processors, and scaling-up dairy chain.
value chain. 15 cooperatives/MCCs (pilot) are
clusters, that enable farmers to access 2.1.2.3: Promote digitalization and traceability
testing the digitalization and traceability
affordable, high-quality inputs and services. of dairy operations.
system to ensure quality of milk.
2.1.3.1: Assess the need and viability of 190 cooperatives have installed solar
The Programme will focus on resource use
renewable energy and waste management equipment.
Activity 2.1.3: Promote renewable efficiency and the substitution of fossil fuels solutions. 130 dairy cooperatives have installed
and firewood by green energy sources. Solar
energy and waste management 2.1.3.2: Support the acquisition of renewable wastewater management systems.
is the key mitigation solution and most
technologies energy and waste management solutions. Management of 650 cooperatives
applicable to relatively larger processors in
2.1.3.3: Organize capacity building in energy received training in energy efficiency
the short term given high upfront costs.
efficiency and waste management and waste management

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
Activity 1.4.1: Support to Regional
Centers of Excellence for technology
validation and for maintaining a
regional database on practices, GHG
emissions and adaptation indicators | The Programme will provide scientific support
combined with capacity development to
“regional centers of excellence” to export
knowledge (regionally and globally) on climate
change and GHG emissions for the dairy
value-chain. | 1.4.1.1: Support to regional Centers of
Excellence in technology validation and
dissemination
1.4.1.2: Develop and maintain a regional
database/ repository on practices, GHG
emissions per sources and systems, and
climate change adaptation | A regional database on best practices,
and their impact on GHG emissions per
sources and livestock production
systems, and adaptation indicators is
operational.
Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional
cooperation platforms and
participation to regional/ global
networks for knowledge exchange on
climate-smart dairy sector
transformation | A regional platform – involving the above-
mentioned entities - will be organized on a
rotational basis in each of the participating
countries to share experiences and scientific
innovations and best practices implemented
on farm. The regional platform will function as
the knowledge management mechanism for
the Programme. | 1.4.2.1: Regional platform for knowledge
sharing and policy dialogue to enhance low-
emission, climate resilient dairy development.
1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global
climate policy mechanisms
1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular
Cooperation | Participation in at least 10 regional and
global climate policy events.
23 south-south cooperation events.
Activity 2.1.1: Strengthen dairy
groups and cooperatives on
organizational management and
service delivery | This activity aims to strengthen cooperative,
organizational, and technical capacities of
dairy cooperatives, and raise their climate-
change and gender awareness of their
management team. Support will be provided
to enhance their network of MCCs and MCPs. | 2.1.1.1: Strengthen the governance and
management structure of dairy cooperatives.
2.1.1.2: Strengthen capacity to reduce milk
losses and ensure milk quality and safety.
2.1.1.3: Expand the outreach and capacity of
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs
2.1.1.4: Create awareness on gender
transformative approaches among
households of dairy farmers | 650 dairy cooperatives are
strengthened and ensure that dairy
farmers have a stable outlet to less
their milk.
650 dairy cooperatives have a better
capacity to manage milk in a safer way
and upgraded equipment for milk
collection.
Management of 650 dairy cooperatives
is more gender sensitive.
Activity 2.1.2: Build and enhance
productive alliances along the dairy
value chain. | This activity supports productive alliances
between farmer cooperatives and enterprises
with farmer-allied engagement models,
particularly processors, and scaling-up dairy
clusters, that enable farmers to access
affordable, high-quality inputs and services. | 2.1.2.1: Strengthen cooperative capacity in
business and financial management.
2.1.2.2: Build linkages along the dairy value
chain.
2.1.2.3: Promote digitalization and traceability
of dairy operations. | Management of 650 dairy cooperatives
received business training.
300 business links established or
strengthened.
15 cooperatives/MCCs (pilot) are
testing the digitalization and traceability
system to ensure quality of milk.
Activity 2.1.3: Promote renewable
energy and waste management
technologies | The Programme will focus on resource use
efficiency and the substitution of fossil fuels
and firewood by green energy sources. Solar
is the key mitigation solution and most
applicable to relatively larger processors in
the short term given high upfront costs. | 2.1.3.1: Assess the need and viability of
renewable energy and waste management
solutions.
2.1.3.2: Support the acquisition of renewable
energy and waste management solutions.
2.1.3.3: Organize capacity building in energy
efficiency and waste management | 190 cooperatives have installed solar
equipment.
130 dairy cooperatives have installed
wastewater management systems.
Management of 650 cooperatives
received training in energy efficiency
and waste management

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
2.2.1.1: Make good quality semen for climate-
Four (4) countries have scaled up the
smart breeds available, adaptable to extreme
availability of good semen.
Breeding and genetic improvement will aim at climatic conditions and to diseases.
improving productivity and heat resistance of Four (4) countries have enhanced the
2.2.1.2: Invest in breeding and artificial
Activity 2.2.1: Promote the adoption dairy cattle while preserving resilience of capacity of their national centers to
insemination centers.
of climate-smart dairy breeds adapted livestock keeping systems by crossing store semen and liquid nitrogen.
2.2.1.3: Scale up the insemination of dairy
to climate change indigenous and exotic breeds through artificial Four (4) countries have scaled up their
cattle to make the herd more productive and
insemination (AI). The national systems will capacities to inseminate dairy cattle.
climate resilient.
be upgraded. Awareness campaigns in each of the
2.2.1.4: Organize awareness campaigns and
countries.
support breeders’ organizations
9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
2.2.2.1: Organize training on animal 291,000 dairy farmers, including
Production losses through reduced
husbandry, with a specific focus on animal farmer-to-farmer trainings in animal
performance (growth rates, milk yield,
health, animal welfare, herd management health, animal welfare, herd
suboptimal herd management) or animal loss and disease prevention. management and disease prevention.
Activity 2.2.2: Provide support for
through morbidity, mortality, and abortion
better animal care, herd management 2.2.2.2: Scale up the use of digital apps to 5,000 dairy farmers who have been
results in cows with relatively high GHG
and disease prevention monitor animal health and herd performance. trained in the use of digital apps to
emission intensities. A comprehensive monitor animal health and herd
2.2.2.3 Scale up vaccination campaigns to
package of interventions will be proposed to mitigate the impact of climate change on the performance.
improve animal health and herd management.
spread of diseases. 2.7 million dairy cows vaccinated
against ECF, PPCB and FMD.
2.2.3.1: Make certified forage seed available
9,500 farmers were trained in seed
The adoption of climate resilient forage to private and community multipliers.
multiplication for forage crops and
varieties and conservation technologies is 2.2.3.2: Support multiplication of climate-
pastures.
essential to reduce enteric methane resilient seed for fodder crops and pastures
Activity 2.2.3: Promote climate-smart 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
emissions intensities in the dairy value chain, 2.2.3.3: Build capacity of dairy farmers on
forage production, conservation, and 291,000 dairy farmers, including
while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle. A forage production and conservation on
water harvesting farmer-to-farmer trainings in forage
comprehensive package of interventions will intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms. production and conservation.
be proposed to improve forage production 2.2.3.4: Access to water for animals and
100,000 farmers received equipment
and conservation, and access to water. forage production in intensive and semi-
for water harvesting.
intensive dairy systems.
Appropriate diet formulation, based on the 2.2.4.1: Develop production system specific
available resources, is a key requirement to supplementation plans and feed packages. 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
Activity 2.2.4: Promote climate-smart
improve dairy cattle productivity, improve 2.2.4.2: Build capacity on appropriate feed 291,000 dairy farmers, including
feeding practices to reduce enteric
welfare, while reducing methane (CH4) formulation. farmer-to-farmer trainings in improved
methane emissions.
emissions. Dairy farmers’ capacity will be 2.2.4.3: Promote appropriate diet formulation feed packages.
built. that reduces enteric methane emissions

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
Activity 2.2.1: Promote the adoption
of climate-smart dairy breeds adapted
to climate change | Breeding and genetic improvement will aim at
improving productivity and heat resistance of
dairy cattle while preserving resilience of
livestock keeping systems by crossing
indigenous and exotic breeds through artificial
insemination (AI). The national systems will
be upgraded. | 2.2.1.1: Make good quality semen for climate-
smart breeds available, adaptable to extreme
climatic conditions and to diseases.
2.2.1.2: Invest in breeding and artificial
insemination centers.
2.2.1.3: Scale up the insemination of dairy
cattle to make the herd more productive and
climate resilient.
2.2.1.4: Organize awareness campaigns and
support breeders’ organizations | Four (4) countries have scaled up the
availability of good semen.
Four (4) countries have enhanced the
capacity of their national centers to
store semen and liquid nitrogen.
Four (4) countries have scaled up their
capacities to inseminate dairy cattle.
Awareness campaigns in each of the
countries.
Activity 2.2.2: Provide support for
better animal care, herd management
and disease prevention | Production losses through reduced
performance (growth rates, milk yield,
suboptimal herd management) or animal loss
through morbidity, mortality, and abortion
results in cows with relatively high GHG
emission intensities. A comprehensive
package of interventions will be proposed to
improve animal health and herd management. | 2.2.2.1: Organize training on animal
husbandry, with a specific focus on animal
health, animal welfare, herd management
and disease prevention.
2.2.2.2: Scale up the use of digital apps to
monitor animal health and herd performance.
2.2.2.3 Scale up vaccination campaigns to
mitigate the impact of climate change on the
spread of diseases. | 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in animal
health, animal welfare, herd
management and disease prevention.
5,000 dairy farmers who have been
trained in the use of digital apps to
monitor animal health and herd
performance.
2.7 million dairy cows vaccinated
against ECF, PPCB and FMD.
Activity 2.2.3: Promote climate-smart
forage production, conservation, and
water harvesting | The adoption of climate resilient forage
varieties and conservation technologies is
essential to reduce enteric methane
emissions intensities in the dairy value chain,
while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle. A
comprehensive package of interventions will
be proposed to improve forage production
and conservation, and access to water. | 2.2.3.1: Make certified forage seed available
to private and community multipliers.
2.2.3.2: Support multiplication of climate-
resilient seed for fodder crops and pastures
2.2.3.3: Build capacity of dairy farmers on
forage production and conservation on
intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms.
2.2.3.4: Access to water for animals and
forage production in intensive and semi-
intensive dairy systems. | 9,500 farmers were trained in seed
multiplication for forage crops and
pastures.
9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in forage
production and conservation.
100,000 farmers received equipment
for water harvesting.
Activity 2.2.4: Promote climate-smart
feeding practices to reduce enteric
methane emissions. | Appropriate diet formulation, based on the
available resources, is a key requirement to
improve dairy cattle productivity, improve
welfare, while reducing methane (CH4)
emissions. Dairy farmers’ capacity will be
built. | 2.2.4.1: Develop production system specific
supplementation plans and feed packages.
2.2.4.2: Build capacity on appropriate feed
formulation.
2.2.4.3: Promote appropriate diet formulation
that reduces enteric methane emissions | 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in improved
feed packages.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
E
Livestock manure is a source of methane
2.2.5.1: Manure management in intensive 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions,
and semi-intensive dairy production systems. 291,000 dairy farmers, including
Activity 2.2.5: Increase sustainable ammonia (NH3) and nitrate (NO3-). At the
farmer-to-farmer trainings in manure
nutrient recycling of manure and dairy same time, manure contains essential 2.2.5.2: Promote adapted animal housing management and adapted cattle
waste to reduce emissions nutrients and is often the primary source of 2.2.5.3: Manure management in extensive housing.
crop fertilization on smallholder dairy farms. systems
Dairy farmers’ capacity will be built.
Manure management using biogas digesters
2.2.6.1: Support capacity building in
is particularly attractive for intensive and
Activity 2.2.6: Build capacity for on- biodigester construction and management 6,920 biodigesters installed.
semi-intensive dairy systems. The
farm use of biodigesters and biogas 2.2.6.2: Support the investments in
Programme will promote on-farm adoption of
biodigesters at the household level
biodigesters for these dairy farms.
To approach net-zero targets of dairy
Activity 2.3.1: Strengthening production systems, the Programme 2.3.1.1: Participatory rangeland management
300,000 hectares of rangeland
rangeland governing structures for considers soil carbon sequestration as an plannning
management plans prepared
communal grazing areas important pathway of GHG emission removals
to offset livestock and manure emissions.
Well managed and restored rangelands not
only benefit improved productivity but 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
contribute also to improving soil carbon 2.3.2.1: Training on rangeland and pasture 291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in rangeland
Activity 2.3.2: Restoration of sequestration and the carbon balance of the management
management.
degraded pastures, including access livestock production systems, increased
2.3.2.2: Rangeland and pastures restoration
to water climate resilience through healthier 178,362 hectares under improved
ecosystems, better access to water, 2.3.2.3: Water availability rangeland management
biodiversity conservation, as well as mitigation 300 investments in water infrastructure
of environmental risks.
3.1.1.1: GDFF established at the PDBs
1,000 smaller (aver. US$ 50,000) Dairy
Loans approved ; capital revolving 3
3.1.1.2: GDFF wholesale lending provided to the times over years
Involves setting up and roll out of investments
retail financial institutions 90 larger (aver. Loan US$ 400,000),
through the GDFF stucture in two windows:
Activity 3.1.1: GDFF Operationalized Green Dairy Partnership Loans
Green Dairy Loan Partnerships and Green
3.1.1.3 Retail financial institutions provide loans approved, capital revolving twice over
Dairy Loan Products. 12 years
to the SMEs to invest into green dairy value chains
Financing of US$35 million for GDFF
3.1.1.4 Portfolio management green investments
Provides appropriate tools and capacity 3.2.1.1: Green dairy finance lending toolkits
Activity 3.2.1 Awareness Raising and
building to the GDFF wholesale and retail 1 toolkit developed and implemented in
Capacity Development of developed and implemented
financial institutions in the implementation of all countries

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
Activity 2.2.5: Increase sustainable
nutrient recycling of manure and dairy
waste to reduce emissions | Livestock manure is a source of methane
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions,
ammonia (NH3) and nitrate (NO3-). At the
same time, manure contains essential
nutrients and is often the primary source of
crop fertilization on smallholder dairy farms.
Dairy farmers’ capacity will be built. | 2.2.5.1: Manure management in intensive
and semi-intensive dairy production systems.
2.2.5.2: Promote adapted animal housing
2.2.5.3: Manure management in extensive
systems | 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in manure
management and adapted cattle
housing.
Activity 2.2.6: Build capacity for on-
farm use of biodigesters and biogas | Manure management using biogas digesters
is particularly attractive for intensive and
semi-intensive dairy systems. The
Programme will promote on-farm adoption of
biodigesters for these dairy farms. | 2.2.6.1: Support capacity building in
biodigester construction and management
2.2.6.2: Support the investments in
biodigesters at the household level | 6,920 biodigesters installed.
Activity 2.3.1: Strengthening
rangeland governing structures for
communal grazing areas | To approach net-zero targets of dairy
production systems, the Programme
considers soil carbon sequestration as an
important pathway of GHG emission removals
to offset livestock and manure emissions. | 2.3.1.1: Participatory rangeland management
plannning | 300,000 hectares of rangeland
management plans prepared
Activity 2.3.2: Restoration of
degraded pastures, including access
to water | Well managed and restored rangelands not
only benefit improved productivity but
contribute also to improving soil carbon
sequestration and the carbon balance of the
livestock production systems, increased
climate resilience through healthier
ecosystems, better access to water,
biodiversity conservation, as well as mitigation
of environmental risks. | 2.3.2.1: Training on rangeland and pasture
management
2.3.2.2: Rangeland and pastures restoration
2.3.2.3: Water availability | 9,700 FFS implemented, targeting
291,000 dairy farmers, including
farmer-to-farmer trainings in rangeland
management.
178,362 hectares under improved
rangeland management
300 investments in water infrastructure
Activity 3.1.1: GDFF Operationalized | Involves setting up and roll out of investments
through the GDFF stucture in two windows:
Green Dairy Loan Partnerships and Green
Dairy Loan Products. | 3.1.1.1: GDFF established at the PDBs
3.1.1.2: GDFF wholesale lending provided to the
retail financial institutions
3.1.1.3 Retail financial institutions provide loans
to the SMEs to invest into green dairy value chains
3.1.1.4 Portfolio management | 1,000 smaller (aver. US$ 50,000) Dairy
Loans approved ; capital revolving 3
times over years
90 larger (aver. Loan US$ 400,000),
Green Dairy Partnership Loans
approved, capital revolving twice over
12 years
Financing of US$35 million for GDFF
green investments
Activity 3.2.1 Awareness Raising and
Capacity Development of | Provides appropriate tools and capacity
building to the GDFF wholesale and retail
financial institutions in the implementation of | 3.2.1.1: Green dairy finance lending toolkits
developed and implemented | 1 toolkit developed and implemented in
all countries

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
E
Participating Banks in Green Dairy green finance to agriculture SMEs and dairy 3.2.1.2: PFI trainings 4 PDBs and at least 6 retail financial
Finance value chain details. institutions received comprehensive
capacity building
3.2.1.3 Coordination by PDBs
4 PDBs provide appropriate
coordination
MSME pipeline of at least 6 retail
3.2.2.1 Training of MSMEs that are potential
finance institutions supported by
pipeline clients of GDFF for the smaller lending
technical assistance at MSME level for
product
Activity 3.2.2. Green Dairy Investment Provides appropriate training and capacity
the GDFF rollout
Support Services to SMEs building to the GDFF pipeline of borrowing 3.2.2.2 Training of larger SMEs that are
Larger agribusiness SME pipeline of at
SMEs to invest into potential pipeline clients of GDFF for the
least 6 retail finance institutions
Partnership Loans
supported by technical assistance at
SME level for the GDFF rollout
3.2.3.1 M&E system established and
All M&E indicators for GDFF reported
maintained
This activity will ensure the appropriate M&E against as per required level of detail
Activity 3.2.3. M&E, household and frequency
system for the GDFF including annual, 3.2.3.2 M&E household surveys and
surveys and evaluations
midterm and final reports. evaluations conducted
M&E household surveys implemented,
and analysis reports submitted
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements
280. Each EE will implement and coordinate the overall M&E system building on the existing M&E systems of the related IFAD-financed projects, allocate
resources for M&E tasks and deliverables, aggregate M&E data and present them in overarching reports and knowledge documents, verify and ensure quality and
validity of the M&E data and information, and organize learning events to facilitate sector wide learning, ensure that funds are effectively managed to deliver
expected Outputs and achieve the anticipated Outcomes; ensure the quality of Programme monitoring, Programme closure and final evaluation timelines are
complied with. The RSC, with secretarial functions provided by the national EEs on a rotational basis, will be responsible for providing harmonized reporting and
methodological guidance on overall M&E implementation, as well as consolidation of timely yet high-quality reports to the GCF. M&E guidance beyond the PIM
will be provided by ILRI (e.g. developing templates, methodology, explanatory notes), overseen by the regional steering committee. The data capture and reporting
aspects will be handled by the countries, through their PMUs. IFAD will organize and lead annual supervision missions, including mid-term and end term
evaluations.
281. The overall M&E for the GDFF will be built around its ToC and Logframe. The system will continuously be built through ongoing adaptive management so
that the Programme can regularly assess it performance in supporting planning and reporting, learn and adapt to improve its climate adaptation outcomes. While
IFAD will have the overall coordination tole to all M&E reporting to the GCF for the GDFF, the Wholesale Banks in each country will have a prominent role in data
collection and analysis. Details on the M&E are proposed in Annex 11.
282. Specifically, for the GDFF under Component 3, a senior GDF Coordinator will be recruited at IFAD Kenya Regional Office to support the overall
coordination, M&E, reporting and Knowledge Management of the GDFF, for the entire project period. In addition, during the Programme start-up phase,
experienced Financial and M&E Specialists will be recruited to assist the DaIMA PMU to develop an appropriate reporting, monitoring and evaluation system for

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
Participating Banks in Green Dairy
Finance |  | green finance to agriculture SMEs and dairy
value chain details. | 3.2.1.2: PFI trainings
3.2.1.3 Coordination by PDBs | 4 PDBs and at least 6 retail financial
institutions received comprehensive
capacity building
4 PDBs provide appropriate
coordination | 
Activity 3.2.2. Green Dairy Investment
Support Services to SMEs |  | Provides appropriate training and capacity
building to the GDFF pipeline of borrowing
SMEs to invest into | 3.2.2.1 Training of MSMEs that are potential
pipeline clients of GDFF for the smaller lending
product
3.2.2.2 Training of larger SMEs that are
potential pipeline clients of GDFF for the
Partnership Loans | MSME pipeline of at least 6 retail
finance institutions supported by
technical assistance at MSME level for
the GDFF rollout
Larger agribusiness SME pipeline of at
least 6 retail finance institutions
supported by technical assistance at
SME level for the GDFF rollout | 
Activity 3.2.3. M&E, household
surveys and evaluations |  | This activity will ensure the appropriate M&E
system for the GDFF including annual,
midterm and final reports. | 3.2.3.1 M&E system established and
maintained
3.2.3.2 M&E household surveys and
evaluations conducted | All M&E indicators for GDFF reported
against as per required level of detail
and frequency
M&E household surveys implemented,
and analysis reports submitted | 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements |  |  |  |  | 
 | 280. Each EE will implement and coordinate the overall M&E system building on the existing M&E systems of the related IFAD-financed projects, allocate |  |  |  | 
 | resources for M&E tasks and deliverables, aggregate M&E data and present them in overarching reports and knowledge documents, verify and ensure quality and |  |  |  | 
 | validity of the M&E data and information, and organize learning events to facilitate sector wide learning, ensure that funds are effectively managed to deliver |  |  |  | 
 | expected Outputs and achieve the anticipated Outcomes; ensure the quality of Programme monitoring, Programme closure and final evaluation timelines are |  |  |  | 
 | complied with. The RSC, with secretarial functions provided by the national EEs on a rotational basis, will be responsible for providing harmonized reporting and |  |  |  | 
 | methodological guidance on overall M&E implementation, as well as consolidation of timely yet high-quality reports to the GCF. M&E guidance beyond the PIM |  |  |  | 
 | will be provided by ILRI (e.g. developing templates, methodology, explanatory notes), overseen by the regional steering committee. The data capture and reporting |  |  |  | 
 | aspects will be handled by the countries, through their PMUs. IFAD will organize and lead annual supervision missions, including mid-term and end term |  |  |  | 
 | evaluations. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 281. The overall M&E for the GDFF will be built around its ToC and Logframe. The system will continuously be built through ongoing adaptive management so |  |  |  | 
 | that the Programme can regularly assess it performance in supporting planning and reporting, learn and adapt to improve its climate adaptation outcomes. While |  |  |  | 
 | IFAD will have the overall coordination tole to all M&E reporting to the GCF for the GDFF, the Wholesale Banks in each country will have a prominent role in data |  |  |  | 
 | collection and analysis. Details on the M&E are proposed in Annex 11. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | 282. Specifically, for the GDFF under Component 3, a senior GDF Coordinator will be recruited at IFAD Kenya Regional Office to support the overall |  |  |  | 
 | coordination, M&E, reporting and Knowledge Management of the GDFF, for the entire project period. In addition, during the Programme start-up phase, |  |  |  | 
 | experienced Financial and M&E Specialists will be recruited to assist the DaIMA PMU to develop an appropriate reporting, monitoring and evaluation system for |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
E
GDFF operations, based on a pre-defined reporting schedule, indicators, and formats, to be agreed-upon between IFAD, DaIMA PMU and the Wholesale Banks.
The GDFF reporting and monitoring would be integrated within the reporting, monitoring, and evaluation systems to be developed for the whole regional DaIMA
operation. These issues are described in detail in Annex 11 of the Funding Proposal and in the Feasibility Study on Component 3 (Annex 2).
283. Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs). The M&E Officer in each of the national PMUs will prepare the national Programme’s consolidated AWPBs,
specifying the following: (i) key activities in the period; (ii) specific unit targets and baseline values; (iii) expected outputs the activity is contributing to; (iv) timeline
to complete each activity; (v) tabular summary information on the AWPBs of the overall project to easily assess progress; and (vi) responsible reporting parties of
each activity and data. The Programme staff and key stakeholders will validate an 18-month AWPB drafted at design during the start-up phase of implementation.
As the Programme implements, the preparation of annual AWPBs will be a participatory process that will be based on the activities needed and proposed by the
beneficiaries, districts, and implementing partners to achieve the desired changes stated in the Theory of Change and indicator targets. The EEs will be the
responsible institution for all planning processes and for inclusion of key stakeholders to guarantee transparency, accountability while ensuring sufficiency of M&E
information for informed and timely decision-making. The EEs will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate AWPBs from the lower planning levels in accordance
with each country administrative or governing structures while ensuring consensus building among key stakeholders in each planning level. The consolidated
AWPB will be reviewed by the National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC) in each country for endorsement before submission to the Regional Steering
Committee (RCS) as the next endorsement level before submission to IFAD. Submission to IFAD will happen at least 60 days before commencement of the next
National level Program planning year/cycle. AWPB review meetings will be conducted during each planning cycle in all levels with the involvement of all key
stakeholders. This will allow common understanding and consensus building among stakeholders on national annual priorities, expected targets and budgetary
adequacy for effective and sustainable implementation of the Program objectives
284. Reporting System. Each participating country will facilitate preparation of each quarterly, six-monthly and an annual progress highlighting achieved
successes, constraints and, lessons learnt, recommendations and action plans to address the identified constraints in the subsequent plans and implementation
periods. Each implementing country’ national reports to be submitted to GCF will be consolidated at RSC level, with technical support provided by ILRI and/or
other service providers.
285. Monitoring and Evaluation. Responsibilities for monitoring and evaluation lie with the national EEs and Component 3 implementation team. Each country
has its own Logical Framework that includes GCF core indicators (outcomes and outputs), in line with the GCF requirements. Respective executing lead agencies
from each country as the key implementer of the Programme, will play a key role in data collection and analysis and reporting. They will collect and report on
baseline data, portfolio information, as well as output and select outcome indicators; participate in Annual Supervision Missions, Midterm and Final Evaluations;
as well learning and adaptive management events organized internally, across projects or those supported by IFAD/GCF directly. The RSC, with technical support
required, will be responsible for providing guidance on reporting needs requiring regional/Programme level consolidation, as well as progress realized on regional
aspects of the Programme, and that regional added value is achieved and sustained beyond the Program life. Specifically, RSC will monitor progress with respect
to Output 1.1, Output 1.3 and Output 1.4. At national level, the PMUs will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management of all activities
related to the Programme. This should in accordance with the Logical Framework provided that includes GCF core indicators (outcomes and outputs), in line with
the GCF requirements. The M&E processes will further be refined during the inception phase of the GDFF with necessary inputs from the stakeholders. When
relevant, indicators will be disaggregated by (i) type of recipient, (ii) gender, (iii) age (youth vs non-youth), (iv) country at least and may further be required at
project levels and according to the information needs of each implementing country.
286. Supervision and implementation support missions will be organised jointly by IFAD, GCF and the Governments of Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and
Uganda, to assess and review progress and assist implementing partners and the PMUs improve on Programme implementation based on the mission’s support

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
 | GDFF operations, based on a pre-defined reporting schedule, indicators, and formats, to be agreed-upon between IFAD, DaIMA PMU and the Wholesale Banks. | 
 | The GDFF reporting and monitoring would be integrated within the reporting, monitoring, and evaluation systems to be developed for the whole regional DaIMA | 
 | operation. These issues are described in detail in Annex 11 of the Funding Proposal and in the Feasibility Study on Component 3 (Annex 2). | 
 |  | 
 | 283. Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPBs). The M&E Officer in each of the national PMUs will prepare the national Programme’s consolidated AWPBs, | 
 | specifying the following: (i) key activities in the period; (ii) specific unit targets and baseline values; (iii) expected outputs the activity is contributing to; (iv) timeline | 
 | to complete each activity; (v) tabular summary information on the AWPBs of the overall project to easily assess progress; and (vi) responsible reporting parties of | 
 | each activity and data. The Programme staff and key stakeholders will validate an 18-month AWPB drafted at design during the start-up phase of implementation. | 
 | As the Programme implements, the preparation of annual AWPBs will be a participatory process that will be based on the activities needed and proposed by the | 
 | beneficiaries, districts, and implementing partners to achieve the desired changes stated in the Theory of Change and indicator targets. The EEs will be the | 
 | responsible institution for all planning processes and for inclusion of key stakeholders to guarantee transparency, accountability while ensuring sufficiency of M&E | 
 | information for informed and timely decision-making. The EEs will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate AWPBs from the lower planning levels in accordance | 
 | with each country administrative or governing structures while ensuring consensus building among key stakeholders in each planning level. The consolidated | 
 | AWPB will be reviewed by the National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC) in each country for endorsement before submission to the Regional Steering | 
 | Committee (RCS) as the next endorsement level before submission to IFAD. Submission to IFAD will happen at least 60 days before commencement of the next | 
 | National level Program planning year/cycle. AWPB review meetings will be conducted during each planning cycle in all levels with the involvement of all key | 
 | stakeholders. This will allow common understanding and consensus building among stakeholders on national annual priorities, expected targets and budgetary | 
 | adequacy for effective and sustainable implementation of the Program objectives | 
 |  | 
 | 284. Reporting System. Each participating country will facilitate preparation of each quarterly, six-monthly and an annual progress highlighting achieved | 
 | successes, constraints and, lessons learnt, recommendations and action plans to address the identified constraints in the subsequent plans and implementation | 
 | periods. Each implementing country’ national reports to be submitted to GCF will be consolidated at RSC level, with technical support provided by ILRI and/or | 
 | other service providers. | 
 |  | 
 | 285. Monitoring and Evaluation. Responsibilities for monitoring and evaluation lie with the national EEs and Component 3 implementation team. Each country | 
 | has its own Logical Framework that includes GCF core indicators (outcomes and outputs), in line with the GCF requirements. Respective executing lead agencies | 
 | from each country as the key implementer of the Programme, will play a key role in data collection and analysis and reporting. They will collect and report on | 
 | baseline data, portfolio information, as well as output and select outcome indicators; participate in Annual Supervision Missions, Midterm and Final Evaluations; | 
 | as well learning and adaptive management events organized internally, across projects or those supported by IFAD/GCF directly. The RSC, with technical support | 
 | required, will be responsible for providing guidance on reporting needs requiring regional/Programme level consolidation, as well as progress realized on regional | 
 | aspects of the Programme, and that regional added value is achieved and sustained beyond the Program life. Specifically, RSC will monitor progress with respect | 
 | to Output 1.1, Output 1.3 and Output 1.4. At national level, the PMUs will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management of all activities | 
 | related to the Programme. This should in accordance with the Logical Framework provided that includes GCF core indicators (outcomes and outputs), in line with | 
 | the GCF requirements. The M&E processes will further be refined during the inception phase of the GDFF with necessary inputs from the stakeholders. When | 
 | relevant, indicators will be disaggregated by (i) type of recipient, (ii) gender, (iii) age (youth vs non-youth), (iv) country at least and may further be required at | 
 | project levels and according to the information needs of each implementing country. | 
 |  | 
 | 286. Supervision and implementation support missions will be organised jointly by IFAD, GCF and the Governments of Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and | 
 | Uganda, to assess and review progress and assist implementing partners and the PMUs improve on Programme implementation based on the mission’s support | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
E
and recommendation. The supervision missions will assess the overall physical and financial performance, identify implementation challenges and propose
possible mitigation measures to help address them. This should be in compliance with all the fiduciary aspects of the financing agreement. The supervision
missions will be conducted at least twice a year or more frequently as conditions may warrant, and according to IFAD’s GCF own policies and procedures including
the provision for implementation support. The outputs of the supervision missions will include: i) Aide Memoire and ii) supervision mission reports with findings and
recommendations, focusing on the achievements and constraints for discussion with the lead Ministry. To facilitate the work of the mission team, lead agencies
will prepare implementation progress reports ahead of the mission team describing key achievements, lessons learnt, best practices to scale up implementation
and constraints encountered during the implementation. The support missions will help identify and address emerging issues, build technical capacities, and to
the extent possible, build on experiences and best practices from past and ongoing IFAD - GCF funded projects. The composition of the support mission team will
include, but not limited to: The financial Expert, M&E expert, targeting specialist etc. It may also add value and if the budget allows to include a sections of PMU
teams on some mission on rotational basis for different projects. This will enhance learning, complement adaptive management and serve as best practices aimed
at strengthening knowledge management within the project and government set-up.
287. Baseline Survey. The Programme will conduct a baseline survey at the beginning of implementation in the targeted areas. The survey will be designed
to capture the following baseline data separately: (i) sampled existing beneficiaries; and (ii) sampled new beneficiaries. The specific GCF core indicators will be
included in the baseline survey that will be updated based on the milestones by the Outcome Survey. The study will be contracted to an external service provider
(SP) with the involvement of PMUs with ILRI and IFAD providing overall guidance. This involvement is aimed at ensuring harmony in indicator definition and targets
refinement. This will be done in a way that ensure data collection appropriates and fir for purpose in the context of Program implementation.
288. Mid-term Review and Final Evaluation. Interim and Final Independent Evaluations will be planned and managed by IFAD according to the requirements
of the GCF’s evaluation criteria and as per the GCF Evaluation Policy. In advance to the end term Evaluation Missions, GCF will conduct a series of more
comprehensive household/business surveys including both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis. IFAD will lead evaluation process following
IFAD’s procurement guidelines, supported by IFAD’s Research and Impact Assessment (RIA) unit. The evaluations will be supported by an Evaluation Reference
Group, made up of IFAD, GCF and the other co-financiers. The MTR and final evaluation will embed an assessment of the Programme’s contributions to the
paradigm shift and enabling environment.
289. Knowledge Management, Communication and Learning. The Programme will elaborate and implement a KM and Communication Strategy that will: (i)
provide Project beneficiaries with the necessary material to sustain the technical knowledge acquired with the support of the Project (production of training materials
and communication platforms for sensitization) and continuously assess their adoption; (ii) generate shared knowledge acquired from the experience of the past
and current Project in various fields and based on the information collected as part of the monitoring of results or from specific thematic studies; (iii) share knowledge
generated with the Technical Departments of the Ministry, IFAD, other donors, and implementing partners using various dissemination strategies and channel for
learning and visibility. In achieving the Policy Component, the KM and Communication Strategy will strongly aim to develop and create channels of policy influence
and dialogue through the development of policy briefs/strategies to be disseminated audience of high-level policy stakeholders in the Dairy Sector. The KM and
Communication Strategy should also establish a Community of Practice (CoP) to support the development and coordination of regional implementation creating
harmonized y programme requirements in all levels

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
 | and recommendation. The supervision missions will assess the overall physical and financial performance, identify implementation challenges and propose | 
 | possible mitigation measures to help address them. This should be in compliance with all the fiduciary aspects of the financing agreement. The supervision | 
 | missions will be conducted at least twice a year or more frequently as conditions may warrant, and according to IFAD’s GCF own policies and procedures including | 
 | the provision for implementation support. The outputs of the supervision missions will include: i) Aide Memoire and ii) supervision mission reports with findings and | 
 | recommendations, focusing on the achievements and constraints for discussion with the lead Ministry. To facilitate the work of the mission team, lead agencies | 
 | will prepare implementation progress reports ahead of the mission team describing key achievements, lessons learnt, best practices to scale up implementation | 
 | and constraints encountered during the implementation. The support missions will help identify and address emerging issues, build technical capacities, and to | 
 | the extent possible, build on experiences and best practices from past and ongoing IFAD - GCF funded projects. The composition of the support mission team will | 
 | include, but not limited to: The financial Expert, M&E expert, targeting specialist etc. It may also add value and if the budget allows to include a sections of PMU | 
 | teams on some mission on rotational basis for different projects. This will enhance learning, complement adaptive management and serve as best practices aimed | 
 | at strengthening knowledge management within the project and government set-up. | 
 |  | 
 | 287. Baseline Survey. The Programme will conduct a baseline survey at the beginning of implementation in the targeted areas. The survey will be designed | 
 | to capture the following baseline data separately: (i) sampled existing beneficiaries; and (ii) sampled new beneficiaries. The specific GCF core indicators will be | 
 | included in the baseline survey that will be updated based on the milestones by the Outcome Survey. The study will be contracted to an external service provider | 
 | (SP) with the involvement of PMUs with ILRI and IFAD providing overall guidance. This involvement is aimed at ensuring harmony in indicator definition and targets | 
 | refinement. This will be done in a way that ensure data collection appropriates and fir for purpose in the context of Program implementation. | 
 |  | 
 | 288. Mid-term Review and Final Evaluation. Interim and Final Independent Evaluations will be planned and managed by IFAD according to the requirements | 
 | of the GCF’s evaluation criteria and as per the GCF Evaluation Policy. In advance to the end term Evaluation Missions, GCF will conduct a series of more | 
 | comprehensive household/business surveys including both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis. IFAD will lead evaluation process following | 
 | IFAD’s procurement guidelines, supported by IFAD’s Research and Impact Assessment (RIA) unit. The evaluations will be supported by an Evaluation Reference | 
 | Group, made up of IFAD, GCF and the other co-financiers. The MTR and final evaluation will embed an assessment of the Programme’s contributions to the | 
 | paradigm shift and enabling environment. | 
 |  | 
 | 289. Knowledge Management, Communication and Learning. The Programme will elaborate and implement a KM and Communication Strategy that will: (i) | 
 | provide Project beneficiaries with the necessary material to sustain the technical knowledge acquired with the support of the Project (production of training materials | 
 | and communication platforms for sensitization) and continuously assess their adoption; (ii) generate shared knowledge acquired from the experience of the past | 
 | and current Project in various fields and based on the information collected as part of the monitoring of results or from specific thematic studies; (iii) share knowledge | 
 | generated with the Technical Departments of the Ministry, IFAD, other donors, and implementing partners using various dissemination strategies and channel for | 
 | learning and visibility. In achieving the Policy Component, the KM and Communication Strategy will strongly aim to develop and create channels of policy influence | 
 | and dialogue through the development of policy briefs/strategies to be disseminated audience of high-level policy stakeholders in the Dairy Sector. The KM and | 
 | Communication Strategy should also establish a Community of Practice (CoP) to support the development and coordination of regional implementation creating | 
 | harmonized y programme requirements in all levels | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
F
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Selected Risk Factor 1 Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational High Medium
Description High
290. Limited skills exist in the dairy value chain in the four countries particularly in areas of social inclusion and
gender, dairy technicians, extension services, M&E and functional dairy L-FFS specialists in the implementing
ministries, national dairy boards, and organisations to guarantee effective Programme implementation. In Tanzania
and Uganda, the local government has limited financial, procurement and human resources to assume their mandate
of execution particularly on community service, extension, nutrition, private sector partnerships and infrastructure
development). Further, limited M&E skills within PMU and government staff in general is bound to affect the
implementation. The four countries are also at different stages of M&E system set up and maturity. Given the scope
of DaIMA project, data collection, harmonization and reporting at the regional level may be a challenge.
Mitigation Measure(s)
291. In each of the four countries, a Programme management unit will be established by the IFAD project that will
mobilise cofinancing, and staff recruitment will follow a competitive process to ensure quality expertise is in place. The
implementation of the Programme will be structured around performance-based contracts which will also be indicated
in the Financing Agreement. Service providers will be contracted through competitive government procedures and
based on renewable performance-based service contracts to provide advisory services. As part of the support
delivered, implementing partners and service providers will ensure that adequate capacity is built among recipients of
their services at various levels including local governments to guarantee their exit strategy and overall sustainability.
Continuous capacity building will be conducted to both government and PMU staff Exchange visits and joint reviews
will also be conducted to enhance learning in addition to routine M&E training to build the capacity of PMUs and
government.
Selected Risk Factor 2 Financial Management and Fiduciary Risks
Category Probability Impact
Governance High Medium
Description
292. The Programme involves multiple line ministries and the Project Management Units (PMU), districts /county
governments, all of which hold fiduciary responsibilities. Although the PCMU will consist of qualified personnel with
expertise in technical and financial management, there may be a lack of familiarity among staff with the procedures of
IFAD and the GCF. The districts /county governments will receive funding from the Ministry of Finance and report to
IFAD through the PMU. There is a risk of delays in flow of fund and the consolidation of project financial reports at the
PMU. Furthermore, the project involves multiple financiers, including IFAD, the GCF, government contributions, and
beneficiary contributions. This creates a risk of commingling funds in budgeting and expenditure allocations among
these financiers. Additionally, there is a risk of inadequate audit coverage for the project due to the involvement of
various districts/ counties governments located across a wide geographic area. Additionally, there is a possibility that
some high-risk expenditure categories may not be adequately addressed during the audits.
Mitigation Measure(s)
293. Formal agreements will be established between the line ministries, the Ministry of Finance, and the
participating districts/county governments. These MoUs will clearly outline the requirements for financial reporting with
penalties for Non-Compliance. The Financial Management Division (FMD) will conduct capacity-building training for
finance staff recruited through a competitive process. This training will focus on: a) Familiarization with IFAD and GCF
procedures; b) Understanding financial reporting requirements and timelines; c) Proper categorization of expenditures
across different project components; and d) Overall financial management practices related to the project. The risks
associated with fund commingling and to facilitate accurate accounting of any advances provided, the following
measures will be implemented: a) Funds will be maintained in dedicated project accounts at the Central Bank of each
country. This will help ensure that project funds are kept separate from other government funds; b) There will be
monthly bank account reconciliations and financial reports generated for these dedicated accounts to ensure
transparency and accountability; c) Each district/county receiving project funds will be required to establish sub-project

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | High |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description High |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
290. Limited skills exist in the dairy value chain in the four countries particularly in areas of social inclusion and
gender, dairy technicians, extension services, M&E and functional dairy L-FFS specialists in the implementing
ministries, national dairy boards, and organisations to guarantee effective Programme implementation. In Tanzania
and Uganda, the local government has limited financial, procurement and human resources to assume their mandate
of execution particularly on community service, extension, nutrition, private sector partnerships and infrastructure
development). Further, limited M&E skills within PMU and government staff in general is bound to affect the
implementation. The four countries are also at different stages of M&E system set up and maturity. Given the scope
of DaIMA project, data collection, harmonization and reporting at the regional level may be a challenge. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
291. In each of the four countries, a Programme management unit will be established by the IFAD project that will
mobilise cofinancing, and staff recruitment will follow a competitive process to ensure quality expertise is in place. The
implementation of the Programme will be structured around performance-based contracts which will also be indicated
in the Financing Agreement. Service providers will be contracted through competitive government procedures and
based on renewable performance-based service contracts to provide advisory services. As part of the support
delivered, implementing partners and service providers will ensure that adequate capacity is built among recipients of
their services at various levels including local governments to guarantee their exit strategy and overall sustainability.
Continuous capacity building will be conducted to both government and PMU staff Exchange visits and joint reviews
will also be conducted to enhance learning in addition to routine M&E training to build the capacity of PMUs and
government. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 Financial Management and Fiduciary Risks |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Governance |  |  | High |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
292. The Programme involves multiple line ministries and the Project Management Units (PMU), districts /county
governments, all of which hold fiduciary responsibilities. Although the PCMU will consist of qualified personnel with
expertise in technical and financial management, there may be a lack of familiarity among staff with the procedures of
IFAD and the GCF. The districts /county governments will receive funding from the Ministry of Finance and report to
IFAD through the PMU. There is a risk of delays in flow of fund and the consolidation of project financial reports at the
PMU. Furthermore, the project involves multiple financiers, including IFAD, the GCF, government contributions, and
beneficiary contributions. This creates a risk of commingling funds in budgeting and expenditure allocations among
these financiers. Additionally, there is a risk of inadequate audit coverage for the project due to the involvement of
various districts/ counties governments located across a wide geographic area. Additionally, there is a possibility that
some high-risk expenditure categories may not be adequately addressed during the audits. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
293. Formal agreements will be established between the line ministries, the Ministry of Finance, and the
participating districts/county governments. These MoUs will clearly outline the requirements for financial reporting with
penalties for Non-Compliance. The Financial Management Division (FMD) will conduct capacity-building training for
finance staff recruited through a competitive process. This training will focus on: a) Familiarization with IFAD and GCF
procedures; b) Understanding financial reporting requirements and timelines; c) Proper categorization of expenditures
across different project components; and d) Overall financial management practices related to the project. The risks
associated with fund commingling and to facilitate accurate accounting of any advances provided, the following
measures will be implemented: a) Funds will be maintained in dedicated project accounts at the Central Bank of each
country. This will help ensure that project funds are kept separate from other government funds; b) There will be
monthly bank account reconciliations and financial reports generated for these dedicated accounts to ensure
transparency and accountability; c) Each district/county receiving project funds will be required to establish sub-project |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93
F
accounts specifically for segregating the funds received. This will help prevent the mixing of project funds with other
county funds; d) Counties will submit monthly financial reports to the PMU to monitor the operations of their sub-
accounts and facilitate consolidation of financial data; e) All district /counties will sign MoUs that clearly outline the
requirements for maintaining separate bank accounts and the financial reporting obligations associated with the
Programme.
294. To mitigate the risks associated with external audits, the following measures will be implemented: a) the
auditor will develop a detailed work plan to ensure sufficient coverage of all counties receiving project funds. This plan
will specifically address major risk areas to ensure that all critical aspects of the project are audited, b) the IFAD
Finance Officer will provide the external auditors with the IFAD audit terms of reference in advance to ensure that all
key elements are included in the audit TOR and c) the project finance staff will be informed of the audit requirements
as outlined in the IFAD Financial Management and Financial Control (FMFCL) Handbook.
Selected Risk Factor 3 Sector Strategies and Policies
Category Probability Impact
Governance High Medium
Description High
295. Each of the four countries recently developed a Livestock Sector Transformation Plan, including a Dairy
Development Plan. Sector policies including the recently developed national dairy strategy documents in the four
countries are formulated in an inclusive manner, involving all organised stakeholders. The policies are aligned with
their national strategies, and priorities. The main gap is the low representation of smallholder dairy farmers in these
policy fora, due to the lack of professional organisation of this category of actors. Policy dialogue is thus dominated
by private sector actors, who are well organised, national dairy boards, larger progressive farmers, NGOs, and public
institutions. The other risk is related to the low capacities of public institutions to enforce sector regulations, particularly
those related to milk hygiene. This has a significant impact on the value chain as it provides a comparative advantage
to the informal raw milk sector.
Mitigation Measure(s)
296. During the design process, the four Governments committed to adhere to IFAD’s environmental safeguards
and targeting policy, to maximise positive social and environmental impacts, and ensure that DaIMA is in line with
IFAD’s core principles. The risk mitigation strategies include: a) Participation of the four countries dairy boards in the
entire design process, b) The Programme will support the organisation of smallholder farmers at regional, national,
and county/district levels, and their participation in policy dialogue fora, to make the policy dialogue more inclusive
and c) The Programme will also support the review and update of sector regulations, but also their enforcement. This
will entail support to the national Dairy Boards, District milk inspectors, and strengthening of laboratory facilities for
milk control.
Selected Risk Factor 4 Project Scope and Approach
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
297. The Programme strategic approach responds to the sector priority needs, characterised by a lack of milk
supply, dominance of the informal raw milk value chain and inadequate access to services and finance. However, the
situation of the dairy value chain is volatile and may evolve during implementation: the supply/demand balance could
be reversed, due to changing consumption patterns or emergence of new market segments, and to rapidly increasing
production. This would require a slight adaptation of the programme activities, and a re-balancing of activities in favour
of either the marketing aspects, or production. The DaIMA design covers a large range of domains due to the overall
low performance of the dairy value chain, affected by challenges at all levels (production, services, access to finance,
market access, low consumption, policy gaps). The Programme must address all these challenges at the same time
to avoid leaving bottlenecks that would impede the overall development of the sector. This leads to a moderate level
of complexity of the programme design, which is however common in similar value chain projects.
Mitigation Measure(s)
298. In case the situation of the value chain evolves during implementation, some adjustments may be needed on
project activities, including on budget allocation, without modifying the project structure, theory of change, objectives,
and overall strategy. This may include for instance increased support for the processing and marketing levels, and
reduced emphasis on production and productivity. These adjustments could be made at the MTR stage. Some of the
mitigation measures will include: a) Implementation of specific sets of activities will be delegated to implementing
partners that have experience and comparative advantage in these domains, b) Design should be flexible and not

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
accounts specifically for segregating the funds received. This will help prevent the mixing of project funds with other
county funds; d) Counties will submit monthly financial reports to the PMU to monitor the operations of their sub-
accounts and facilitate consolidation of financial data; e) All district /counties will sign MoUs that clearly outline the
requirements for maintaining separate bank accounts and the financial reporting obligations associated with the
Programme.
294. To mitigate the risks associated with external audits, the following measures will be implemented: a) the
auditor will develop a detailed work plan to ensure sufficient coverage of all counties receiving project funds. This plan
will specifically address major risk areas to ensure that all critical aspects of the project are audited, b) the IFAD
Finance Officer will provide the external auditors with the IFAD audit terms of reference in advance to ensure that all
key elements are included in the audit TOR and c) the project finance staff will be informed of the audit requirements
as outlined in the IFAD Financial Management and Financial Control (FMFCL) Handbook. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 3 Sector Strategies and Policies |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Governance |  |  | High |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description High |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
295. Each of the four countries recently developed a Livestock Sector Transformation Plan, including a Dairy
Development Plan. Sector policies including the recently developed national dairy strategy documents in the four
countries are formulated in an inclusive manner, involving all organised stakeholders. The policies are aligned with
their national strategies, and priorities. The main gap is the low representation of smallholder dairy farmers in these
policy fora, due to the lack of professional organisation of this category of actors. Policy dialogue is thus dominated
by private sector actors, who are well organised, national dairy boards, larger progressive farmers, NGOs, and public
institutions. The other risk is related to the low capacities of public institutions to enforce sector regulations, particularly
those related to milk hygiene. This has a significant impact on the value chain as it provides a comparative advantage
to the informal raw milk sector. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
296. During the design process, the four Governments committed to adhere to IFAD’s environmental safeguards
and targeting policy, to maximise positive social and environmental impacts, and ensure that DaIMA is in line with
IFAD’s core principles. The risk mitigation strategies include: a) Participation of the four countries dairy boards in the
entire design process, b) The Programme will support the organisation of smallholder farmers at regional, national,
and county/district levels, and their participation in policy dialogue fora, to make the policy dialogue more inclusive
and c) The Programme will also support the review and update of sector regulations, but also their enforcement. This
will entail support to the national Dairy Boards, District milk inspectors, and strengthening of laboratory facilities for
milk control. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 4 Project Scope and Approach |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact |  | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Low |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
297. The Programme strategic approach responds to the sector priority needs, characterised by a lack of milk
supply, dominance of the informal raw milk value chain and inadequate access to services and finance. However, the
situation of the dairy value chain is volatile and may evolve during implementation: the supply/demand balance could
be reversed, due to changing consumption patterns or emergence of new market segments, and to rapidly increasing
production. This would require a slight adaptation of the programme activities, and a re-balancing of activities in favour
of either the marketing aspects, or production. The DaIMA design covers a large range of domains due to the overall
low performance of the dairy value chain, affected by challenges at all levels (production, services, access to finance,
market access, low consumption, policy gaps). The Programme must address all these challenges at the same time
to avoid leaving bottlenecks that would impede the overall development of the sector. This leads to a moderate level
of complexity of the programme design, which is however common in similar value chain projects. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
298. In case the situation of the value chain evolves during implementation, some adjustments may be needed on
project activities, including on budget allocation, without modifying the project structure, theory of change, objectives,
and overall strategy. This may include for instance increased support for the processing and marketing levels, and
reduced emphasis on production and productivity. These adjustments could be made at the MTR stage. Some of the
mitigation measures will include: a) Implementation of specific sets of activities will be delegated to implementing
partners that have experience and comparative advantage in these domains, b) Design should be flexible and not |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94
F
overly prescriptive to allow adaptations in course of implementation, based on lessons learned, c) Programme
governance should be solid, with mechanisms for effective national and regional coordination of implementing partners
and service providers (reporting system, M&E, regular technical meetings, and regional steering committee meetings)
and d) Governance organs such as the National and Regional Steering Committees include stakeholders that have
very good knowledge and sound analysis of the sector (e.g. ILRI).
Selected Risk Factor 5 Regional Context
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Medium
Description
299. Despite recent protest by the youth, the four countries are characterised by a good socio-political stability, and
a rather low occurrence of inter-ethnic tensions or clashes. In the four countries, there is growing concern because
young people have become disenchanted with agriculture and often do not have access to (high quality) input and
capital. Youth involvement in small-scale / zero-grazing dairy is critical to address the youth bulge. All IFAD projects
in the four countries have been designed to reduce rural poverty and consequently inequality and social tensions.
There are also risks linked to political commitment, governance and the macroeconomic situation in the 4 countries.
Mitigation Measure(s)
300. As the largest employer in the country, agriculture will remain an entry point for job creation, inclusive growth,
and poverty reduction. Small-scale / zero grazing dairy has a lot of potential to reduce poverty, increase food security,
improve nutrition, and strengthen resilience. DaIMA will strengthen the livelihoods of the most disadvantaged rural
categories including smallholder dairy farmers, poor households without cows, unemployed youth, women, and
women-headed households. DaIMA will leverage four national projects that are co-financed by IFAD and other funding
mechanisms and will invest in rural areas to increase smallholder productivity. Regarding political commitment, the
relevant counterpart government officials have been actively engaged throughout the design of the regional
Programme. Three (3) regional preparation workshops were organised, in addition to a series of national events. The
IFAD team will continue to work closely with the Government of the four countries during the next phases of the
Programme approval and start-up, to ensure Government ownership and alignment with IFAD’s and Government’s
policies is ensured. Regarding governance, IFAD’s COSOP in the four countries places the country-level policy
engagement (CLPE) at the core of its strategy. Key areas of policy engagement are focusing on increasing
investments, improving policy coherence and coordination and improving the business environment for priority value
chains. One of the focus areas of DaIMA will be the formulation and implementation, review and update of national
policies, strategies and legislations with respect to the dairy sector. It is envisaged to support the Governments to
strengthen regulations on milk trade, as well as their enforcement. DaIMA will also contribute to significantly improve
the governance of the dairy sector. Finally regarding macroeconomic risks, The Governments of the four countries
committed to macroeconomic policies, aimed at not increasing public debt, containing inflation within their target
range, and preserving external stability. The authorities have established a track record of sound macroeconomic
management, but further reforms to revenue policy and administration, public expenditures, and debt management
will be necessary to create adequate space to increase priority social spending and productive investment without
jeopardising fiscal sustainability.
Selected Risk Factor 6 Limited adoption/reversal to BAU practices by beneficiaries
Category Probability Impact
Other Medium Medium
Description
301. Small dairy farmers show a low adoption rates of improved practices or revert to business-as-usual practices
Mitigation Measure(s)
302. The use of participative approaches for capacity development such as farmers field schools, demo farms and
learning routes increases the probability of adoption of improved practices. In addition, activities will rely on the support
of dairy groups and cooperatives which will be supported by sector specific organisations such as (i) SDLD and KDB
in Kenya, (ii) the Rwanda National Dairy Platform ((RNDP)) in Rwanda; (iii) the Dairy Development Authority (DDA),
in Uganda; (iv) the Tanzania Dairy Board (TDB) and the Tanzania Cooperative Development Commission (TCDC).
Finally, improved practices will not only result in improved resilience and lower emissions but also in better economic
return for farmers, which creates economic incentives.
Selected Risk Factor 7 Insufficient access to markets to incentivise the paradigm shift
Category Probability Impact

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
overly prescriptive to allow adaptations in course of implementation, based on lessons learned, c) Programme
governance should be solid, with mechanisms for effective national and regional coordination of implementing partners
and service providers (reporting system, M&E, regular technical meetings, and regional steering committee meetings)
and d) Governance organs such as the National and Regional Steering Committees include stakeholders that have
very good knowledge and sound analysis of the sector (e.g. ILRI). |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 5 Regional Context |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Governance |  | Medium | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  | 
299. Despite recent protest by the youth, the four countries are characterised by a good socio-political stability, and
a rather low occurrence of inter-ethnic tensions or clashes. In the four countries, there is growing concern because
young people have become disenchanted with agriculture and often do not have access to (high quality) input and
capital. Youth involvement in small-scale / zero-grazing dairy is critical to address the youth bulge. All IFAD projects
in the four countries have been designed to reduce rural poverty and consequently inequality and social tensions.
There are also risks linked to political commitment, governance and the macroeconomic situation in the 4 countries. |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
300. As the largest employer in the country, agriculture will remain an entry point for job creation, inclusive growth,
and poverty reduction. Small-scale / zero grazing dairy has a lot of potential to reduce poverty, increase food security,
improve nutrition, and strengthen resilience. DaIMA will strengthen the livelihoods of the most disadvantaged rural
categories including smallholder dairy farmers, poor households without cows, unemployed youth, women, and
women-headed households. DaIMA will leverage four national projects that are co-financed by IFAD and other funding
mechanisms and will invest in rural areas to increase smallholder productivity. Regarding political commitment, the
relevant counterpart government officials have been actively engaged throughout the design of the regional
Programme. Three (3) regional preparation workshops were organised, in addition to a series of national events. The
IFAD team will continue to work closely with the Government of the four countries during the next phases of the
Programme approval and start-up, to ensure Government ownership and alignment with IFAD’s and Government’s
policies is ensured. Regarding governance, IFAD’s COSOP in the four countries places the country-level policy
engagement (CLPE) at the core of its strategy. Key areas of policy engagement are focusing on increasing
investments, improving policy coherence and coordination and improving the business environment for priority value
chains. One of the focus areas of DaIMA will be the formulation and implementation, review and update of national
policies, strategies and legislations with respect to the dairy sector. It is envisaged to support the Governments to
strengthen regulations on milk trade, as well as their enforcement. DaIMA will also contribute to significantly improve
the governance of the dairy sector. Finally regarding macroeconomic risks, The Governments of the four countries
committed to macroeconomic policies, aimed at not increasing public debt, containing inflation within their target
range, and preserving external stability. The authorities have established a track record of sound macroeconomic
management, but further reforms to revenue policy and administration, public expenditures, and debt management
will be necessary to create adequate space to increase priority social spending and productive investment without
jeopardising fiscal sustainability. |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 6 Limited adoption/reversal to BAU practices by beneficiaries |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Other |  | Medium | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  | 
301. Small dairy farmers show a low adoption rates of improved practices or revert to business-as-usual practices |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
302. The use of participative approaches for capacity development such as farmers field schools, demo farms and
learning routes increases the probability of adoption of improved practices. In addition, activities will rely on the support
of dairy groups and cooperatives which will be supported by sector specific organisations such as (i) SDLD and KDB
in Kenya, (ii) the Rwanda National Dairy Platform ((RNDP)) in Rwanda; (iii) the Dairy Development Authority (DDA),
in Uganda; (iv) the Tanzania Dairy Board (TDB) and the Tanzania Cooperative Development Commission (TCDC).
Finally, improved practices will not only result in improved resilience and lower emissions but also in better economic
return for farmers, which creates economic incentives. |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 7 Insufficient access to markets to incentivise the paradigm shift |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95
F
Other Low Medium
Description
303. Small dairy farmers are interested in improved practices but they do not have sufficient access to market to
find the economic return they need.
Mitigation Measure(s)
304. The Programme has a strong focus on developing access to market for small holders under Output 2.1:
Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened. It will expand the outreach and capacity of dairy
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs. It will also build productive alliances and linkages along the dairy value chain,
including with offtake agreements between cooperatives and private off-takers (Productive Alliance model), as well as
public procurement (e.g. school or hospital procurement) for better milk prices guaranteed by contract.
Selected Risk Factor 8 Risk of low demand for and repayment of GDFF Funds
Category Probability Impact
Other Medium Medium
Description
305. Establishing four relatively small-sized credit lines in a niche sub-sector like dairy poses several challenges.
Relatively low funding base can constrain the interest of banks to participate in the scheme. Lack of understanding of
the bankable options in green dairy lending can further reduce bank interest. Similarly, lack of knowledge of the
advantages of green dairy investments among the dairy businesses can reduce loan demand. Finally, lack of
management skills in medium and small businesses can result in low recovery rates particularly in more technically
aspects of green dairy investments.
Mitigation Measure(s)
306. To address these risks, GDFF includes several design features and instruments. Substantial technical support
provided by GDFF aims to substantially increase and improve the understanding of both the banks and borrowing
SMEs on the available investment options in greening of the dairy operations. Favourable loan terms, particularly the
long grace and repayment periods, will support successful cash flow management in the borrowing companies and
support timely loan repayment. At the same time participation in GDFF lending operations will build positive credit
histories for small and medium dairy companies, providing a soft start for permanent client relationships with
commercial banks to enable larger future investments for participating dairy businesses.
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment
307. The Programme has been reviewed in line with IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) and classified as Moderate for the categorization of Environmental & Social risks as well as
Climate Risk. Based on the results of the screening, the activities proposed under the Programme do not pose a high
risk of harm to people or the environment and will be located away from environmentally or socially sensitive areas. In
addition, the risks associated with the programme are predictable and expected to be temporary or reversible and have
a low likelihood of causing serious adverse effects to human health or the environment.
308. Recognizing that moderate adverse impacts may impinge on the environment and human health during various
phases of the Programme, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) has been prepared as
part of the ESMF. The ESMP entails potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks associated with
proposed activities, respective mitigation measures, responsible parties, and cost estimates for implementation of each
mitigation measures. To keep track of the implementation of the ESMF, there will be two types of monitoring to be
conducted during implementation of the programme i.e. Performance and results monitoring. The Environment and
Social Safeguard Specialist will conduct at least one field visit at an interval of six months to verify reports submitted
from responsible parties indicated in the ESMP. Additional site visits and/or changes in site visit frequency may be
required based on the risk level of the sub-project. As regards Reviews, there will be annual reviews of the ESMF and
all associated environmental and social instruments. This activity will be undertaken in a participatory manner and shall
involve programme stakeholders at various levels from the sub-project level to the national level in the four countries.
Annual reviews are aimed to ensure that implementation of interventions is undertaken in compliance with IFAD
SECAP and GCF Environmental and Social Standards.

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
Other |  | Low | Medium
 | Description |  | 
303. Small dairy farmers are interested in improved practices but they do not have sufficient access to market to
find the economic return they need. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
304. The Programme has a strong focus on developing access to market for small holders under Output 2.1:
Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened. It will expand the outreach and capacity of dairy
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs. It will also build productive alliances and linkages along the dairy value chain,
including with offtake agreements between cooperatives and private off-takers (Productive Alliance model), as well as
public procurement (e.g. school or hospital procurement) for better milk prices guaranteed by contract. |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 8 Risk of low demand for and repayment of GDFF Funds |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact
Other |  | Medium | Medium
 | Description |  | 
305. Establishing four relatively small-sized credit lines in a niche sub-sector like dairy poses several challenges.
Relatively low funding base can constrain the interest of banks to participate in the scheme. Lack of understanding of
the bankable options in green dairy lending can further reduce bank interest. Similarly, lack of knowledge of the
advantages of green dairy investments among the dairy businesses can reduce loan demand. Finally, lack of
management skills in medium and small businesses can result in low recovery rates particularly in more technically
aspects of green dairy investments. |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
306. To address these risks, GDFF includes several design features and instruments. Substantial technical support
provided by GDFF aims to substantially increase and improve the understanding of both the banks and borrowing
SMEs on the available investment options in greening of the dairy operations. Favourable loan terms, particularly the
long grace and repayment periods, will support successful cash flow management in the borrowing companies and
support timely loan repayment. At the same time participation in GDFF lending operations will build positive credit
histories for small and medium dairy companies, providing a soft start for permanent client relationships with
commercial banks to enable larger future investments for participating dairy businesses. |  |  | 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS |  |  | 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment |  |  | 
307. The Programme has been reviewed in line with IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) and classified as Moderate for the categorization of Environmental & Social risks as well as
Climate Risk. Based on the results of the screening, the activities proposed under the Programme do not pose a high
risk of harm to people or the environment and will be located away from environmentally or socially sensitive areas. In
addition, the risks associated with the programme are predictable and expected to be temporary or reversible and have
a low likelihood of causing serious adverse effects to human health or the environment.
308. Recognizing that moderate adverse impacts may impinge on the environment and human health during various
phases of the Programme, an Environmental, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) has been prepared as
part of the ESMF. The ESMP entails potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks associated with
proposed activities, respective mitigation measures, responsible parties, and cost estimates for implementation of each
mitigation measures. To keep track of the implementation of the ESMF, there will be two types of monitoring to be
conducted during implementation of the programme i.e. Performance and results monitoring. The Environment and
Social Safeguard Specialist will conduct at least one field visit at an interval of six months to verify reports submitted
from responsible parties indicated in the ESMP. Additional site visits and/or changes in site visit frequency may be
required based on the risk level of the sub-project. As regards Reviews, there will be annual reviews of the ESMF and
all associated environmental and social instruments. This activity will be undertaken in a participatory manner and shall
involve programme stakeholders at various levels from the sub-project level to the national level in the four countries.
Annual reviews are aimed to ensure that implementation of interventions is undertaken in compliance with IFAD
SECAP and GCF Environmental and Social Standards. |  |  | 

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96
F
309. During proposal development phase, consultation of potential stakeholders in selected sites was done to solicit
their views and concerns regarding the proposed interventions. For a continuous engagement during implementation
of the program, a stakeholders engagement strategy has been prepared as part of the ESMF. The strategy provides
a framework for achieving effective stakeholder involvement and promoting greater awareness and understanding of
issues so that the programme is carried out effectively. As part of the stakeholders’ engagement and for addressing
complaints that may arise during programme implementation, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been
established. The GRM will address queries and offer an avenue for clarifications about the program, respond to
problems, complaints, and grievances. The GRM also provides an opportunity for appeal if any aggrieved person is
not satisfied with a decision or action in response to their issue. To ensure that the Grievance Redress Mechanism is
well known and accessible to all program stakeholders, various communication tools will be adopted to disseminate
the information about the available opportunity, and how to register complaints and seek redress. The program will
also use the opportunities from the existing communication system and program awareness-raising events to
disseminate the information on GRM.
310. As regards Information Disclosure, the ESMF will be disclosed 30 days (Category B/I-2 projects) before the
GCF or IFAD Board meeting date, whichever is earlier. It will be posted on the IFAD website, on the GCF website
together with the funding proposal and at locations convenient to affected peoples, i.e. at all levels at the relevant
institutions. The Programme Coordination Teams at the country level will make and distribute copies of the ESMF
written in English and working language of the country in compliance with the IFAD’s Public Consultation and
Disclosure Policy. Thereafter various communication tools will be utilized for the engagement process, such as Project
notices published in local newspapers, radio advertisements, direct mailings to communities, presentations with or
without focus group sessions, targeted e-mails, one-on-one meetings, social media, seminars, workshops, e-mails,
and phone conversations with stakeholders.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
311. The gender assessment and action plan of the Programme provides an overview of the gender inequalities
that hinder women, youth, and other vulnerable groups participation in and benefitting from dairy production and
climate change mitigation and adaptation interventions. Annex 8 sets out the main parameters of the Gender Equality
and Social Inclusion (GESI) assessment and analysis. Part 1 provides a brief GESI analysis of smallholder dairy
farmers and MSMEs (dairy cooperatives and processors) i.e., the experiences of women, youth, people with disabilities
and other vulnerable in dairy production and the barriers they face Part 2 provides an overview of the GESI action plan
setting out actions and targets to achieve the project objectives.
312. The methodology for the gender assessment and action plan was informed by in-country missions in Tanzania,
Uganda, Kenya, and Rwanda. The field missions included consultations with key stakeholders and in-depth interviews
with key stakeholders in the dairy sector. This was followed by a desk literature review and synthesis, including practical
and field examples to inform the needed interventions. How resources (cattle, water, money and family land) are
accessed and controlled by different people, and the implications for climate resilience. For example, women and girls
are impacted disproportionately from the effects of climate change due to factors such as entrenched discriminatory
social and cultural norms compounded by limited mobility and decision-making power exacerbates climate-related
impacts on women’s poverty.
313. To address these barriers, the Programme will (i) Increase women economic empowerment through dairy
production and access and control over productive resources (ii) Reduce time and labour burdens and balance
workloads activities (iii) Increase their voice and decision making at individual, household, group, and community levels
and (iv) Increase Joint and equitable benefits sharing while promoting positive gender norms and practices. Young
women and men, of different groupings, disabilities, ethnicity, and religion will be targeted to access productive assets,
services and skills to create jobs and entrepreneurship. The Programme will recruit implementation partner or Service
Providers with experience in community centred approaches promoting integration of young men and women,
vulnerable groups, persons with disabilities. This may include gender focused, youthful enterprises, NGOs, the
academia and researchers. The GESI action plan will be monitored and evaluated through the project M and E system
ensuring sex, age and gender disaggregated data is collated to inform project interventions.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
314. Disbursements/Fund Flow. Designated accounts (DAs) will be administered following “revolving fund
arrangements” as described in Annex 2 chapter 9. The Recipients/Borrowers will enter into MoU with the Implementing
Partners (IPs) before any funds transferred to the IPs, except Tanzania where MoUs signed with the IPs only when
they are not included in the financing agreement. Each project will open and maintain separate DAs in USD to receive

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
309. During proposal development phase, consultation of potential stakeholders in selected sites was done to solicit
their views and concerns regarding the proposed interventions. For a continuous engagement during implementation
of the program, a stakeholders engagement strategy has been prepared as part of the ESMF. The strategy provides
a framework for achieving effective stakeholder involvement and promoting greater awareness and understanding of
issues so that the programme is carried out effectively. As part of the stakeholders’ engagement and for addressing
complaints that may arise during programme implementation, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been
established. The GRM will address queries and offer an avenue for clarifications about the program, respond to
problems, complaints, and grievances. The GRM also provides an opportunity for appeal if any aggrieved person is
not satisfied with a decision or action in response to their issue. To ensure that the Grievance Redress Mechanism is
well known and accessible to all program stakeholders, various communication tools will be adopted to disseminate
the information about the available opportunity, and how to register complaints and seek redress. The program will
also use the opportunities from the existing communication system and program awareness-raising events to
disseminate the information on GRM.
310. As regards Information Disclosure, the ESMF will be disclosed 30 days (Category B/I-2 projects) before the
GCF or IFAD Board meeting date, whichever is earlier. It will be posted on the IFAD website, on the GCF website
together with the funding proposal and at locations convenient to affected peoples, i.e. at all levels at the relevant
institutions. The Programme Coordination Teams at the country level will make and distribute copies of the ESMF
written in English and working language of the country in compliance with the IFAD’s Public Consultation and
Disclosure Policy. Thereafter various communication tools will be utilized for the engagement process, such as Project
notices published in local newspapers, radio advertisements, direct mailings to communities, presentations with or
without focus group sessions, targeted e-mails, one-on-one meetings, social media, seminars, workshops, e-mails,
and phone conversations with stakeholders. |  | 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
311. The gender assessment and action plan of the Programme provides an overview of the gender inequalities
that hinder women, youth, and other vulnerable groups participation in and benefitting from dairy production and
climate change mitigation and adaptation interventions. Annex 8 sets out the main parameters of the Gender Equality
and Social Inclusion (GESI) assessment and analysis. Part 1 provides a brief GESI analysis of smallholder dairy
farmers and MSMEs (dairy cooperatives and processors) i.e., the experiences of women, youth, people with disabilities
and other vulnerable in dairy production and the barriers they face Part 2 provides an overview of the GESI action plan
setting out actions and targets to achieve the project objectives.
312. The methodology for the gender assessment and action plan was informed by in-country missions in Tanzania,
Uganda, Kenya, and Rwanda. The field missions included consultations with key stakeholders and in-depth interviews
with key stakeholders in the dairy sector. This was followed by a desk literature review and synthesis, including practical
and field examples to inform the needed interventions. How resources (cattle, water, money and family land) are
accessed and controlled by different people, and the implications for climate resilience. For example, women and girls
are impacted disproportionately from the effects of climate change due to factors such as entrenched discriminatory
social and cultural norms compounded by limited mobility and decision-making power exacerbates climate-related
impacts on women’s poverty.
313. To address these barriers, the Programme will (i) Increase women economic empowerment through dairy
production and access and control over productive resources (ii) Reduce time and labour burdens and balance
workloads activities (iii) Increase their voice and decision making at individual, household, group, and community levels
and (iv) Increase Joint and equitable benefits sharing while promoting positive gender norms and practices. Young
women and men, of different groupings, disabilities, ethnicity, and religion will be targeted to access productive assets,
services and skills to create jobs and entrepreneurship. The Programme will recruit implementation partner or Service
Providers with experience in community centred approaches promoting integration of young men and women,
vulnerable groups, persons with disabilities. This may include gender focused, youthful enterprises, NGOs, the
academia and researchers. The GESI action plan will be monitored and evaluated through the project M and E system
ensuring sex, age and gender disaggregated data is collated to inform project interventions. |  | 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  | 
 | 314. Disbursements/Fund Flow. Designated accounts (DAs) will be administered following “revolving fund | 
 | arrangements” as described in Annex 2 chapter 9. The Recipients/Borrowers will enter into MoU with the Implementing | 
 | Partners (IPs) before any funds transferred to the IPs, except Tanzania where MoUs signed with the IPs only when | 
 | they are not included in the financing agreement. Each project will open and maintain separate DAs in USD to receive | 

=== PAGE 100 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97
F
GCF funds from IFAD. Similarly, separate project accounts in local currency will be opened by PCUs, district offices
and IPs to receive funds from the project designated/operating accounts. Countries where single treasury account is
used, adequate chart of accounts will be used to segregate GCF sources and uses of funds from other financiers. In
case of flow of fund issues to ILRI, direct payments to ILRI may be considered based on the MoUs signed between
the Borrower and ILRI. However, all Withdrawal Applications and IFRs need to be submitted by the PCU of each
Country.
315. Disbursements will be based on submission of quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) within 30 days after
the period ends and upon availability of funds. IFRs and the Withdrawal Applications will be submitted to IFAD by
PCUs through IFAD’s Client Portal and will include a cash forecast for the next two quarters. As per GCF rules, there
will be no disbursement unless 70% of GCF proceeds is utilized and all other GCF disbursement conditions are met.
316. Accounting and Financial Reporting. Rwanda (RDDP-II) and Uganda (ReLIV): Accounting and reporting will
be performed through Country’s IFMIS system and will follow national regulation, which is in a gradual process of
transition to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) accrual and (IPSAS) cash standards
respectively. Tanzania (C-SDTP) and Kenya (INReMP): Off-the-shelf accounting software will be used, and adequate
chart of accounts will be developed to segregate sources and uses of funds. The Financial Statements will be prepared
in accordance with IPSAS-accrual basis and IPSAS-Cash basis of accounting respectively.
317. Quarterly interim financial reports will be submitted to IFAD within 30 days after each quarter end and unaudited
financial statements within four months of end of each financial year. In addition, Recipients/Borrowers shall certify
semi-annual reports on the use of funds by source of funding, category, components, sub-components and activities
in the required GCF budget format will be submitted within 30 days of period end. All implementing partners will be
required to prepare the financial reports with standard templates and submit them to the executing agency’s PCU.
PCUs will prepare the consolidated financial statements and submit them to IFAD.
318. Internal Controls. Executing agencies will have the oversight responsibility over IPs. PCUs and all IPs will
have adequate internal control arrangements in place to ensure that funds are used for intended purposes. Rwanda
(RDDP-II) will be internally audited by an internal Auditor hired under the SPIU and will report to the PSC; Tanzania
(C-SDTP) will be internally audited quarterly by the independent Internal Audit (IA) Unit under the aegis of the Internal
Auditor General, which is established at MLF. Uganda (ReLIV) will be internally audited quarterly by the independent
Internal Audit (IA) Unit under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Kenya (INReMP) will be
internally audited quarterly by the independent Internal Audit (IA) Unit established under the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development.
319. External Audit. Financial statements of Rwanda (RDDP-II), Tanzania (C-SDTP), Kenya (INReMP) and
Uganda (ReLIV) will be audited annually by the Auditors General in each country as per the International Auditing
Standards, and the audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the Borrower’s fiscal year-end. The
auditor scope of work will provide a specific opinion on GCF funds.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
X With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided confidently. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing the Secretariat with the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential info.

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
 | GCF funds from IFAD. Similarly, separate project accounts in local currency will be opened by PCUs, district offices | 
 | and IPs to receive funds from the project designated/operating accounts. Countries where single treasury account is | 
 | used, adequate chart of accounts will be used to segregate GCF sources and uses of funds from other financiers. In | 
 | case of flow of fund issues to ILRI, direct payments to ILRI may be considered based on the MoUs signed between | 
 | the Borrower and ILRI. However, all Withdrawal Applications and IFRs need to be submitted by the PCU of each | 
 | Country. | 
 |  | 
 | 315. Disbursements will be based on submission of quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) within 30 days after | 
 | the period ends and upon availability of funds. IFRs and the Withdrawal Applications will be submitted to IFAD by | 
 | PCUs through IFAD’s Client Portal and will include a cash forecast for the next two quarters. As per GCF rules, there | 
 | will be no disbursement unless 70% of GCF proceeds is utilized and all other GCF disbursement conditions are met. | 
 |  | 
 | 316. Accounting and Financial Reporting. Rwanda (RDDP-II) and Uganda (ReLIV): Accounting and reporting will | 
 | be performed through Country’s IFMIS system and will follow national regulation, which is in a gradual process of | 
 | transition to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) accrual and (IPSAS) cash standards | 
 | respectively. Tanzania (C-SDTP) and Kenya (INReMP): Off-the-shelf accounting software will be used, and adequate | 
 | chart of accounts will be developed to segregate sources and uses of funds. The Financial Statements will be prepared | 
 | in accordance with IPSAS-accrual basis and IPSAS-Cash basis of accounting respectively. | 
 |  | 
 | 317. Quarterly interim financial reports will be submitted to IFAD within 30 days after each quarter end and unaudited | 
 | financial statements within four months of end of each financial year. In addition, Recipients/Borrowers shall certify | 
 | semi-annual reports on the use of funds by source of funding, category, components, sub-components and activities | 
 | in the required GCF budget format will be submitted within 30 days of period end. All implementing partners will be | 
 | required to prepare the financial reports with standard templates and submit them to the executing agency’s PCU. | 
 | PCUs will prepare the consolidated financial statements and submit them to IFAD. | 
 |  | 
 | 318. Internal Controls. Executing agencies will have the oversight responsibility over IPs. PCUs and all IPs will | 
 | have adequate internal control arrangements in place to ensure that funds are used for intended purposes. Rwanda | 
 | (RDDP-II) will be internally audited by an internal Auditor hired under the SPIU and will report to the PSC; Tanzania | 
 | (C-SDTP) will be internally audited quarterly by the independent Internal Audit (IA) Unit under the aegis of the Internal | 
 | Auditor General, which is established at MLF. Uganda (ReLIV) will be internally audited quarterly by the independent | 
 | Internal Audit (IA) Unit under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Kenya (INReMP) will be | 
 | internally audited quarterly by the independent Internal Audit (IA) Unit established under the Ministry of Agriculture and | 
 | Livestock Development. | 
 |  | 
 | 319. External Audit. Financial statements of Rwanda (RDDP-II), Tanzania (C-SDTP), Kenya (INReMP) and | 
 | Uganda (ReLIV) will be audited annually by the Auditors General in each country as per the International Auditing | 
 | Standards, and the audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the Borrower’s fiscal year-end. The | 
 | auditor scope of work will provide a specific opinion on GCF funds. | 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal |  | 
 | ☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | X With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided confidently. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing the Secretariat with the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an | 
 | explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential info. | 

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S documents corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, IPPF)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☐ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☐ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☒ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) - OUTLINE
☒ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)96
☐ Annex X Other references
*
96 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
ANNEXES |  |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S documents corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
☒ Others (Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, IPPF) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☒ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☒ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☒ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) - OUTLINE | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and
cross cutting-projects)96 | 
☐ |  | Annex X | Other references | 

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99
H
List of main acronyms

=== PAGE 103 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 108 ===
CamScanner

=== PAGE 111 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Existence of subproject(s) to
be identified after GCF Board Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaIMA)
approval
Sector (public or private) No
Accredited entity
Environmental and social Public
safeguards (ESS) category International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Location – specific location(s)
Category B
of project or target country
or location(s) of programme
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on accredited
Monday, May 12, 2025
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English
English is an official language for all four targeted
Explanation on language
countries.
https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-ifad.org/daima-
Link to disclosure
esmf
Other link(s) N/A
Requirements for developing a Category B ESIA are
Remarks contained in Annex 6 “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Management Framework (ESMF)” of the Funding Proposal.
Date of disclosure on accredited
Monday, May 12, 2025
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English
English is an official language for all four targeted
Explanation on language
countries.
https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-ifad.org/daima-
Link to disclosure
esmf
Other link(s) N/A
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category
B project is contained in Annex 6 “Environmental and
Remarks
Social Management Framework (ESMF)” of the Funding
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)
Proposal.
Date of disclosure on accredited
N/A
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN.g/.A R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigenNo/uAs Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable)

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project or programme title |  |  |  |  | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaIMA) |  |  | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | No |  |  | 
 | Accredited entity |  |  |  |  | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Public
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) |  |  | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  |  |  | 
 | Location – specific location(s) |  | Category B |  |  | 
 | of project or target country |  |  |  |  | 
 | or location(s) of programme |  |  |  |  | 
 | Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | Monday, May 12, 2025 |  |  | 
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English |  |  | 
Explanation on language |  |  | English is an official language for all four targeted
countries. |  |  | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-ifad.org/daima- |  |  | 
Other link(s) |  |  | esmf
N/A
Requirements for developing a Category B ESIA are |  |  | 
 | Remarks contained in Annex 6 “Environmental and Social
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Management Framework (ESMF)” of the Funding Proposal. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | Monday, May 12, 2025 |  |  | 
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English |  |  | 
Explanation on language |  |  | English is an official language for all four targeted
countries. |  |  | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-ifad.org/daima- |  |  | 
Other link(s)
Remarks |  |  | esmf
N/A
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category
B project is contained in Annex 6 “Environmental and |  |  | 
 | Social Management Framework (ESMF)” of the Funding
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Proposal. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | N/A |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A |  |  | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A |  |  | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A |  |  | 
 | OAtnhye or tlihnekr( sr)e levant ESS reports, eN.g/.A R esettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  |  |  | 
 | RPeomlicayr kFsr amework (RPF), IndigenNo/uAs Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning |  |  |  |  | 
 | Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 112 ===
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF);
Description of report
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
Date of disclosure on accredited
Monday, May 12, 2025
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English
E• nglish is an official language for all four targeted
Explanation on language
countries.
• IPPF: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-
ifad.org/daima-ippf
Link to disclosure
SEP: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-
ifad.org/daima-stakeholder-engagement-plan-annex7
Other link(s) N/A
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and a
Remarks Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) are included in
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Annexes 6 and 7 respectively.
Kenya:
Date Wednesday, May 28, 2025
The National Treasury, Harambee Avenue, Treasury
Building,
P• .O Box 30007-00100, Nairobi.
• ESMF : https://www.treasury.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2025/05/DaIMA-esmf.pdf
IPPF:https://www.treasury.go.ke/wp-
Rwacnodntae:n t/uploads/2025/05/DaIMA-ippf.pdf
,
RAB/SPIU, Blue Star House, 2° piano Kacyiru, Gasabo
District
K• igali, Rwanda.
ESS documents:
https://www.rab.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile&t=
Place f&f=130379&token=21e954ef2b1c371d1c15d35f18e8
Tan0z6a3n9ia4aM3aei2n0lda6n d :
Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries, Government City -
Mtumba,
UZalinnzzii bSatrre: et, P.O.Box 2870, 40487 Dodoma, Tanzania.
Ministry of Agriculture, Maruhubi, P.O.Box 159, 70471,
•M jini Maghreb, Zanzibar.
• ESMF: https://www.mifugouvuvi.go.tz/uploads/text-
editor/files/DaIMA-esmf_1748345012.pdf
IPPF: https://www.mifugouvuvi.go.tz/uploads/text-
editor/files/Annex%206b%20IPPF%20v2_174834512
8.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 112 ---
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of report |  | Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF);
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on accredited |  | Monday, May 12, 2025 | 
entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | E• nglish is an official language for all four targeted
countries.
• IPPF: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new-
ifad.org/daima-ippf | 
 |  |  | SEP: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/new- | 
Other link(s) |  |  | ifad.org/daima-stakeholder-engagement-plan-annex7
N/A
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and a | 
 | Remarks Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) are included in
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 |  |  | Annexes 6 and 7 respectively. | 
Date
Place |  |  | Kenya:
Wednesday, May 28, 2025
The National Treasury, Harambee Avenue, Treasury
Building,
P• .O Box 30007-00100, Nairobi.
• ESMF : https://www.treasury.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2025/05/DaIMA-esmf.pdf
IPPF:https://www.treasury.go.ke/wp-
Rwacnodntae:n t/uploads/2025/05/DaIMA-ippf.pdf
,
RAB/SPIU, Blue Star House, 2° piano Kacyiru, Gasabo
District
K• igali, Rwanda.
ESS documents:
https://www.rab.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile&t=
f&f=130379&token=21e954ef2b1c371d1c15d35f18e8
Tan0z6a3n9ia4aM3aei2n0lda6n d :
Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries, Government City -
Mtumba,
UZalinnzzii bSatrre: et, P.O.Box 2870, 40487 Dodoma, Tanzania.
Ministry of Agriculture, Maruhubi, P.O.Box 159, 70471,
•M jini Maghreb, Zanzibar.
• ESMF: https://www.mifugouvuvi.go.tz/uploads/text-
editor/files/DaIMA-esmf_1748345012.pdf
IPPF: https://www.mifugouvuvi.go.tz/uploads/text-
editor/files/Annex%206b%20IPPF%20v2_174834512 | 

=== PAGE 113 ===
Uganda:
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development,
Plot 2/8 Apollo Kaggwa Road, P.O.Box 8147 Shimoni Rd 1,
•
Kampala, Uganda.
• ESMF: https://www.finance.go.ug/publications/dairy-
interventions-mitigation-and-adaptation-esmf
IPPF: https://www.finance.go.ug/publications/dairy-
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
interventions-mitigation-and-adaptation-ippf
Date of accredited entity’s
N/A
Board meeting
NDoatete: Tofh GisC fFo’sr mBo warads mpreeeptianrge d by Mthoen adcacyr,e Jdunitee d30 e, n2t0it2y5 s tated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
 |  |  | Uganda:
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development,
Plot 2/8 Apollo Kaggwa Road, P.O.Box 8147 Shimoni Rd 1,
•
Kampala, Uganda.
• ESMF: https://www.finance.go.ug/publications/dairy-
interventions-mitigation-and-adaptation-esmf | 
 | IPPF: https://www.finance.go.ug/publications/dairy-
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
interventions-mitigation-and-adaptation-ippf |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | N/A | 

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 114
Secretariat’s assessment of FP269
Proposal name: Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaiMA)
Accredited entity: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Countries: Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and United Republic of Tanzania
Project/programme size: Large
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The first GCF dedicated livestock programme, Multi-country programme, which might lead
developed in response to the climate risks to unsynchronized implementation across
affecting the sector, particularlydrought and the four countries. Mitigating measures have
increasing temperatures and reduced been included to decouple implementation in
availability of feed and fodder, while the case of delays.
reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
especially methane.
Sectoral programme designed to build
resilience across the dairy value chains
across the East Africa region, through
implementation by public and private actors,
including local financial institutions.
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the
terms listed in the term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity (AE)
and, if considered appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II to document
GCF/B.42/02.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Programme background
3.
The dairy sector in East Africa, including Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania, faces significant challenges due to climate change. Dairy farming is a
major contributor to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in each of these countries and the effects
of climate change threaten its long-term sustainability. Inefficiencies in dairy farming lead to
high GHG emission intensities per kilogram of milk. Additionally, many dairy farmers struggle
with limited market access, challenges in sourcing local feed and fodder, inadequate extension
and financial services, and difficulties in risk management. The sector is further impacted by
low livestock genetic potential, herd management issues, animal diseases, insufficient extension
support, limited awareness of climate-resilient and low-carbon practices and technologies,
rangeland degradation and gender inequalities.

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
The first GCF dedicated livestock programme,
developed in response to the climate risks
affecting the sector, particularlydrought and
increasing temperatures and reduced
availability of feed and fodder, while |  |  | Multi-country programme, which might lead
to unsynchronized implementation across
the four countries. Mitigating measures have
been included to decouple implementation in
the case of delays. |  | 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
especially methane.
Sectoral programme designed to build
resilience across the dairy value chains
across the East Africa region, through |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 115
4.
To address the above-mentioned challenges, this programme, “DaIMA – Dairy
Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation”, will have a comprehensive and holistic approach
to improve all aspects of the dairy sector, from improving policy, institutional and service
delivery environments to building the capacity of smallholder farmers, including women, youth
and marginalized groups, by strengthening climate resilience, reducing emissions across the
dairy value chain and im proving the livelihoods of dairy farmers in East Africa. It also involves
strategies to improve access to finance and innovative technologies that offer both mitigation
and adaptation benefits.As a result, dairy farmers and processors will be encouraged to adopt
m ore efficient, climate-resilient practices that enhance incomes and lower production costs.
5.
The total budget for the programme is USD 358.26 million. USD 58.20 million is
allocated for component 1, USD 234.98 million for component 2 and USD 45.0 million for the
Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF) (component 3), with the remaining USD 13.36 million
allocated for programme management and USD 6.72 million for monitoring and evaluation
(M &E).
6.
The programme will impact 2.5 million direct and 15.4 million indirect beneficiaries
across all four countries. The programme aims to reduce the milk emission intensities by 29 per
cent (of which 28 per cent is from Kenya, 50 per cent from Rwanda, 33 per cent from Uganda
and 29 per cent from the United Republic of Tanzania) over a 20-year lifespan. The programme
is also expected to reduce total GHG emissions on the targeted dairy farms, while significantly
increasing milk production by 34 per cent (of which 31 per cent is from Kenya, 73 per cent from
R wanda, 30 per cent from Uganda and 36 per cent from the United Republic of Tanzania).
7.
Furthermore, it is projected to reduce total GHG emissions from milk production by 4.01
per cent. Specifically, emissions are expected to decline by 2.02 per cent (61,967 tonnes of
carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO₂ eq)) in Kenya, 9.56 per cent (56,507 t CO₂ eq) in Rwanda, 5.22
per cent (82,372 t CO₂ eq) in Uganda and 4.69 per cent (65,718 t CO₂ eq) in the United Republic
of Tanzania. Additionally, methane emissions from enteric fermentation are anticipated to drop
by 4.6 per cent, while methane from manure management is expected to decrease by 5.93 per
cent. The programme will also contribute to estimated emission savings of 54,435 t CO₂ eq per
ye ar through improved energy generation and access.
8.
Also, the programme contributes to the Food systems (Target 4), Ecosystems (Target 5),
Clean Energy (Target 7), Local private sector ventures (Target 10) and National and regional
fi nancial institutions (Target 11) objectives of the GCF Updated Strategic Plan (USP-2).
9.
The DaIMA Programme strengthens climate resilience in East Africa’s dairy sector by
enabling 2.5 million smallholder farmers to adopt adaptive practices. It enhances water access,
pasture management, animal health, and disease control, leading to increased milk productivity
and improved food and nutrition security, while reducing vulnerability to droughts and climate
hazards (Target 4). The programme will also restore and sustainably manage over 178,000
hectares of degraded rangelands (Target 5) and strengthen dairy value chains by upgrading
milk collection and processing facilities powered by renewable energy (Target 7). Under
Component 3.1, the Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF) will provide two loan products to
support the adoption of climate-smart technologies and sustainable dairy practices. Through
this facility, DaIMA mobilizes concessional loans and technical assistance to promote low-
em ission investments and institutional capacity building in the dairy sector (Targets 10 and 11).
10.
The programme will have three components as set out below.
Component 1: Strengthened national capacities and enhanced enabling environment for low
2.2 Component-by-component analysis
emissions climate resilient dairy sectors (total cost: USD 58.2 million; GCF cost: USD 17.28 million)

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 116
11.
Component 1 will create a supportive environment for transforming East Africa’s dairy
sector, driving higher productivity, enhancing climate resilience and reducing emission
intensity. It will focus on four key outputs: establishing a supportive policy and regulatory
framework, including enhanced consumer awareness and nutritional balance (output 1.1);
enhancing public service delivery in the dairy sector, particularly through specialized livestock
extension and veterinary services (output 1.2); strengthening the capacity to monitor GHG
emissions and climate vulnerabilities (output 1.3); and promoting regional cooperation and
im proving knowledge management (output 1.4).
12.
Output 1.1 (Climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment established) aims to
establish a climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment to support the sustainable
transformation of the dairy sector in East Africa. Activity 1.1.1 focuses on reviewing and
formulating dairy sector policies, strategies and regulations to enhance climate change
adaptation and mitigation. This includes aligning national policies with nationally determined
contributions (NDCs) and national adaptation plans, improving trade and investment
regulations and fostering private sector engagement. Sub-activities 1.1.1.1 and 1.1.1.2 will
support national-level policy revisions and regional policy dialogue to harmonize dairy sector
regulations and enhance technology transfer. Sub-activities 1.1.1.3 and 1.1.1.4 will strengthen
dairy value chain governance and local stakeholder participation. Activity 1.1.2 will raise public
awareness on the nutritional benefits of milk and food safety, promoting increased consumption
of high-quality dairy products through educational campaigns and school milk programmes.
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 will focus on awareness initiatives for climate-vulnerable populations, while
sub-activity 1.1.2.2 will enhance dairy inspection systems to ensure quality standards and
reduce milk waste. Activity 1.1.3 will work towards improving land tenure security for
sustainable dairy farming, identifying tenure risks and supporting land-use planning to enhance
dairy productivity. Sub-activities 1.1.3.1 and 1.1.3.2 will provide training, public awareness
campaigns and capacity-building efforts to secure land rights, particularly for women and youth.
These activities collectively aim to create a more climate-resilient, inclusive and sustainable
da iry sector in East Africa.
13.
Output 1.2 (Enhancing public service delivery in the dairy sector, particularly through
specialized livestock extension and veterinary services) aims to enhance service delivery in the
dairy sector through improved veterinary and extension services. Activity 1.2.1 focuses on
strengthening veterinary services to improve animal health, boost milk yields and reduce losses
caused by climate-induced diseases. This will involve expanding veterinary outreach, investing
in diagnostic laboratory capacities and equipping veterinarians, paraveterinarians and
community animal health workers with better tools and training. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 will
support the deployment of veterinarians and paraveterinary professionals, particularly young
and female practitioners, while sub-activity 1.2.1.2 will enhance the diagnostic capacity of
veterinary laboratories and improve feed quality testing. Activity 1.2.2 focuses on strengthening
extension services to support a low-carbon and climate-resilient dairy sector. This will involve
innovative advisory approaches such as digital tools, Farmer Field Schools and participatory
extension models to enhance farmers' knowledge of climate-smart dairy practices. Sub-activity
1.2.2.1 will develop training modules on climate mitigation and adaptation, including topics like
fodder production, biogas management and animal welfare. Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 will train
master trainers and facilitators to scale up climate-smart practices, with a focus on women and
youth participation. Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 will promote innovative extension tools, including
digital platforms, text messaging service based advisories, social media and mobile apps like
iCow in the United Republic of Tanzania and Kenya Agricultural Observatory Platform. These
initiatives will increase farmers' access to knowledge, improve productivity and enhance
cli mate resilience in the dairy sector.
14.
Output 1.3 (Strengthening the capacity to monitor GHG emissions and climate
vulnerabilities) will enhance GHG emission measurement, reporting and verification (MRV)
capacities and improve climate vulnerability monitoring in the dairy sector. Activity 1.3.1

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 117
focuses on developing national MRV systems to track dairy emissions accurately and support
climate commitments. Activity 1.3.2 will improve GHG emission measurement by collecting on-
farm data, refining emission factors and using advanced modelling tools. Activity 1.3.3 will
conduct climate risk and vulnerability assessments, strengthening early warning systems and
national feed balance mechanisms. Activity 1.3.4 will facilitate low-carbon certification and
enable dairy stakeholders to access carbon finance by developing verification standards and
certification systems. These efforts will enhance climate reporting, attract climate finance and
str engthen dairy sector resilience.
15.
Output 1.4 (Promoting regional cooperation and improving knowledge management)
will aim to enhance knowledge management and regional cooperation to promote the
replication of climate-resilient and low-carbon dairy practices across East Africa. Activity 1.4.1
will support regional centres of excellence and national research institutions to build capacity in
GHG measurement, livestock productivity and climate adaptation. This includes developing a
regional database to document best practices and emissions data. Activity 1.4.2 will establish
regional cooperation platforms for knowledge exchange, involving public and private
stakeholders, research institutions and international organizations. These platforms will
facilitate policy discussions, scientific innovations and best practice sharing through workshops,
conferences and study tours. Additionally, participation in global climate policy events and
South–South and Triangular Cooperation will strengthen regional and international
Component 2: Enabling low-emission and climate-resilient dairy value chain development (total
collaboration on dairy sector sustainability and climate finance solutions.
cost: USD 234 million; GCF cost: USD 100.7 million)
16.
Component 2 focuses on enhancing incomes and productivity for smallholder dairy
farmers, cooperatives and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) by promoting
sustainable, climate-resilient and low-emission growth pathways. The three associated outputs
outlined in the following paragraphs will also contribute to gender equality, improved food
security and nutrition for rural and urban consumers and greater empowerment and inclusion
of women and marginalized groups.
17.
Output 2.1 (Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened) aims to
improve market access, strengthen dairy cooperatives and promote sustainable practices for
smallholder dairy farmers. Activity 2.1.1 will enhance the governance, capacity and service
delivery of dairy cooperatives, ensuring fair prices, reduced milk losses and improved quality
standards. Activity 2.1.2 will build productive alliances along the dairy value chain, supporting
business management, financial literacy and digitalization for better efficiency, traceability and
access to credit. Activity 2.1.3 will promote renewable energy and waste management solutions
by introducing solar-powered milk cooling, energy-efficient equipment and sustainable waste
recycling. These initiatives will boost farmer incomes, enhance climate resilience and reduce
em issions in the dairy sector.
18.
Output 2.2 (Breeding, animal health, feed and fodder, manure management improved)
will reduce farm-level GHG emissions and enhance productivity through climate-smart
breeding, improved animal health, better feeding practices and sustainable manure
management. Activity 2.2.1 will promote climate-resilient dairy breeds by scaling up artificial
insemination and breeding programmes to enhance milk yields while reducing emissions.
Activity 2.2.2 focuses on disease prevention, improved herd management and digital tools for
animal health monitoring. Activity 2.2.3 will support forage production, water harvesting and
certified seed multiplication to improve feed availability. Activity 2.2.4 promotes climate-smart
feeding strategies to lower enteric methane emissions, while activity 2.2.5 will enhance manure
management and nutrient recycling for soil health and emission reduction. Lastly, activity 2.2.6
will scale up biodigesters to convert manure into clean energy, reducing deforestation and
providing sustainable fuel alternatives. These initiatives will boost dairy sector resilience,
increase milk production and contribute to climate change mitigation.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 118
19.
Output 2.3 (Pasture and grasslands management improved) aims to improve pasture
and grassland management to enhance climate resilience, biodiversity and carbon sequestration
while reducing GHG emissions from dairy production. Activity 2.3.1 will strengthen rangeland
governance by supporting community-led pasture management planning, securing land tenure
rights and resolving resource conflicts. Activity 2.3.2 will focus on restoring degraded
rangelands through rotational grazing, integration of leguminous trees for carbon
sequestration, and soil and water conservation practices. Additionally, the programme will
increase water availability for dairy cattle by investing in water harvesting systems, such as
micro-dams and rock catchments, with a view to ensuring sustainable access to water in
extensive dairy systems. These interventions will support sustainable livestock production,
Component 3: Green Dairy Financing Facility (total cost: USD 45 million; GCF cost: USD 17.5
reduce land degradation and enhance dairy sector resilience.
million loan and USD 10 million grant)
20.
Component 3 will establish GDFF in the four target countries to enhance access to
finance for dairy value chain actors, including farmers, cooperatives, SMEs and technology
providers. By addressing financial and technological barriers, GDFF will support the adoption of
climate-smart technologies and sustainable practices, facilitating the transition to low-carbon
and climate-resilient dairy value chains. Businesses identified under component 2 will be
encouraged to apply for GDFF financing to further strengthen the sector’s sustainability. This
component is structured in two parts – output 3.1 (Effective green financing for dairy value
ch ains) and output 3.2 (Capacity-building for green dairy investments).
21.
Under output 3.1, GDFF will offer two loan products to support the adoption of climate-
smart technologies and sustainable dairy practices. The Green Dairy Investment Partnership
Loan is a long-term financing option for larger, well-established dairy businesses with annual
turnovers above USD 800,000, offering loans between USD 250,000 and USD 550,000 with
tenors of five to nine years. These loans will help businesses to expand smallholder networks,
acquire productive cows, solarize equipment and improve milk transport. The Green Dairy Loan
Product targets smaller SMEs and dairy cooperatives, providing short-term working capital
loans of up to USD 250,000 (average USD 50,000) with a three-year tenure. Both loan types
require businesses to demonstrate clear climate-smart investment ambitions and strong
smallholder partnerships. Additionally, technical assistance will be provided to help businesses
to prepare investment plans and optimize their operations post-financing.
22.
Under output 3.2, GDFF will use a USD 10 million technical assistance facility to enhance
the capacity of banks and dairy sector businesses in implementing climate-smart projects. The
technical assistance facility will address financial and non-financial barriers, ensuring effective
green financing. Key activities include (i) capacity development for banks – wholesale and retail
banks will receive training and support to integrate green dairy finance products, improve risk
management and enhance reporting on sustainability impacts; (ii) support for SMEs – dairy
businesses will receive tailored assistance in business planning, investment readiness, financial
management and climate adaptation strategies to improve loan access and investment success;
and (iii) regional coordination and knowledge-sharing – best practices, lessons learned and
technical expertise will be shared among stakeholders to strengthen green finance in the dairy
sector. This initiative aims to scale up climate-smart investments, improve operational
Monitoring and evaluation components (total cost: USD 6.7 million; GCF cost: USD 1.4 million)
efficiency and support sustainable growth in the dairy value chain.
23.
Each executing entity (EE) will manage and coordinate the overall M&E system,
leveraging existing project frameworks financed by the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD). Responsibilities include allocating resources, aggregating and verifying
data, producing reports and organizing learning events to enhance sector-wide knowledge. The
Regional Steering Committee, supported by rotating national EEs, will ensure harmonized

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 119
reporting and methodological guidance. International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) will
provide additional M&E support, such as templates and methodologies, while data capture and
reporting will be handled by country-level project management units (PMUs). IFAD will oversee
the process through annual supervision missions, including mid-term and final evaluations.
24.
For component 3, a senior coordinator will be recruited at IFAD Kenya Regional Office to
oversee GDFF coordination, M&E, reporting and knowledge management. During the start-up
phase, financial and M&E specialists will assist the DaIMA PMU in establishing a reporting and
evaluation system for GDFF, aligned with policy of IFAD, the DaIMA PMU and wholesale banks.
GDFF monitoring and reporting will be integrated into the overall DaIMA regional M&E
Project management (total cost: USD 13.35 million; GCF cost: USD 3.049 million)
framework.
25.
IFAD will serve as the AE for the programme, overseeing its overall management. This
includes programme appraisal and administrative, fiduciary and technical supervision to ensure
the achievement of the expected outputs and outcomes, as well as programme closure and final
evaluation. IFAD will fulfil these responsibilities in line with the accreditation master agreement
with GCF, coordinating efforts through its headquarters in Rome, the East and Southern Africa
Regional Office in Nairobi and country offices in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania. IFAD will also set up a dedicated programme task force consisting of IFAD
ex perts from within its headquarters and regional and country offices.
26.
Additionally, a Regional Steering Committee will oversee regional alignment and value
addition, while governments in each country will implement the programme through
designated EEs. National programme steering committees will provide oversight, and
programme implementation units will handle coordination. International and national entities,
including ministries of agriculture and specialized organizations like ILRI, will offer technical
support to national teams.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
Scale: High
3. 1 Impact potential
27.
The programme will impact 2.5 million direct and 15.4 million indirect beneficiaries
across all four countries. As detailed in paragraph 6 above, the programme aims to reduce the
milk emission intensities by 29 per cent over a 20-year lifespan and is expected to reduce total
GH G emissions on the targeted dairy farms while increasing milk production by 34 per cent.
28.
The programme is projected to reduce total GHG emissions from milk production by
4.01 per cent (see para. 7 above). Additionally, methane emissions from enteric fermentation
are anticipated to drop by 4.6 per cent, while methane from manure management is expected to
decrease by 5.93 per cent. The programme will also contribute to estimated emission savings of
54 ,435 t CO₂ eq per year through improved energy generation and access.
29.
The programme will directly contribute to the results of the updated Strategic Plan for
the GCF 2024–2027 in the areas of food systems, ecosystems, clean energy, local private sector
early-stage ventures and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises innovation by supporting
resilient market chains and GDFF.
Scale: High
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
30.
The programme takes a holistic approach to reshaping the dairy sector in East Africa,
aiming to lower GHG emissions while enhancing the well-being of dairy producers. By

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 120
strengthening policy frameworks, institutional capacity and service delivery, alongside
expanding financial access and climate-smart solutions for smallholder farmers, it seeks to drive
a comprehensive transformation across the dairy value chain. Its strategy integrates private
sector engagement and financial mechanisms to promote sustainable, low-carbon growth that
extends well beyond the programme’s initial investment. The scalability of its interventions,
coupled with knowledge-sharing, improved regulatory frameworks and the promotion of
cli mate-resilient practices, ensures a long-term impact on the dairy industries.
31.
The programme enhances access to finance and alternative technologies, creating
opportunities for local private sector actors, including dairy cooperatives and milk processors,
to overcome financial and technological limitations that have historically hindered their growth
and sustainability. By addressing these key constraints, the programme fosters innovation,
efficiency and resilience within the dairy value chain. This approach enhances productivity and
profitability and also serves as a catalyst for systemic change, promoting the adoption of
sustainable, climate-smart practices that contribute to a low-emission, climate resilient
livestock sector. The programme supports the adoption of more resilient animal breeds,
improved livestock husbandry practices and windrow composting techniques to reduce
methane emissions from enteric fermentation in livestock. It also promotes more efficient
manure management systems, which help to lower GHG emissions while improving soil health
an d nutrient recycling.
32.
Additionally, it lays the groundwork for long-term sectoral transformation, ensuring
that the benefits extend beyond individual businesses to influence policy frameworks, market
structures and broader economic development. Through these targeted interventions, the
programme demonstrates a scalable and far-reaching impact, positioning the dairy sector as a
model for sustainable agricultural development in the region.
Scale: High
3. 3 Sustainable development potential
33.
DaIMA contributes to several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by enhancing
financial access, increasing productivity, improving food security and nutrition, fostering
innovation in climate-smart technologies, promoting sustainable dairy production and
su pporting biodiversity conservation and rangeland restoration.
34.
The programme contributes to SDG 3 (Good health and well-being) by promoting safe,
high-quality dairy consumption and raising nutrition awareness. Strengthening veterinary
services supports SDG 12 (Responsible consumption and production) by improving animal
health, increasing productivity and reducing emissions. Additionally, by ensuring better food
safety and access to nutritious dairy products, it advances SDG 2 (Zero hunger), fostering food
sec urity and improved nutrition in both rural and urban communities.
35.
It also supports environmental sustainability by enhancing soil conservation,
biodiversity and ecosystem health. It aligns with SDG 15 (Life on land) through rangeland
restoration and biodiversity conservation, combating climate change and maintaining
ecosystem balance. By promoting SDG 12 (Responsible consumption and production), it
integrates circular economy principles, improves manure management for biogas production,
and enhances soil health through nutrient recycling. It also drives economic growth by creating
jobs, reducing poverty (SDG 1) and enhancing productivity t hrough climate-smart technologies.
It strengthens dairy farmers' incomes and financial access, fostering a resilient, low-carbon
dairy sector while promoting innovation and infrastructuredevelopment (SDG 9).
Scale: Medium to high
3.4 Needs of the recipient

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 121
36.
The sustainability of dairy farming in the region is increasingly at risk owing to rising
temperatures, erratic weather patterns and resource constraints, all of which negatively affect
milk production, feed availability and animal health. Smallholder farmers, who constitute the
majority of dairy producers, are particularly vulnerable as they operate on a small scale with
limited resources and infrastructure. Their productivity remains low as a result of insufficient
access to quality feed, veterinary services and climate-smart technologies. Additionally, limited
training and technical knowledge prevent farmers from adopting more efficient and sustainable
dairy farming methods. Financial barriers further hinder investments in improved breeding
practices, better manure management and energy-efficient dairy processing technologies. The
programme seeks to address these issues by providing technical assistance, financial support
and capacity-building initiatives to enable smallholder dairy farmers to transition to climate-
resilient and low-emission dairy production. By equipping farmers with the necessary skills,
resources and innovative solutions, the programme aims to enhance productivity, reduce GHG
emissions and ensure the long-term sustainability of the dairy sector in East Africa.
Scale: High
3. 5 Country ownership
37.
DaiMA serves as a comprehensive framework to address the impacts of climate change
on the dairy sector and the sector’s GHG emissions. It aligns with the NDCs, nationally
appropriate mitigation actions, national adaptation plans for agriculture and national
agriculture policies, contributing to national development plans for climate-smart dairy value
chains. By promoting climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies, the programme
aims to drive resilient, low-carbon growth in the dairy sector, with a particular focus on
me thane reduction.
38.
The NDCs and other national strategies define each country's approach to reducing GHG
emissions and adapting to climate change. The proposed programme aligns with these national
strategies by incorporating various measures aimed at enhancing climate resilience in the
agriculture and livestock sectors. These measures include the promotion of climate-resilient
crops that can withstand extreme weather conditions, the development of climate-resilient
livestock breeds that are better adapted to heat stress and disease, and the expansion of crop
an d livestock insurance schemes to protect farmers against climate-related risks.
39.
Overall, the programme will provide technical and policy support to the ministries
responsible for the dairy sector in reviewing and formulating national policies, strategies and
regulations that are critical for the sustainable transformation of the dairy industry. These
efforts will ensure that national policies are fully aligned with NDC commitments, driving a shift
towards low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy production that benefits both the environment and
rural communities.
Scale: High
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
40.
The programme’s economic and financial analyses assess profitability from both a
societal and a participant perspective, using the Livestock Sector Investment and Policy Toolkit
to model dairy production across four countries over a 20-year period. Five dairy herd models,
reflecting different production systems, were developed per country based on national herd
structures. Financial models were also created for milk collection points, chilling centres,
processing units (all solar powered) and service providers. The programme’s GHG mitigation
im pact was evaluated using the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model.
41.
The overall financial analysis of the programme indicates the profitability of the
programme's investments for the farmers and cooperatives. It uses a 17.5 per cent discount rate

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 122
(reflecting average lending rates in the target countries) based on incremental net cash flows
co mparing scenarios with and without the programme.
42.
At the regional level, the DaIMA programme is economically viable, with an expected net
present value of USD 181.20 million and an economic rate of return (ERR) of 25.0 per cent
under the baseline scenario. Country-level analyses for the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uganda, Rwanda and Kenya also confirm viability. When the economic value of GHG emissions
is considered, the expected net present value rises to USD 217.87 million (ERR 27.9 per cent)
under a low-carbon price and to USD 254.64 million (ERR 30.3 per cent) under a high carbon
price scenario.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 Environmental and social safeguards
43.
The DaIMA programme to be implemented across four countries in East Africa is
assessed as category B with a moderate environmental and social risk rating. The programme
has been screened against IFAD Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures and
the GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The AE shared an environmental and social
management framework and stakeholder engagement plan as part of the funding proposal.
Anticipated environmental and social risks are likely to be related to pollution associated with
the intensification of dairy production, lack of appropriate waste management and child labour
associated with engaging youths in the dairy value chain. The programme also proposes to
improve pasture productivity and quality by enhancing the composition of forage varieties,
fodder conservation and better pasture management, coupled with low-carbon sources of
en ergy in milk processing.
44.
During the review process, information was limited on the resilient seed variety fodder
crops to be adopted to eliminate invasive species, specific national legislation and policies for
agriculture and livestock for the beneficiary countries and information on envisaged
infrastructure works that are likely to include the construction of veterinary laboratories,
centres for artificial insemination, water harvesting systems such as micro-dams and cattle
sheds. Following the GCF appraisal mission to Rome in March 2025 and various review
iterations, the AE provided specifications on the type of infrastructure works to be adopted on
the programme and the promotion of locally proven fodder varieties to eliminate the potential
of introd
G
u
C
c
F
in
I
g
n d
in
i
v
g
a
e
s
n
i
o
ve
u s
s p
P
e
e
c
o
ie
p
s
l
.
e s Policy and environmental and social safeguard 7
(Indigenous Peoples).
45.
An Indigenous Peoples planning framework is provided as an annex to
the environmental and social management framework. The AE has confirmed that the
Indigenous Peoples planning framework will not be confined to one or two pastoralist groups
and that it will be applied thoroughly. In line with its roles and functions, the Indigenous
Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE and EEs. In line with the GCF
Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples focal point will be available for
ass istan
S
c
e
e
x
a
u
t
a
a
l
n
e
y
x
s
p
t
l
a
o
g
i
e
t
,
a
i
t
n
i
c
o
l
n
u
,
d
a
in
b
g
u s
b
e
e f
a
o
n
re
d
a
h
c
a
l
r
a
a
im
ss m
ha
e
s
n
b
t
e
.
en made.
46.
The revised GCF Environmental and
Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding from sexual
exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The AE provided SEAH
safeguarding in its submission to this funding proposal. During the operational phases,
especially construction related, it will be import for the project to ensure that there is a
comprehensive SEAH policy and overall continuum of care with respect to gender-based
violence (GBV). The AE has therefore highlighted potential SEAH/GBV risks for all activities,
including activity risk assessment in alignment with the GCF SEAH safeguards requirement.

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 123
SEAH mitigation measures have been included, including post-mitigation, to ensure that any
residual SEAH/GBV impacts are addressed and monitored accordingly. Since the project is
targeting four countries in the region with dynamic SEAH/GBV and gender inequalities
contexts, it is highly recommended that the AE also take a closer look (during implementation
and monitoring) at the differentiated approaches where applicable.
4. 2 Gender policy
47.
In compliance with the GCF Gender Policy, the AE prepared and submitted a gender
assessment together with its gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) action plan. Informed
by the IFAD gender analysis approach, the assessment covers key areas required for gender
mainstreaming and specific interventions to this project. The gender assessments discuss the
targeting criteria and provide sex and gender/social disaggregation targets for its interventions.
The GESI action plan will be carried out through an implementation partner and a range of
service providers included in the action plan. These may include youth enterprises, non-
governmental organizations, academia and researchers. The line ministries will also be key
during implementation of the GESI action plan as these already have gender focal points. In
addition, a GESI specialist will be appointed for each country’s operation. Additional expertise
will be procured under GDFF and technical assistance sub-activities to ensure implementation
of the gender action plan. The specific technical assistance will include (i) capacity
strengthening and technical support provided to partner staff and agents to help them to deliver
the gender action plan; (ii) the recruitment of experienced service providers to support
outreach, gendered approaches and capacity-building at the community level; and (iii) ongoing
GE SI technical support during implementation.
48.
DaIMA aims for 40 per cent of project beneficiaries to be women, 30 per cent youth and
5 per cent comprising persons with disabilities and Indigenous Peoples. Women, youth and
persons with disabilities will be targeted with technological solutions to reduce methane and
GHG emissions, and with financial support services to sustain efficient production and
marketing processes. The objective of the DaIMA GESI action plan is to ensure that women,
youth, people with disabilities and marginalized groups have equal opportunities to participate
in, and benefit from, the programme in these communities. Social inclusion considerations for
these groups will be achieved by increasing their participation in project activities, economic
empowerment opportunities and access to information and skills, as well as market linkages
and value addition.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l project/programme assessment (high risk)
4.3.2. Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current
project/programme (low risk)
49.
IFAD is an international AE with nearly 50 years of development work in global
agriculture and food security. To date, IFAD has provided approximately USD 24 billion in
grants and loans for agricultural and rural development projects in 109 developing countries.
T
4.
h
3.
e
3.
proPjercot jEeEcts/ aprreo tghrea fminmanec-es pmeicniifsitcr ieexse acnudt idoenv reilsokpsm (ehnitg bha rniksks )in each of the host countries.
Sovereign credit risk.
50.
The GCF loan will be extended to the governments of four host
countries in the programme. Proceeds will then be channelled to public development banks and
to retail banks or microfinance banks, which will on-lend to small dairy farmers and

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 124
cooperatives. GCF credit exposure will be to the Governments of Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and
the Unit
P
e
r
d
o
R
g
e
r
p
a
u
m
b
m
lic
e
o
i
f
m
T
p
a
l
n
e
z
m
an
e
i
n
a
t
w
at
it
io
h
n
lo
r
w
is
s
k
o
.
vereign credit rating between B– to B+.
51.
Within the four target countries, there is limited
institutional capacity and skill set in the dairy industry including dairy technicians, social /
gender specialists and national dairy boards, etc. which could lead to low adoption or project
delays. This is being mitigated by competitive recruitment of qualified project management
un its in
P
e
r
a
o
ch
g r
c
a
o
m
un
m
tr
e
y
’ s
w
c
i
o
th
n c
p
e
e
s
r
s
fo
io
rm
na
a
l
n
p
ce
ri
-
c
b
i
a
n
s
g
e
.
d contracts.
52.
To ensure that full benefit of concessional loan
pricing under Component 3 is passed on to end borrowers, the facility agreements will include
provisions capping the margin of financial intermediaries. Lending rates to end borrowers will
be reduced by the lowered funding cost from this programme compared to the retail banks’ own
4 fu .3 n .4 d . ingC coomst.p liance risk (medium risk)
53.
The inherent money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF) risk associated with
certain programme activities, such as the launch of a Green Dairy Financing Facility to provide
gre en loans, is relatively elevated.
54.
The AE will oversee the programme through its regional office in Kenya, as well as its
country offices in the four target countries. The four target country governments will act as EEs
for Components 1 & 2 through their respective ministries and state-owned development
financial institutions. The AE’s financial management risk assessments of the recipient
governments did not flag elevated risks related to ML/TF. The ministries of finance in the target
countries will serve as EEs for Component 3 and will disburse local currency loans to local
Public Development Banks in each target country to execute green dairy sector financing
op erations.
55.
Anti-money laundering/countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) controls to be
implemented by the AE, which is responsible for overall fiduciary management, include training
conducted during project preparation and implementation. In addition, the AE assesses
counterparty integrity risk taking a risk-based approach, incorporating integrity due diligence
measures including daily screening of project counterparties including EEs, payment
beneficiaries, and procurement counterparties, to identify ML/TF and other prohibited
practices risks. Furthermore, capacity-building training for finance staff will be conducted as an
additional safeguard against financial management and fiduciary risks. In addition, the four
PDBs are subject to AML/CFT regulations in their respective countries, and the retails banks
that the PDBs will on-lend to will be selected based on criteria that includes whether they
operate under prudential supervision with solid institutional and financial conditions per
cen tral bank standards.
56.
Based on the elevated ML/TF risk posed by some of the proposed programme activities
and the various controls and mitigation measures to be applied during project preparation and
i
4
m
.3.
p
5.
l emeGnCtFa tpioonr,t ftohlei oo vceornaclle cnotmraptliioannc rei srkis k is determined to be medium.
57.
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal within monitoring threshold on the
G
4.3
C
.
F
6.
porRtfeoclioom comnecnendtartaitoionn in terms of results area, AE concentration and single proposal.
58.
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 125
Summary risk assessment
Overall project/programme High
Accredited entity/executing entity capability Low
Project-/programme-specific execution High
Compliance Medium
GCF portfolio concentration Within monitoring threshold
4. 4 Fiduciary
59.
IFAD serves as the AE and is responsible for overall programme management, including
appraisal, fiduciary and technical oversight, supervision and closure, in line with its
accreditation master agreement with GCF. IFAD will execute these functions through its
headquarters in Rome, regional office in Nairobi and country offices in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania. Implementation will be carried out by national EEs in each
country, including key ministries, public development banks and agricultural agencies.
Programme coordination units will be established or integrated within existing structures and
staffed with competitively recruited government personnel, with IFAD involved in the
recruitment process through a no-objection mechanism. The programme coordination units will
ov ersee day-to-day coordination, implementation and reporting.
60.
Component 3 centres on operationalizing GDFF, a regional initiative to expand inclusive
green finance for climate-smart dairy investments. Each country will implement a dedicated line
of credit managed by public development banks, which act as wholesale banks and report
regularly to the programme coordination units and IFAD. These banks will on-lend to retail
banks (commercial or prudentially supervised microfinance institutions), which will extend
loa ns to end beneficiaries using their existing frameworks and digital platforms.
61.
Disbursement will follow a revolving fund arrangement, with each country operating
separate USD Designated Accounts and local currency accounts for downstream transfers.
Where treasury single account systems are used, GCF funds will be tracked via a dedicated chart
of accounts. Disbursements will be based on quarterly interim financial reports and withdrawal
applications, conditional on 70 per cent utilization of prior tranches. Rwanda and Uganda will
use integrated financial management information systems aligned with International Public
Sector Accounting Standards, while Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania will apply
commercial accounting software with GCF-specific coding. Programme coordination units will
consolidate financial reports from implementing partners and submit them to IFAD. Internal
controls will be enforced through national audit systems, with Rwanda using a project-specific
auditor and the other countries relying on established internal audit units. Annual external
audits will be conducted by each country’s Auditor General, with specific audit opinions on GCF
funds due within six months of fiscal year-end.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
62.
The DaIMA funding proposal presents a well-structured results architecture anchored in
a robust theory of change. The programme is designed to deliver transformative impacts in the
East African dairy sector through a combination of mitigation and adaptation measures across
Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The causal logic is clearly
articulated and is supported by a coherent results framework that links activities and outputs to
expected outcomes and long-term impact, in line with the GCF Integrated Results Management
Framework.

--- Table 1 on Page 125 ---
 | Summary risk assessment |  | 
 |  |  | 
Overall project/programme |  | High | 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability |  | Low | 
Project-/programme-specific execution |  | High | 
Compliance |  | Medium | 

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 126
63.
The programme contributes to three GCF results areas: mitigation through forestry and
land use, adaptation through the areas of most vulnerable people and communities, and
ecosystems and ecosystem services. It commits to reporting on GCF core indicator 1 (GHG
emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered), with an expected reduction in emissions
of approximately 2.17 million t CO₂ eq; core indicator 2 (direct and indirect beneficiaries
reached), estimated at 2.5 million and 15.4 million respectively; and core indicator 4 (hectares
of natural resource areas brought under improved low-emission and/or climate-resilient
management practice), with a target area of 178,362 hectares. These indicators are
co mplemented by programme-specific and supplementary indicators.
64.
The monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) system is comprehensively described in
annex 11 to the funding proposal and is well aligned with GCF guidance and IFAD evaluation
standards. Given the multi-country nature of the programme, the MEL plan appropriately
outlines mechanisms for country-level disaggregation of data and indicator targets. The MEL
system includes baseline assessments, mid-term and final evaluations, and annual performance
reviews. Outcome surveys will be harmonized across countries, and the programme plans to
establish a regional Community of Practice to facilitate ongoing coordination and
methodological consistency. Particular attention is given to the capacity-building of
implementing partners and EEs to ensure the long-term sustainability of the MEL system and its
integration with national frameworks. IFAD and ILRI will provide technical support in areas
su ch as geographic information systems, MRV systems and carbon accounting.
65.
The programme has allocated approximately USD 6.72 million for MEL activities. This is
considered sufficient to support the ambitious and technically demanding results monitoring,
particularly given the scale and scope of the interventions across four countries. The proposed
MEL arrangements meet the requirements of the GCF Evaluation Policy and Integrated Results
Management Framework, and the Secretariat is satisfied that the programme has the systems
and resources in place to support rigorous tracking of results, evaluation of impact and learning
for scale-up.
4. 6 Legal assessment
AMA
66.
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 24
September 2018 (the “ ”), and it became effective on 9 November 2018. The Accredited
Entity’s five-year accreditation term lapsed on 8 November 2023 but was extended by Decision
B.37/18, paragraph (q) until the earlier of three years from the date of lapse of the five-year
accreditation term or the date on which a revised accreditation framework is adopted by the
Board. The Board approved the re-accreditation of the Accredited Entity pursuant to Decision
B.37/18, and negotiation of the Amended and Restated Accreditation Master Agreement is
on going.
67.
The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has
obtained all internal approvals, and it has the capacity and authority to implement the
pr ogramme.
68.
The proposed programme will be implemented in four host countries. The GCF has
signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with one of these host countries,
namely, Rwanda. In the case of the remaining three host countries, namely Kenya, Tanzania and
Uganda, GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks
need to be further assessed. Moreover, the ability of GCF to undertake redress activities and/or
investigations in such countries may be hindered due to the absence of privileges and
immunities for relevant GCF personnel.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 127
69.
Therefore, it is recommended that the Board considers whether disbursements of GCF
proceeds should only be made after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation
and expropriation in those countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and
im munities for GCF and its personnel.
70.
With regard to the acMtiovFities being financed by the GCF loans, the Accredited Entity has
proposed that it will enter into a financing agreement with each host country, acting through its
ministry of finance (each a “ ”). Each MoF will then on-lend the GCF proceeds to the
wholesale bank in that host country under the terms of an on-lending agreement between MoF
that the wholesale bank. Although it has been agreed that each MoF and each wholesale bank
are executing entities for the programme, under the Accredited Entity’s proposed contractual
structure, the Accredited Entity will not have a direct contractual relationship with each
wholesale bank which is responsible for the cFhAaAnnelling of GCF proceeds and programme
implementation. For the Accredited Entity to pass down and enforce the relevant requirements
of the AMA and funded activity agreement (“ ”) on each wholesale bank, the Accredited
Entity has agreed in the term sheet that it will ensure that each MoF passes down, monitors,
supervises and enforces such requirements against each wholesale bank in a manner that
allows the Accredited Entity to comply with the AMA and FAA requirements as if it had a direct
co ntractual relationship with that wholesale bank.
71.
Since the Accredited Entity’s direct counterparty is a sovereign state (as one of the
executing entities), the Secretariat has agreed to disapply the provisions of the AMA allowing
GCF to step in to the Accredited Entity’s contractual arrangements with the Executing Entity, i.e.,
each MoF as, due to the sovereign nature of the counterparty and the contracts, it is not feasible
for the Accredited Entity to allow GCF or any other party to take over its contractual
relationship with the executing entities under the subsidiary agreements. Accordingly, and
similar to the arrangements for FP143, FP162, FP183, FP236, SAP012 and SAP017, as a
condition for execution of the FAA, the Accredited Entity is required to inform the National
Designated Authority (NDA) of each host country of this disapplication and its implications. An
ex press provision has been included in the term sheet to provide for such disapplication.
72.
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval,
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed programme;
(b)
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within
180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the Accredited Entity has
provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal
approvals, whichever is later; and
(c)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 128
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s review of FP269
Proposal name: Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaiMA)
Accredited entity: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Countries: Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and United Republic of Tanzania
Project/programme size: Large
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.
This funding proposal for a large, public-sector cross-cutting programme in
environmental and social safeguards category B is submitted by the International Fund for
1
Agricultural Development (IFAD) as accredited entity (AE). The Dairy Interventions for
Mitigation and Adaptation (DaIMA) programme will operate over six years in four contiguous
East African countries: Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania (see figure
1). The total cost of the programme is USD 358.26 million, of which USD 150 million is proposed
as GCF grant finance and USD 208.26 million as co-finance from IFAD and two of the
governments (see section 1.7 below).
2.
The proposed executing entities (EEs) for the implementation of components 1 and 2
are as follows: in Kenya, the Government of Kenya through its National Treasury, the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock Development and the Agricultural Finance Cooperation; in Rwanda,
the Government of Rwanda thorough its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, Rwanda
Agriculture Board within the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources and the
Development Bank of Rwanda; in Uganda, Government of Uganda through its Ministry of
Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and
Fisheries and Uganda Development Bank; and in the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania through its Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Livestock and Fisheries and Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank. No overall executing
entity is identified for component 3 in the funding proposal, section A.20, but this is understood
to be IFAD itself.
3.
The aim of the proposed programme is:
“to reduce methane and other GHG emissions from the dairy sector while increasing the
resilience of livestock-dependent communities. The programme will support a shift
from low production efficiency to improved, gender-sensitive, integrated and NDC
[nationally determined contribution]-aligned practices that reduce emissions at farm
and food system levels (including interventions that reduce milk losses and increase
milk collection, decarbonize processing with renewable energies, formalize dairy value
chains and strengthen partnerships with the private sector), as well as interventions
that promote circularity, and increase rangelands ecosystems resilience and services
(including carbon sequestration in grasslands)” (funding proposal, para. 2).
4.
The programme’s theory of change is also summarized in paragraph 2.
5.
The programme’s interventions, geographically targeted as shown in figure 1 below, will
address climate change adaptation and mitigation issues across the various dairy production
systems and along the dairy value chain, while addressing a number of barriers. It will follow a
1
This assessment is based on the full and final funding proposal package received by the iTAP on 24 March 2025.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 129
farm and herd-level practices
holistic approach and will simultafnaeromu-slleyv seclasleo luupt:i o(in)s to
increase productivity, reduce emission intensity, and decrease absolutela enmdisscsaiopnes- lceovmelp ared to
ain btuesrivneenstsi-oans-susual scenario; (ii) for manure management and nutrient
recycling, to improve circularity, resilience and reduce emissions; (iii) value-chain level
interventions to improve the resilience and services of rangelands ecosystems, particularly soil
carbon sequestration, and water and biomass supply for animal feed; and (iv)
, to reduce milk losses (and corresponding greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions) and
increase the use of renewable energy. A useful detailed table, linking the climate drivers with
iFnigteurrvee 1n:t Dioanirsy a Inndt etrhveeirn tbioennes ffiotsr, Misi taivgaaitliaobnl ea nind aAndnaepxta 2t itoon t phreo fgeraasmibmiliet yin stteurdvye n(ttaiobnle a 2re3a)s. in the
four targeted countries (source: funding proposal figure 14)
6.
Table 1T: Shter upcrtougrrea omf mthee sDtaruircyt uInrete, ruvnednetrio tnhsr efoer c Momitipgoantieonnt as,n ids sAhdoawptna tiino tna pbrleo g1r:a mme
Component 1: Strengthened national capacities and enhanced enabling environment for low-
emission climate-resilient dairy sectors
Outcome 1 Output 1.1
: Systemic and institutional : Climate-responsive policy and regulatory
Output 1.2
capacities of the livestock sector are environment established
strengthened to enable smallholder
: Improved public-service delivery to the dairy
dairy producers and local value chain Output 1.3
sector
actors to reduce methane and other
: Improved greenhouse gas measurement,
greenhouse gas emissions
reporting and verification capacities & monitoring of
Output 1.4
climate vulnerabilities
: Knowledge management and enhanced
Component 2: Enabling low-emission andre cgliiomnaalt eco-roepseirliaetniotn d airy value chain development
Outcome 2 Output 2.1
: Smallholder dairy : Smallholders’ and cooperative technical and
Output 2.2
producers and private-sector value business capacity development strengthened
chain players operate within a low-
: Breeding, animal health, feed and fodder, and
emission, climate-resilient, and
manure management improved

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
 | Component 1: Strengthened national capacities and enhanced enabling environment for low- |  | 
 | emission climate-resilient dairy sectors |  | 
Outcome 1
: Systemic and institutional
capacities of the livestock sector are
strengthened to enable smallholder
dairy producers and local value chain
actors to reduce methane and other
greenhouse gas emissions |  | Output 1.1 | 
 |  | : Climate-responsive policy and regulatory
Output 1.2
environment established | 
 |  | : Improved public-service delivery to the dairy
Output 1.3
sector
: Improved greenhouse gas measurement, | 
 |  | reporting and verification capacities & monitoring of
Output 1.4
climate vulnerabilities | 
 | : Knowledge management and enhanced
Component 2: Enabling low-emission andre cgliiomnaalt eco-roepseirliaetniotn d airy value chain development |  | 
Outcome 2
: Smallholder dairy
producers and private-sector value
chain players operate within a low- |  | Output 2.1 | 
 |  | : Smallholders’ and cooperative technical and
Output 2.2
business capacity development strengthened | 

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 130
Output 2.3
sustainable pathway through increased : Pasture and grassland management improved
production and market knowledge and
tCooomlsp onent 3: Green Dairy Financing Facility
Outcome 3 Output 3.1
Output 3.2
: Financial institutions make Effective green financing for dairy value chains
available the appropriate investment
Capacity-building for green dairy investments
resources to make the necessary
transition to low-carbon, climate-
resilient and sustainable dairy
production, and strengthen value-chain
linkages and improved productivity
Scale: Medium to high
1 .1 Impact potential
7.
The programme will target two of the GCF results areas for adaptation, aiming to
enhance the resilience of: (i) most vulnerable people and communities (adaptation result area
(ARA) 1), and (ii) ecosystems and ecosystem services (ARA4). Despite the core goal of
enhancing dairy productivity and production, the programme does not target the GCF results
area of increased resilience in relation to health, food and water security, but highlights co-
be nefits in this regard in section D.3 of the funding proposal.
8.
In addition, the programme will target two of the GCF results areas for mitigation,
aiming to reduce GHG emissions from (i) energy generation and access (mitigation result area
(MRA) 1); and (ii) forests and land use (MRA4, which includes livestock farming), both by
reducing emissions from dairy farming, particularly release of methane; and by increasing the
ca pacity
C
o
li
f
m
ca
a
r
t
b
e
o
-c
n
h
s
a
in
n
k
g
s
e
t
r
h
i
r
s
o
k
u
a
g
n
h
d
p
i
a
m
st
p
u
a
re
c t
a
s
n
.
d rangeland restoration.
9.
The funding proposal highlights the climate context
of the four countries, and undertakes a systematic analysis of climate hazards. This covers
observed changes historically in four key parameters across the region – a mostly declining
volume of precipitation, increased annual average maximum temperature, declining relative
humidity in some areas, and increased rainfall variability throughout the region, as well as
increased frequency of dry days, very wet days, and very warm days. Future projections on
rainfall vary across the region, with arid and semi-arid regions expected to receive less
precipitation, while the highlands and lake regions may receive more rainfall. Mean maximum
and minimum temperature are projected to increase across the region, as is mean relative
humidity in Kenya and along Lake Victoria. All areas are projected to experience rainfall
variability, with some experiencing more dry days and widespread increase in very wet days
and very warm days. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) notes that the AE chose
not to include analysis of duration hot days, given the complexity and variety of de�initions of a
2
heatwave , thus missing an opportunity to explore the link between prolonged heat stress and
de clines in animal health, milk production, fertility and calving complications.
10.
The funding proposal demonstrates how these observed and projected changes in
climate are impacting the four countries, causing increased exposure to droughts and floods,
and increased vulnerability to rangeland degradation (compounding direct anthropogenic
impacts). A clear analysis is provided of the vulnerability of the dairy sector and the
agroecosystems on which it depends to these climate change and other challenges, with limited
access to quality inputs, limited water availability, frequent disease outbreaks, inadequate
2
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
sustainable pathway through increased |  | Output 2.3
: Pasture and grassland management improved | 
 | production and market knowledge and
tCooomlsp onent 3: Green Dairy Financing Facility |  | 
Outcome 3
: Financial institutions make
available the appropriate investment
resources to make the necessary
transition to low-carbon, climate-
resilient and sustainable dairy |  | Output 3.1 | 
 |  | Output 3.2
Effective green financing for dairy value chains
Capacity-building for green dairy investments | 

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 131
infrastructure, energy supply and access to markets, limited access to credit and finance, and
lan d tenure insecurity.
11.
The funding proposal correctly identifies heat stress as a critical climate hazard affecting
dairy productivity and health. However, it defines heat stress primarily through temperature
thresholds (>35°C), and does not use the temperature-humidity index (THI), which is a
scientifically recognized indicator for livestock stress, based on the combined effects of
temperature and humidity. The absence of explicit THI consideration constitutes a
methodological gap, leading to potential for: (i) underestimation of dairy-sector vulnerability;
(ii) inaccurate assessment of productivity and mortality risks; and (iii) suboptimal targeting of
ad aptation measures.
12.
Impacts of climate change at the dairy-farm level are shown to include:
(a)
A decline in milk yields, especially of high milk-yielding breeds;
(b)
Heat stress in dairy cattle;
(c)
Increased development of pathogens, diseases, parasites and vectors in dairy cattle;
(d)
Decreased feed production and productivity, due to reduced or excess soil moisture and
fertility;
(e)
A decrease in the quantity and quality of pasture; and
(f)
Deterioration of fodder in unprotected warehouses due to increased humidity (see
funding proposal, paras 1 and 35).
13.
At the rangeland level, livestock owners face a decrease in rangeland and pasture
productivity and forage quality. At the dairy value chain level, high temperatures compromise
the safety of milk and dairy products, increase the risk of milk losses, and elevate costs per unit
of produ
A
c
d
e
a
.
ptation impact potential.
14.
The intended adaptation impact of the programme is not
stated clearly in section D.1, which speaks broadly about efficiency, productivity and resilience
of dairy value chains, this leads also to closely interwoven mitigation benefits. References to
reducing vulnerability to particular climate hazards are scattered throughout the funding
proposal, but are stated explicitly only in the feasibility study (see table 23) and even there, not
comprehensively. The iTAP would have expected to see a clear statement in the funding
proposal itself on how the programme interventions reduce vulnerability or exposure, or
enhance adaptive capacity (see annex VI to decision B.33/12), in relation to the six key impacts
of climate change identified in paragraphs 1 and 35. The iTAP recommends that this gap be
addressed in the programme implementation manual, to avoid a situation in which adaptation
im pacts are tracked with less rigour than mitigation impacts.
15.
Table 23 of the feasibility study (annex 2 to the funding proposal) provides the clearest
analysis of how the specific exposure and vulnerability discussed above will be addressed
through particular interventions. For example, the table shows how rangeland restoration
interventions will build resilience against drought – increasing vegetation cover and enhancing
wa ter infiltration, as well as setting aside fodder reserves.
16.
Measures to decrease cattle’s exposure and vulnerability to increased heat, humidity or
combined heat and humidity, are not fully covered in the funding proposal, and are mentioned
only once in table 23. In response to a question from the iTAP about this, the AE indicated its
intention to include a range of measures:
“to attenuate heat-stress effect on animal’s reproduction and production parameters
(e.g. improvement of livestock housing and animal welfare; trees for shade to reduce the
exposure of livestock to heat stress / solar radiation in grazing fields; water harvesting
and recycling for cattle watering; crossbreeding with heat-tolerant, disease-resilient and

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 132
productive cross-breeds;…improved herd management – including observation on
3
secondary signs of delayed oestrus due to heat stress).”
17.
The iTAP recommends that this aspect be brought out strongly in the project
implementation manual to be developed, with practical recommendations for management
pr otocols on very hot days and during heatwaves.
18.
Overall the programme aspires to directly benefit about 2.5 million individual dairy
farmers and dairy value chain actors in 94 districts/counties that are vulnerable to climate
change – approximately 467,000 people in Kenya, 614,000 in Rwanda, 665,000 in Uganda and
758,000 in the United Republic of Tanzania. Of the beneficiaries, at least 40 per cent will be
women, 30 per cent youth and 5 per cent from marginalized groups (including people with
disabilities). An estimated 15.4 million indirect beneficiaries will benefit from strengthened
veterinary services reducing the spread of diseases exacerbated by climate change, enhanced
extension and breeding services, and improved access to climate information. A total of about
2.7 million dairy cattle will be reached, and approximately 178,362 ha of rangelands and natural
pastures will be brought under improved management. The funding proposal shows the
following combination of criteria used to select intervention areas: (i) climate-risk hotspots; (ii)
absolute methane emissions from the dairy sector; (iii) soil carbon sequestration potential in
pa stures
M
a
i
n
ti
d
g a
ra
ti
n
o
g
n
e l
i
a
m
n
p
ds
a
;
c
a
t
n
p
d
o
(
t
i
e
v
n
)
t
m
ia
i
l
lk production by district/county.
19.
: The DaiMA programme aims to achieve total mitigation
2
results of 2,169,485 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO eq) over its 20-year lifespan. This
results from a combination of emissions reductions (from the introduction of renewable-energy
solutions and better dairy-cattle management) and increased carbon sequestration (from the
reh abilitation of pastures and rangelands).
20.
Estimates for these mitigation results were calculated using the best practice Global
Livestock Environmental Assessment Model-interactive (GLEAM-i) developed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). GLEAM-i uses an embedded herd
dynamic model, and estimates of feed requirements to predict direct emissions resulting from
enteric methane and manure, based on digestibility and nitrogen content. Indirect emissions
from the production of feed resources, and direct and embedded energy use are also included.
Using this methodology, milk production is projected to increase by 34 per cent (through
productivity increases and loss reductions), while reducing the milk emission intensity (i.e. the
4
volume of methane emissions generated per kg of milk) by a significant 29 per cent, and
red ucing the total feed intake by 5.23 per cent, compared with the without-project scenario.
21.
The contributions of the three major clusters of interventions to the projected
Tmaibtilgea 2ti:o Mna rjeosru plrtso garraem summe minatreirzveedn itnio tnasb alen d2 .h ow they contribute to mitigation results (created
by the independent Technical Advisory Panel)
Total
Type of
Intervention result Summary of how mitigation results are to be
mitigation
area (over 20 achieved
result
years in t
1 Renewable Emission 1,088,705 Substitution of grid and diesel electricity (which
energy reductions would be expanded in the without-project scenario)
with biogas-generated electricity and solar
photovoltaic (PV) systems, though grants to dairy
3
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025.
4
This average comes from the following intended reductions per country: 28 per cent in Kenya, 50 per cent in
Rwanda, 33 per cent in Uganda and 29 per cent in the United Republic of Tanzania.

--- Table 1 on Page 132 ---
Intervention
area |  | Type of
mitigation
result | Total
result
(over 20
years in t | Summary of how mitigation results are to be
achieved
1 | Renewable
energy | Emission
reductions | 1,088,705 | Substitution of grid and diesel electricity (which
would be expanded in the without-project scenario)

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 133
cooperatives for solar PV-powered milk coolers, milk
transfer tanks, solar water heaters, water-recycling
systems, heat exchangers, milk pasteurizers, butter
churners and cheese makers, as well as loans to
dairies for other technology such as
insulated/refrigerated trucks
2 Dairy-herd Emission 266,560 Reduced emissions in the with-project scenario,
management reductions compared to the without-project scenario, after
successful implementation of interventions –
enabling access to better quality pasture and feed
sources that reduce enteric fermentation; reduced
mortality and higher productivity through access to
better veterinary care and vaccination; improved
fertility and productivity rates through support on
artificial insemination with high-yielding cross-
breeds; and effective management of manure and use
for biogas
3 Pasture and Carbon 814,220 Significant increase in soil organic carbon, and
rangeland sequestration related above-ground and below-ground biomass,
restoration compared with the without-project scenario – as a
result of restoration and management interventions
such as rotational grazing, earthworks for
infiltration, reseeding of palatable species, and
2,169,485
removal of encroacher bush
Total
Limitations to achieving mitigation potential
22.
: A challenge with achieving emission
reductions related to dairy-herd management is that the reductions depend not only on
successful implementation of all the improved practices (on breeding, animal health, fodder and
feed, and manure management), but critically also on an assumption that herd sizes can be
stabilized – an assumption which may not hold true in reality. The with-project scenario
assumes a very low rate of herd size growth, and compare this with a slightly higher rate in the
with-project scenario. The iTAP acknowledges that the programme interventions aim to
increase milk yields without increasing head count, as a result of several efficiency and
productivity-raising interventions as well as improving herd composition. But in reality, the
programme and its proponents will have little control over the decisions made by the millions of
farmers and producers involved over whether and to what extent to increase their cattle head
5
count and business size in response to increasing demand, as well as the incentives provided
by the programme itself (access to cold-chain technology, finance and markets).
23.
In response to a question from the iTAP on whether herd stability is a realistic
assumption, the AE pointed to evidence from Kenya showing that the dairy herd had remained
around 5 million animals since 2002, while production of milk had increased by 60 per cent in
the same period. According to IFAD, this is explained by various factors, including the use of
mobile payment system (M-pesa) and offtake of unproductive animals. The AE also pointed out
that “the feed base and the collection capacity are not expendable, which means that farmers
cannot grow a significantly larger numbers of animals, even if they wanted to”. They also
pointed to the livestock-farmer field schools training modules on herd management, focusing on
5
Discussed in ‘Selected Risk Factor 4’ in the funding proposal, with mention also in paragraph 33 of projected dairy-
herd growth in the United Republic of Tanzania to satisfy future demand for dairy products, which is expected to
grow from 1.4 billion litres of raw milk in 2020, to 2 billion litres in 2030, and 8 billion litres in 2050.

--- Table 1 on Page 133 ---
 |  |  |  | cooperatives for solar PV-powered milk coolers, milk
transfer tanks, solar water heaters, water-recycling
systems, heat exchangers, milk pasteurizers, butter
churners and cheese makers, as well as loans to
dairies for other technology such as
2 | Dairy-herd
management | Emission
reductions | 266,560 | insulated/refrigerated trucks
Reduced emissions in the with-project scenario,
compared to the without-project scenario, after
successful implementation of interventions –
enabling access to better quality pasture and feed
sources that reduce enteric fermentation; reduced
mortality and higher productivity through access to
better veterinary care and vaccination; improved
fertility and productivity rates through support on
artificial insemination with high-yielding cross-
breeds; and effective management of manure and use
3 | Pasture and
rangeland
restoration | Carbon
sequestration | 814,220 | for biogas
Significant increase in soil organic carbon, and
related above-ground and below-ground biomass,
compared with the without-project scenario – as a
result of restoration and management interventions
such as rotational grazing, earthworks for
 |  |  | 2,169,485 | infiltration, reseeding of palatable species, and
removal of encroacher bush

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 134
the reproduction calendar, performance recording using technology, an enhanced female-to-
male ratio through sexed-semen and reduction/off-take of unproductive animals, as well as
production efficiencies (through breeding, feeding and animal health), and interventions to
strengthen value chains and enhance market access “allowing shifting the value from their
6
livestock to the milk”. The iTAP recommends tracking of herd sizes (as a combined result of
bir ths, deaths and acquisitions of new livestock) during project implementation.
24.
A further factor which could undermine project results, in both mitigation and
adaptation, is the uncertainty around how climate-change impacts will evolve during the
programme implementation. For example, exposure of cattle to extreme climate conditions
resulting from the combined effect of high temperature and high humidity may turn out to be
even higher than projected. It is well documented that high THI conditions lead to higher
mortality, lower fertility and reduced calving rates, which could counteract programme
int erven
M
ti
o
o
n
n
i
s
t o
to
r i
i
n
m
g
p
l
r
a
o
n
v
d
e
s
p
c
r
a
o
p
d
e
u c
im
tiv
p
i
a
ty
c
,
t
t
s
h
:
us limiting both adaptation and mitigation results.
25.
The iTAP notes the solid monitoring system (set out in
annex 22 to the funding proposal) for rangeland restoration interventions, with clear
indications of responsibilities for site-level ground-truthing and data collection on: (i) GPS
coordinates of rangelands under intervention, and areas of rangelands where improved
practices were implemented; (ii) surveys on species composition and improved biomass yield;
(iii) the type of improved grazing management applied at the community level (rotational
grazing, agroforestry, improved pasture management, management of grazing intensity, etc.);
and (iv) the quantity and type of legume seeds used, date of planting or reseeding. This will be
combined with remote sensing analysis through high-resolution satellite images (using, for
example, the normalized difference vegetation index) to monitor the rangelands under
restoration. On the mitigation side, a system is also in place for measurement, reporting and
verification (MRV) of soil carbon sequestration in areas under restoration, including modelling
for estimating the impact of management practices. Using baseline information on soil carbon
stocks, soil texture, carbon inputs from vegetation and manure, as well as climate (all collected
through the baseline survey), process-based models (e.g. RothC) will be used to estimate actual
results. The team will also leverage data from the national MRV systems enhanced under
component 1 and make estimations using tier 2 sequestration factors generated under sub-
activity 1.3.1.1 (e.g. with flux towers such as eddy covariance towers – see feasibility study for
mo re details).
26.
Overall, the impact potential is rated as medium to high.
Scale: Medium to high
1. 2 Paradigm shift potential
27.
Paradigm shift relates to the degree to which the proposed programme can successfully
catalyse impact beyond the GCF one-off investment of USD 150 million over six years, together
with complementary IFAD projects. The programme, which will work with approximately 6.5
per cent of all dairy farmers in Kenya, 30 per cent in Rwanda, 11.3 per cent in Uganda and 9.1
per cent in the United Republic of Tanzania, aims to facilitate the transition from a dairy sector
characterized by rising emissions, low production efficiency, market informality and climate
vulnerability, with limited access to services and finance, to a more efficient, formal and low-
carbon, climate-resilient sector. By improving policy, institutional and service-delivery
environments, building climate adaptation capacity, and enabling access to finance and climate-
smart solutions for smallholder dairy farmers, the programme seeks to transform all aspects of
the dairy value chain.
6
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 135
Enabling environment for scaling up.
28.
Component 1 of the programme focuses on
creating a climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment in the four countries, through
work to review and formulate dairy-sector policies, strategies and regulations. Awareness
campaigns will be run on the nutritional benefits of milk and food safety aspects. The
programme also seeks to improve land-tenure security and management for sustainable dairy
farming. Public-sector capacity for livestock support will be increased, enhancing veterinary
services for better animal health, higher milk productivity and reduced losses, and extension
services will be strengthened. At a regional scale, GCF financing supports the transformation of
the dairy sector through interventions such as regional policy dialogues, cooperation platforms
and centres of excellence; cross-country cooperation, and knowledge exchange; MRV systems
using cutting-edge methods; climate risk and vulnerability assessments, including feed balance
ass essm
F
e
o
n
c
t
u
s;
s
a
o
n
n
d
n
p
a
ro
ti
v
o
i
n
si
a
o
l
n
M
o
R
f f
V
in
:
ance through the Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF).
29.
The programme has the potential to make an important
contribution to building MRV capacities in the four countries’ governments and research
institutions, for both climate risk and vulnerability assessments, improving greenhouse gas
emission measurements in dairy value chains, as part of national MRV systems. The programme
also aims to facilitate the development of a carbon certification system for the dairy sector, and
reduce barriers to accessing carbon finance. Although the funding proposal does not mention
the issue of benefit-sharing of potential proceeds from the sale of carbon credits in the future, in
response to a question on this from the iTAP, IFAD stated: “To ensure fair and inclusive access
to carbon finance under pilot Activity 3.4, the Programme will support preparedness by
establishing transparent mechanisms for beneficiary identification, benefit-sharing, and
7
pa rticip
R
at
e
io
ta
n
i l
i n
b a
go
n
v
k
e
u
rn
p
a
t
n
ak
ce
e :
s tructures across the dairy value chain”.
30.
The intention of the programme is to de-risk private investment
and accelerate the adoption oflow-emission, climate-resilient technologies and solutions by
smallholders and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), catalysing private-sector
engagement and scaling-up climate-finance flows. The programme is based on a thorough dairy
market study (funding proposal, annex 2, appendix 1), and effectively targets many of the key
barriers to technology dissemination and strengthening dairy value chains. At the same time,
there is a possibility that demand for and uptake of loans through the GDFF will be lower than
anticipated, limiting the paradigm shift achieved in financial markets. In the experience of the
iTAP, a risk with providing lines of credit via commercial banks is that they end up not being
drawn upon, because the banks fail to actively engage new customers in unfamiliar market
sectors. Cheap liquidity alone has often proven insufficient to entice local commercial banks to
broaden their lending portfolios to include higher-risk clients or enterprises with new business
models. Risk participation agreements, which share a portion of credit losses between a
concessional finance provider and the banks, may represent a more effective incentive
me chanism but remain unexplored in the current programme design.
31.
The funding proposal highlights the technical assistance programme that will work with
the wholesale and retail banks, as well as the favourable loan terms, including long grace and
repayment periods, but it is unclear what the programme can/will do to incentivize these retail
banks to go out and actually build business with this particular client base. This is highlighted in
Selected Risk Factor 8 in the funding proposal, which acknowledges that “[e]stablishing four
relatively small-sized credit lines in a niche sub-sector like dairy poses several challenges.
Relatively low funding base can constrain the interest of banks to participate in the scheme.
Lack of understanding of the bankable options in green dairy lending can further reduce bank
interest”. In response to a request to the AE to explain the approach to mitigating this risk in a
bit more depth, IFAD stated that “The financing will be made in tranches and only against
proven success concerning the level and quality of the GDFF portfolio implementation. The
7
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 136
meetings held with candidate retail banks indicate strong demand by SMEs in the dairy sector.
The low cost of capital to the retail banks, together with the TA grant, further incentivizes the
8
utilization of resources”. Nonetheless, experience shows that proactive measures beyond
concessional pricing, such as risk-sharing facilities or partial credit guarantees, are often
necessary to overcome entrenched risk aversion in commercial banks and to ensure that
cli mate finance flows reach the intended underserved market segments.
32.
Taking all these factors into account, paradigm shift potential is rated as medium to
high.
Scale: High
1. 3 Sustainable development potential
33.
The programme is expected to have a number of social, economic and environmental co-
be nefits
S
,
o
as
c i
o
a
u
l
t
a
li
n
n
d
e d
h e
b
a
el
l
o
th
w
c
.
o-benefits.
34.
The programme will promote improved food safety and
nutrition, and thus human health – using market formalization, awareness campaigns and
product traceability to improve nutrition and health awareness, with a focus on the increased
consumption of safe and high-quality dairy products (Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 3:
Good health and well-being). The programme contributes to ending hunger, achieving food
security and improving children’s nutritional status (SDG 2: Zero hunger). In addition, by
strengthening veterinary services, it aims to improve animal health and welfare, contributing to
higher milk productivity and reduced losses, as well as decreased GHG emissions and increased
farmers’ incomes, which will, in turn, incentivize famers to adopt better measures on animal
he alth a
G
n
e
d
n
w
d
e
e
l
r
fa
a
r
n
e
d
(S
s
D
o
G
ci
1
a
2
l
:
i n
R
c
e
l
s
u
p
s
o
io
ns
n
i b
c
l
o
e
- b
co
e
n
n
s
e
u
f
m
its
p
.
tion and production).
35.
The programme includes strengthening of
dairy groups and cooperatives, enhancing social cohesion. It has clear targets for the
involvement of women, youth and marginalized groups (see paragraph 15 of this assessment).
Project activities take into account the distinct traditional roles that women and men (and
youth) play in rearing cattle, milking cows and producing dairy products in households and
small businesses. These roles, as well as constraints on women’s access to land, financing and
other resources, are analysed in annex 8 (Gender assessment and action plan). The programme
aims to reduce gender inequalities (SDG 5: Gender equality) by actively promoting women’s
participation in livestock-farmer field schools, and opening space for women and youth in
traditionally male-dominated roles – including milk aggregation, animal health services, manure
management, fodder production and cooperative leadership. The Gender Action Learning
System Plus will be used – a participatory tool that engages households and communities in
rethinking power dynamics, promoting joint decision-making, benefit-sharing, and reshaping
soc ially
E
a
n
cc
v
e
i
p
ro
ta
n
b
m
le
e
r
n
o
t
l
a
e
l
s
c
t
o
h
-
r
b
o
e
u
n
gh
e f
g
it
e
s
n
.
der champions and peer influence.
36.
The programme’s interventions to restore and better
manage rangelands and pastures will not only have core adaptation and mitigation results, but
will also produce environmental co-benefits – such as an increase in biodiversity, with native
species reintroduced or allowed to regenerate (SDG 15: Life on land). Although planted pastures
with exotic grasses may be used more extensively in humid and semi-humid
grasslands/rangelands in Uganda and Rwanda, indigenous grasses and trees will be allowed to
regenerate in arid and semi-arid grasslands/rangelands in Kenya and the United Republic of
Tanzania (see funding proposal, annex 2, feasibility study, textbox 14). The programme follows
circular economy principles, improving manure management for biogas production and
nutrient cycling, which in turn improves soil health (SDG 12: Responsible consumption and
production). It is noted that sub-activity 2.1.3.3 will include strategies to avoid waste (including
8
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025.

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 137
e-waste) through the repair of the installed renewable energy-based equipment and the
establishment of an equipment maintenance account in a local financial institution by each
su pport
E
e
c
d
o
r
n
u
o
ra
m
l
i
o
c
r g
co
an
-b
iz
e
a
n
ti
e
o
f
n
it
.
s .
37.
The programme is expected to generate significant positive
economic impacts, including job creation, poverty reduction, increasing productivity,
strengthening income-generating capacities, and hopefully attracting additional private finance
into the dairy sector. Smallholder dairy producers and local private-sector value chain actors
will have access to essential financial services to improve production processes. This approach
aims to increase dairy farmers’ incomes, motivating them to adopt further efficient practices
and climate-smart technologies (SDG 9: Industry, innovation and infrastructure). Capacity-
building and adoption of integrated solutions will improve sustainable and resilient production,
thereby improving the incomes and productivity of smallholder dairy farmers (SDG 1: No
po verty
S
).
e mi-nomadic pastoralists
38.
: Although the programme focuses primarily on intensive
and semi-intensive livestock systems for the value-chain interventions, extensive grazing
systems (rangelands on which multipurpose cattle are 100 per cent dependent for foraging) are
also part of the activities on rangeland restoration and management, as well as manure
management. In response to a question from the iTAP about how the programme will ensure
the involvement of extensive pastoralists who are semi-nomadic, including some who self-
identify as Indigenous Peoples, the AE confirmed that such groupings will be engaged through
local community governance structures, and that free, prior and informed consent processes
will be conducted where appropriate. Pastoralists who so wish will be integrated into supply
9
chains through dairy training and the establishment of new milk collection centres. Although
traditional knowledge is mentioned in the funding proposal only in the logframe (section E.3),
the AE confirmed its centrality in the approaches to be followed by the livestock-farmer field
sch ools,
S
a
e
l
e
o
d
n g
s
s
o
id
v
e
e r
s
e
c
i
i
g
en
n
c
ty
e,
:
especially in relation to rangeland management and restoration.
39.
In response to a question from the iTAP, the AE confirmed that
activity 2.2.3, which makes certified forage/fodder seed available for multiplication, will be
aligned with the principle of seed sovereignty:
“IFAD supports seed sovereignty, recognizing farmers’ rights to save, use, exchange, and
sell their own seeds, while promoting access to diverse, open-source, non-GMO seed
systems that strengthen resilience and local control. Under Activity 2.2.3, DaIMA will
align with these principles by promoting the use, multiplication, and dissemination of
certified or quality-declared forage and fodder seeds, focusing specifically on open-
pollinated, locally adapted varieties — not hybrids or genetically modified organisms
(GMO). In doing so, the programme will engage local seed businesses, farmer
cooperatives, and community seed systems, in accordance with national regulatory
frameworks and farmer preferences.”
40.
Sustainable development potential is rated as high.
Scale: High
1. 4 Needs of the recipient
10
41.
Three of the four DaIMA countries are classified as least developed countries , and all of
them are recognized as being highly vulnerable to climate change. Observed and projected
climate-change scenarios for the region indicate significant changes in precipitation and
temperature patterns, as well as heat stress, increased frequency and severity of droughts and
other extreme weather events. The effects will negatively impact the dairy sector, resulting in
9
Written questions from the iTAP with IFAD responses, 11 April 2025.
10
Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 138
substantial losses in dairy livestock, and loss of productivity of pastures and rangelands, with
profound implications for the dairy industry and dairy farmers, leading to lower milk yields and
production, reduced cattle health, deterioration in pasture and feed quality, and increased risks
in milk losses along the value chains. These impacts compound the sector’s existing
vulnerabilities, such as farmers’ lack of access to knowledge and new skills, insufficient milk
co llection facilities, and limited access to quality inputs and finance.
42.
On the mitigation side, methane emissions from the dairy sector dominate the GHG
emission inventories of Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The
expected growth of the dairy sector means that both absolute emissions and emission
intensities will continue to rise if no action is taken to reduce emission intensity per litre of milk
produced, and to enhance productivity such that yields can increase without growing herd sizes.
The urgency of reducing the sector’s GHG emissions and increasing its resilience to climate
change is highlighted in national policies and plans, more particularly in the countries’ NDCs. As
pointed out in the funding proposal (para. 1), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
recognizes “efficient livestock systems” as a feasible adaptation option that has synergy with
11
mi tigation.
43.
Each of these countries suffers from a significant development deficit, which negatively
impacts their ability to steer the dairy sector on a path to low-emission and climate-resilient
development. In all four countries, public fiscal space is limited (see section B.5), and
governments rely heavily on official development assistance and concessional financing to fund
their dairy sector programmes. As a result, vulnerable populations, such as smallholders,
women and youth in the dairy sector are highly exposed to climate risks due to technological,
org anizational and policy constraints.
44.
The needs of the recipient are rated as high.
Scale: High
1. 5 Country ownership
45.
The Governments of Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania are
fully supportive of the proposed DaIMA programme aiming to improve resilience to climate
change in dairy production and value chains and to reduce methane and other GHG emissions
from the dairy sector. Integrating the dairy sector into national climate actions will also have
multiple benefits for the environment, nutrition, livelihoods and social inclusion. Partners
supporting the programme design and development process include IFAD, FAO, the Global Dairy
Pla tform, the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), and Bain & Company.
46.
According to annex 10 to the funding proposal, the programme was initially
conceptualized as mitigation only and was entitled “Pathways to Dairy Net Zero (PADNET)”.
This project idea and the concept of net zero itself, however, were perceived as too complex,
unclear and difficult to understand by many government and development partners. In addition,
country-level stakeholders asserted that a key priority in East Africa is the high vulnerability of
smallholder farmers and pastoralists and their adaptation to climate change, leading to the shift
to a cross-cutting programme called “Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation
(DaIMA)”. The word “daima” means “always” or “forever” in Swahili, a language spoken in all
four countries, highlighting the importance of sustainability and a regional identity to the
programme.
11
This is shown in the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Synthesis Report,
Figure SPM.7 (fourth row).

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 139
Alignment with policy.
47.
The DaIMA programme aligns with the national strategies of
the participating countries by supporting and complementing existing plans, policies and
strategies related to agriculture, livestock and climate change. In Kenya, the proposed
programme aligns with the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (2019–2029), National
Climate Change Action Plan, Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Implementation Framework
(2018‒2027), and the Kenya National Strategy on Climate Change and Low Carbon
Development. In Uganda, the programme aligns with the Livestock Development Strategy and
Investment Plan, National Adaptation Plan, and National Climate Change Strategy. In Rwanda, it
aligns with Rwanda's NDC, National Climate Change and Environment Policy, Rwanda Livestock
Master Plan, National Adaptation Plan, and National Livestock Policy. The funding proposal is
silent on alignment with the relevant general policies of the United Republic of Tanzania, though
these are shown in table 11 of the feasibility study (annex 2 to the funding proposal). Relevant
reg ional
E
p
n
o
g
l
a
ic
g
y
e
f
m
ra
e
m
n
e
t
w
w
o
it
r
h
k s
s t
a
a
r
k
e
e
a
h
ls
o
o
l d
h
e
ig
r
h
s
l
.
ighted in section 2.11 of the feasibility study.
48.
The stakeholder engagement plan (annex 7 to the
funding proposal) provides a record of an extensive consultation process over the course of
2023 and 2024. The national designated authorities in the four target countries were directly
involved in all stages of programme ideation, conceptualization and preparation. In each
country, National Programme Preparation Teams (comprising a wide range of stakeholders
from ministries of agriculture/livestock and dairy boards) were established in 2023, at the
regional workshop in Kigali (September 2023). Through regional (Arusha, February 2023;
Kigali, September 2023) and national workshops (July and September 2023), stakeholder
engagement meetings were organized to involve a wide array of national and regional public
institutions, private-sector operators, civil society, research institutions and development
partners in designing the programme. Four design missions were held in 2023, involving visits
to farms and dairy centres, and meetings with government agencies (ministries of
agriculture/livestock, ministries of the environment, meteorological services, national
agricultural research institutes, dairy development boards/authorities), with private dairy
processors, with milk collection centres, dairy cooperatives and farmers, with pastoral
communities, with financial services providers (savings and credit cooperative societies,
co mmer
C
c
a
ia
p
l
a
b
c
a
i
n
ty
k s
o
,
f
f i
a
n
c
t
c
e
r
c
e
h
d
c
i
o
te
m
d
p
a
a
n
n
d
ie s
e
)
x
,
e
a
c
n
u
d
t i
w
n
i
g
th
e
i
n
n
t
p
it
u
i
t
e
p
s:
roviders (feed and fodder, machinery).
49.
As AE for the programme, IFAD will be
responsible for the overall management of the programme, building on its experience with 11
other GCF projects/programmes under implementation. This role includes programme
appraisal, fiduciary and technical oversight, fund management, quality monitoring, reporting to
the GCF, and overseeing final evaluation, engaging IFAD headquarters in Rome and its regional
office in Nairobi, as well as its country offices in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania. A Regional Steering Committee – constituted of Permanent Secretaries
(most senior civil servants) from the EEs, 12 government entities listed in paragraph 2 above –
will ensure regional alignment and added value, with national governance structures in each
country overseeing implementation. International and national entities, including ministries of
agriculture and specialized entities (e.g. ILRI), will provide targeted services to the national
implementation teams, with preference given to those that have both proven capacity and
reg ional presence.
50.
Component 1’s work on policies, awareness and vulnerability assessment will be
implemented by the relevant EEs in each country, through a wide range of additional
government agencies and service providers. Contracted implementing partners, over which the
EEs will have oversight responsibility, will include local governments, national government
institutions, financial institutions, universities and knowledge institutions, local and national
non-governmental organizations, ILRI, FAO and private-sector entities. The same applies to
work in component 2 on cooperative strengthening, promoting renewable energy and waste
management, investment in cattle-breeding centres, support to animal health and forage
production. The programme will build on the fiduciary capacity of the key EE in each of the four

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 140
countries (National Treasury of Kenya, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources - Rwanda
Agriculture Board in Rwanda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in
Uganda, and Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries in the United Republic of Tanzania), and the
existing expertise of the wide range of implementing partners in the four countries, further
de veloping this capacity over the six years of programme implementation.
51.
Country ownership is rated as high.
Scale: Medium
1. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
52.
With a total budget for the proposed DaIMA programme of USD 358.26 million, IFAD is
seeking USD 150 million from GCF – 42 per cent of the overall budget. IFAD is investing a total
of USD 193.28 million – made up of USD 17.5 million in loans from its general programme of
loans and grants, and USD 175.78 million in senior loans through four existing IFAD-to-
government loan programmes: in Rwanda – the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, phase 2, in
the United Republic of Tanzania – Climate Smart Smallholder Dairy Transformation Project, in
Kenya – the Integrated Natural Resource and Environmental Management Project, and in
Ug anda – the Resilient Livestock Value Chain project.
53.
The proposed financial structure for the DaIMA programme includes slightly
concessional loans to dairy producers (12 per cent of GCF investment, 63 per cent of the total
programme) and grants to governments, service providers and producer beneficiaries (88 per
cent of the proposed GCF investment, 37 per cent of total programme). Maximum
concessionality is sought from G CF for component 1 activities to strengthen the enabling
environment and national capacities for low-emission climate-resilient dairy sectors, and also
for component 2 investments instrengthening smallholders’ and cooperative technical and
business capacity, in improving breeding, feed and fodder, and manure management in the
va lue ch
L
a
o
in
a
,
n
a
f
n
a
d
c
i
i
n
li t
i
y
mproving management of pasture and grasslands.
54.
: In addition to the four complementary IFAD-government loans serving as
co-finance to the GCF investment, a programme-wide investment facility is being set up through
component 3 – the Green Dairy Financing Facility. The GDFF will de-risk and enable affordable
loans to producers for renewable energy-driven productivity enhancements, with a total of USD
45 million allocated to the facility. Of this amount, USD 35 million will be for on-lending loan
capital (GCF loan of USD 17.5 million, IFAD loan of USD 17.5 million), with USD 10 million for a
technical assistance facility that will improve investment demand and readiness among pipeline
en terprises, and provide support post-deal to ensure successful implementation.
55.
The Ministries of Finance in the participating countries, acting as EEs, will receive this
combined loan package. These ministries will then disburse local currency loans to wholesale
banks or public development banks (PDBs) within their respective countries. Following this, the
wholesale banks provide local currency wholesale loans to retail banks operating at the national
or local level. Finally, the retail banks on-lend the funds directly to SMEs, specifically targeting
dairy value chain actors. An annual survey of market interest rates will help to define an
appropriate range of acceptable interest rates for end-borrower lending, within which the retail
banks will operate. The entire amount revolves across the GDFF financing chain until the loans
to IFAD and GCF have been repaid. As per the repayment schedule, the retail banks are fully
responsible for repaying the total loan amounts back to the wholesale banks, regardless of the
performance of the underlying portfolio, and the wholesale banks are required to repay the full
lFoigaunr aem 2o: Gunretse nto D tahiery M Fiinniasntrciiensg o Ffa Fciinliatyn fcien afonrc irnegp achymainen (tfr boamck fu tnod IiFnAgD p aronpdo GsCalF, .p ara. 146)

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 141
Abbreviations: EE = executing entity, IFAD = International Fund for Agricultural Development, LCY = local
cur rency, m = million, PDB = public development bank, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises
56.
The programme thus includes a complex on-lending structure across four steps: 1) from
GCF to the host government; 2) from the host government to a PDB; 3) from the PDB to
participating retail banks; and 4) from retail banks to borrowers. The iTAP acknowledges the
value of the host governments taking the hard currency risk and thus enabling on-lending in
local currency. Nonetheless, this long chain of institutions involved, each taking a cut,
potentially undermines the concessional nature of GCF funds provided, and seems likely to
make coordination of the facility (e.g. ensuring use of proceeds clauses are properly
im pleme
E
n
c
t
o
e
n
d
o
)
m
ve
ic
ry
a
c
n
h
a
a
l
l
y
le
s
n
is
ging.
57.
: The ex-ante financial and economic viability of the programme is
demonstrated by an economic and financial analysis conducted by the AE (annex 3 to the
funding proposal). Economic performance indicators for the four countries individually confirm
the economic viability of the investment for society as a whole. At regional level, the aggregated
economic net present value (ENPV) of the countries’ incremental net benefit streams,
discounted at 13.25 per cent (the average social discount rate), is USD 181.20 million, with an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 25 per cent for the baseline scenario. Two additional economic
performance scenarios are included, by integrating the economic value of the GHG emissions
balance with a low vs a high carbon market price assumption. Under the low scenario, the ERR
is 27.9 per cent and the ENPV is US$ 217.87 million. Under the high scenario, the ERR is 30.3 per
cent and the ENPV is US$ 254.64 million. The sensitivity analysis confirms that DaIMA
rep rese
F
n
i
t
n
s
a
a
n
r
c
o
i
b
a
u
l
s
a
t
n
e
a
c
l
o
y
n
s
o
is
mically worthwhile investment.
58.
: The financial analysis examines the profitability of programme
investments from the perspective of direct participants. The Livestock Sector Investment Policy
Toolkit was used to develop dairy production models in all four countries, using five different
herd types: (i) small-scale intensive system/zero grazing with cross-breed and exotic animals;
(ii) small-scale intensive system/zero grazing with exotic animals; (iii) semi-intensive with
cross-breeds; (iv) semi-intensive with local breeds; and (iv) extensive systems with local
breeds. Combinations of these herd models with likely investments through dairy farmers, milk
co llection points and centres, and dairy-processing units were used as the basis for the analysis.
59.
The financial analysis used the financial discount rate for each of the four countries (i.e.
the rate at which commercial banks can borrow from the central bank): 11.25 per cent in Kenya,

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 142
6.5 per cent in Rwanda, 9.75 per cent in Uganda and 5.5 per cent in the United Republic of
Tanzania. The analysis indicates that the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is above the
opportunity cost of capital in all four countries and thus that the proposed investments can be
profitable. The analysis suggests: for Kenya, an FIRR of 31 per cent and net present value (NPV)
of USD 172.82 million; for Rwanda, an FIRR of 19 per cent and NPV of USD 41.62 million; for
Uganda, an FIRR of 17 per cent and NPV of USD 47.48 million; and for the United Republic of
Tanzania, an FIRR of 21 per cent and NPV of USD 87.11 million. A regional average rate of return
is also calculated for the proposed programme as a whole, using an average discount rate of
8.2 5 per
M
c
i
e
t
n
ig
t,
a
a
t
n
io
d
n
y
c
ie
o
l
s
d
t
i
-
n
e
g
f f
a
e c
re
ti
g
v
i
e
o
n
na
e
l
s
F
s:
IRR of 23 per cent and a NPV of USD 349.2 million.
60.
The estimated cost per tonne of carbon dioxide
equivalent for the programme, defined as total investment cost/expected lifetime emission
reductions, is USD 165 per tonne when considering the entire programme (with co-finance,
including the existing IFAD loan programmes), and USD 85 per tonne when considering only the
50 per cent of the programme cost nominally associated with GCF mitigation results (see
fun ding proposal, section A.4).
61.
Given the high unit cost of the mitigation results and the complexity of the on-lending
structure that reduces financial efficiency, efficiency and effectiveness are rated as medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
62.
This proposed DaIMA programme is expected to make a significant contribution to
helping the smallholder dairy farming and dairy production sectors in these four East African
countries reduce their GHG emissions and enhance carbon removals, while simultaneously
bu ilding resilience of vulnerable smallholder farmers and SMEs.
63.
To enhance the robustness of adaptation actions related to heat stress, the iTAP
recommends that IFAD, during the inception phase and early implementation, systematically
integrate the Temperature-Humidity Index into operational climate-risk assessments and
adaptation monitoring frameworks. This will refine the targeting of livestock heat stress
interventions (e.g. housing, shade, water management, breed selection) across intervention
are as.
64.
The iTAP further recommends that IFAD include in the programme implementation
ma nual:
(a)
A clear statement of the intended adaptation impact of the project – in reducing
vulnerability or exposure, or enhancing adaptive capacity, in relation to the key climate
change impacts identified: (i) a decline in milk yields; (ii) heat stress in dairy cattle; (iii)
increased development of pathogens, diseases, parasite and vectors in dairy cattle; (iv)
decreased feed production and productivity, due to reduced soil moisture and fertility;
(v) a decrease in the quantity and quality of pasture; and (vi) deterioration of fodder in
unprotected warehouses due to increased humidity.
(b)
A detailed section on measures to be implemented for heat stress reduction in cattle,
taking into account the combined effects of temperature and humidity, including both
the broader project strategies like introducing shade trees in pastures and cross-
breeding with heat-tolerant breeds, and also a management protocol for very hot days –
involving, for example, avoiding animal handling, ensuring water availability, bringing
cattle under a shade roof with solar-powered fans, and spraying cattle with water.
(c)
An addition to the project’s monitoring and evaluation plan to track herd size (including
mortality rate, birth rate and acquisition) over the six years of programme
implementation, in order to test the assumption on which the programme’s mitigation

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 143
results depend (i.e. that herd sizes will remain stable), and to put in place adaptive
management measures where growth trends are emerging.
6 5.
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.42/02/Add.11
Page 144
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP269)
Proposal name: Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation (DaiMA)
Accredited entity: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Countries: Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and United Republic of Tanzania
Project/programme size: Large
Impact potential
IPFaArDa dtaigkmes snhoitfet pofo ttheen tpioasli tive assessment.
ISFuAsDta tiankaebsl en odteev oefl tohpem peonsitt ipvoet aesnsteisaslment.
INFeAeDd sta okfe tsh neo rtee coifp tiheen ptositive assessment.
ICFoAuDn ttaryk eosw nnoeter sohf itph e positive assessment.
IEFfAfiDci etankceys annodte e offf etchtei vpeonsietsivse assessment.
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. IFAD takes note of the iTAP comment in reference
to the high unit cost of the mitigation results and the required three layers of on-lending
structure which potentially increase the risk of reduced financial efficiency, and that the
efficiency and effectiveness are rated as medium. IFAD will ensure that the Financing
Agreements at all layers are designed to facilitate funds flow and eligible use of resources,
oOfvfeerr saulbl srteamntiaarl kTsA ffroor mth et hime pinledmeepnetantdioenn, at nTde cclhosneilcya ml Aondivtoirs othrey s Paamnee. l:
IFAD thanks the iTAP for its positive review of the proposal.

--- Table 1 on Page 144 ---
Impact potential

IPFaArDa dtaigkmes snhoitfet pofo ttheen tpioasli tive assessment.

ISFuAsDta tiankaebsl en odteev oefl tohpem peonsitt ipvoet aesnsteisaslment.

INFeAeDd sta okfe tsh neo rtee coifp tiheen ptositive assessment.

ICFoAuDn ttaryk eosw nnoeter sohf itph e positive assessment.

IEFfAfiDci etankceys annodte e offf etchtei vpeonsietsivse assessment.
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. IFAD takes note of the iTAP comment in reference
to the high unit cost of the mitigation results and the required three layers of on-lending
structure which potentially increase the risk of reduced financial efficiency, and that the
efficiency and effectiveness are rated as medium. IFAD will ensure that the Financing
Agreements at all layers are designed to facilitate funds flow and eligible use of resources,
oOfvfeerr saulbl srteamntiaarl kTsA ffroor mth et hime pinledmeepnetantdioenn, at nTde cclhosneilcya ml Aondivtoirs othrey s Paamnee. l:

=== PAGE 145 ===
Gender documentation for FP269
DAIRY INTERVENTIONS FOR MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION (DAIMA)
FUNDING PROPOSAL
ANNEX 8: GENDER ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAMME-LEVEL ACTION PLAN
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION 2
PART 1: GESI ANALYSIS FOR KENYA, TANZANIA, UGANDA AND TANZANIA 2
Gender equality and women empowerment ............................................................................................................... 3
Youth ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4
Vulnerable, marginalized groups (VMGs) ..................................................................................................................... 5
People Living with Disabilities (PWDs) ......................................................................................................................... 5
Nutrition ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Target groups ............................................................................................................................................................... 6
Targeting strategy......................................................................................................................................................... 6
PART 2: GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN 6
Purpose ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7
Objectives of DaIMAthe Programme............................................................................................................................ 7
Theory of change, assumptions and risks ..................................................................................................................... 7
Implementation arrangements .................................................................................................................................. 11
GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN MATRIX 14
1

=== PAGE 146 ===
ACRONYMS
AGYW Adolescent Girls and Young Women
AI Artificial Insemination
ASDP-L Agricultural Sector Development Programme–Livestock
BBT-YAI Build a Better Tomorrow – Youth Agribusiness Initiative
BDS Business Development Services
CAHW Community Animal Health Workers
CC Climate Change
C-SDTP Climate Smart Smallholder Dairy Transformation Project
CVIL Central Veterinary Investigation Laboratory of Zanzibar
DaIMA Dairy Interventions for Mitigation and Adaptation
DHS Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey
DVC Dairy Value Chain
EAC East African Community
EADD East African Dairy Development Project
ELISA Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay
ESADA East and Southern Africa Dairy Association
FDA Food and Drugs Authority
FGM Female Genital Mutilation
FGM/C Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting
GALS Gender Action Learning System
GBV Gender-Based Violence
GDFF Green Dairy Financing Facility
GESI Gender and Social Inclusion
GEWE Gender Equality Women’s Empowerment
GHG Green House Gas(ses)
GoT Government of Tanzania
HDI Health Development Initiative
HHs Households
2

=== PAGE 147 ===
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HPI Heifer Project International
ICPALD Center for Pastoral Areas and Livestock Development
ICT Information and communication technology
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
IGAD Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
KALRO Kenya Agriculture and Livestock Research Organization (KALRO)
KAOP Kenya Agricultural Observatory Platform
KDB Kenya Dairy Board
KDHS Kenya Demographic and Health Survey
KeLCoP Kenya Livestock Commercialization Project
LEWs Livestock Extension Workers
L-FFS Livestock Farmer Field School (L-FFS)
MCC Milk Collection Centre
MCP Milk Collection Plant
MDAs Ministries, Departments, and Agencies
MoA Ministry of Agriculture
MRV Measurement, Reporting and Verification
MSMES Micro, small and medium enterprises
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NVL National Veterinary Laboratory
OHRECA One Health Research and Education Centre in Africa
OUT Open University of Tanzania
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction
PFF Pastoralist Field Schools
PFIs Participating Financial Institutions
PICSA Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture
PSEAH Preventing Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment
PSTA5 Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation 5
PWDs People Living with Disabilities
3

=== PAGE 148 ===
RNDP Rwanda National Development Plan
RSB Rwanda Standards Board
SACCO Savings and Credit Cooperative
SDLD State Department of Livestock Development
SEAH Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment
SGBV Sexual Gender-Based Violence
SOA The Sexual Offenses Act
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures
SSTC South-South and Triangular Cooperation
SUA Sokoini University of Agriculture
TAD Transboundary Animal Diseases
TDB Tanzania Dairy Board
TMR Total Mixed Rations
ToT Training of Trainers
TVET Technical and Vocational Education and Training
TVLA Tanzanian Veterinary Laboratories Agency
UDSM University of Dar-es-Salaam
UMMB urea-molasses multi-nutrient blocks
VCs Value Chains
VMGs Vulnerable and Marginalized groups
YLP Youths Livelihood Programme
4

=== PAGE 149 ===
INTRODUCTION
This annex sets out the main parameters of the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) assessment and action plan
for implementation of DaIMA’s interventions in Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. Part 1 provides a contextual
GESI analysis of smallholder dairy farmers and MSMEs (dairy cooperatives and processors) in each respective country.
Identifying the key challenges for gender equality and women empowerment, youth empowerment, nutrition,
marginalized and vulnerable groups and persons living with disability (PWDs) in dairy production and associated
services enterprises and proposes required interventions. Part 2 provides the gender action plan setting out proposed
actions to achieve the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) targets. These will be further reviewed and revised
during project start-up.
The DaIMA theory of change is “IF technological solutions to reduce methane and GHG emissions and financial services
to efficiently sustain production and marketing processes, which increase revenue and/or reduce production costs,
are supported for dairy farmers and milk processors to adopt in East Africa, THEN farm-level methane emissions and
supply chain GHG emissions will be reduced, because a cross-cutting transition to net-zero dairy production will be
economically attractive to farmers, pastoralists and dairy sector processors”. The key objectives of DaIMA are: (i) To
strengthen systemic and institutional capacities of the livestock sector to enable smallholder dairy producers and local
value chain actors to reduce CH4 and other GHG emissions (ii) To increase production, market knowledge and tools
for smallholder dairy producers and private sector value chain operators for a low-emission, climate-resilient, and
sustainable pathway (iii) To enable smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain actors access to
required financial services to make the necessary transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient, and sustainable livestock
production and value chain development.
PART 1: GESI ANALYSIS
Agriculture plays a significant role in the economy, providing employment and income to millions of people. As a result,
the impact of climate change on agriculture may have long-reaching consequences that extend well beyond individual
farmers and their families. According to the United Nations, this output is mostly generated by family farms, where
women supply around 60 to 80 percent of the labor input. East Africa has demonstrated the positive effects of dairy
production on income, food security and dietary diversity. Most of the EAC countries have ratified international
frameworks and progressive national legal and policy frameworks promoting gender equality and women
empowerment. However, women in agriculture face gender-specific barriers, including limited access to land,
financing, and other resources1. Policy implementation remains weak in country and regional disparities persist. Each
country, therefore, presents a unique context with varying statistics and progress towards closing the gender gaps.
Nevertheless, present data reveals some progress towards achieving the stated policy commitments for the four
DaIMA project focus countries and the need to address barriers in the dairy sector as outlined below.
Rwanda
In Rwanda, maternal and child health has improved significantly over the last two decades and exceeded Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) ambitions. Maternal mortality reduced by 80% between 2000 and 2014 while infant and
child-mortality decreased by over 70% in the same period.2 Free universal basic education was initiated and scaled up
1
FAO 2019. ESA Working Paper No. 11-02 March 2011 Agricultural Development Economics Division. The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nationswww.fao.org/economic/esa
2
The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), 2015. Demographic and Health Survey (2014/15). Kigali, National Institute of Statistics of
Rwanda.
5

=== PAGE 150 ===
to 12 years. This resulted in a net enrolment of nearly 100% in primary school for both boys and girls. Gender parity
was achieved with more girls than boys in primary school.3
Women outnumber men (92% compared to 77%, as per 2012 population census) in the rural population working in
agriculture.4 About 25% of the (rural) households in Rwanda are headed by women and working age youth (ages 15-
34) constitute 77% of the rural population. Women account for only 24% of the agro-dealers in Rwanda. Women and
men farmers in dual households are characterized by unequal power relations, and women have limited decision-
making powers. Within the dairy value chain, women have distinct and significant roles, although those roles vary by
production system. In extensive systems, men and boys predominately bring the animals to graze and find water, while
women care for the calves and process the milk. In zero grazing systems, which are required for participation in the
GIRINKA5 program, women are responsible for feeding the animals, cleaning the stalls and milking utensils, while men
are more involved in the milking of cows as well as the transport and sale of milk. These social and gender dynamics
related to both women’s roles in the production as well as consumption of livestock, if not fully considered, limit the
effectiveness of such programs, or worse, increase gender inequalities within the household. Such cases may occur,
for instance, when men take over decision-making and control of income from a livestock product, such as dairy, that
has become more lucrative following the intervention6. Additionally, women in agriculture are more vulnerable to
climate change and land degradation because they generally do not have other livelihood options to support their
families.7
Uganda
The Government of Uganda has identified gender equality and women's empowerment as critical to achieving
accelerated socio-economic transformation. The country has ratified key gender equality instruments and
commitments and has put in place a legal framework to promote Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
(GEWE). Although the Government of Uganda has established the Gender Equality Commission, which produces an
annual report on the state of gender equality in the country, and signs Gender Equality Compacts with Ministries,
Departments and Agencies to track the country's progress in improving the livelihoods and well-being of the most
vulnerable, gaps remain in the economic, political and social inclusion of women. Men generally own cattle while
women have ownership over the milk with women tending to engage more in dairy processing. Women are hindered
in dairy development by a lack of ownership, access to resources and assets, which also results in lack of collateral for
financial instruments. Generally, at household or farm level women’s decision-making power can be assumed low as
also seen in farmers groups, in which they seldom hold leadership positions. The proportion of women in the cabinet
rose from 9.4 percent in 1996 to 32.8% in 2003 but decreased to 19.4 percent in 2006. However, most women in
Uganda are engaged in livestock yet have limited access to agricultural assets, including large-livestock, land, labor and
credit. In most communities, land and other productive assets belong to men, and women's access is mediated through
men.
Tanzania
Women constitute 52 percent of the population in Tanzania. 75 percent of these women live in rural areas. Of these,
90.4 percent work in the agriculture sector, 0.1 percent in the mining sector and 1.2percent in small and medium
enterprises (SMES). 44.1 percent of women in the urban centres work in SMES and mainly sell clothes, food and non-
3 NISR, 2017. Statistical yearbook 2016. Kigali, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.
4 Agriculture Policy of Rwanda 2018
5 Rwanda National Government programme where a poor family receives a heifer by way of donation. When a cow gives birth, the first female
calf is given to a neighbour or community member. Once that cow gives birth, its first female calf is given to the next selected beneficiary and so
on
6 Umuzigambeho, J.F. 2017. Gender assessment of dairy value chains: evidence from Rwanda, Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6845e.pdf
7 ibid
6

=== PAGE 151 ===
alcoholic and alcoholic beverages. Among the challenges experienced by women doing business include lack of capital,
materials, markets, expertise / skills, knowledge and physical spaces to conduct business.8 The constitution
recommends 30 percent among all appointed and elected officers.9 Women and youth tend to have limited access to
and control over the resources and information needed for dairy production, value addition, and marketing. Men
generally own cattle while women have ownership over the milk. Women are hindered in dairy development by a lack
of ownership and access to resources and assets, which also results in lack of collateral for credit. Generally, at
household or farm level women’s decision-making power is low as also seen in farmers groups, in which they seldom
hold leadership and decision-making positions.
Mostly, gender relations vary with diverse cultural contexts, and this diversity should inform analysis and interventions.
In traditional dairy production systems, gender roles vary with geographies. For example, in the Southern Highlands
of Tanzania, milking is a man’s activity, but not a taboo for women, whereas in Tanga both women and men can milk.
In both these areas, men own the cattle and women the milk, but the man can sell the milking cow and therefore the
woman loses the milk. Youth too often have limited rights over household assets, control and ownership of
commodities. As value chains commercialize and markets become sophisticated, moving further away from the farm
gate, women tend to lose control of the commodities in question. For as long as the production of milk is low and the
markets rudimentary, milk shall remain a woman’s commodity. Once the productivity increases to profitable
magnitudes and the value chain becomes commercialized the ownership of milk is likely to change to men. To address
these, lessons learnt from the Heifer Project International (HPI) Tanzania, which DaIMA foresees as implementing
partner, uses participatory sensitization meetings with women and men at household and farmer group level to
develop agreed gender strategies and action plans for mainstreaming and transformation. Couple training in the
Gender Action Learning System (GALS) where women have multiple livelihood options, such as dairy production, crop
residue preservation for fodder production and fodder harvesting “cut and carry” from communal lands, raise poultry,
collect and trade with non-timber forest products such as medicinal herbs and gums (for food, medicine and other
uses). With support for the various livelihood options, the women can still survive the worst-case scenario of losing
milk business to men. The DaIMA and the IFAD Climate Smart Smallholder Dairy Transformation Project (C-SDTP)
interventions have much complementarity including areas of geographical coverage. DaIMA will, support additional
geographical areas such as the peri-urban dairy communities in the coastal region as well as some pastoral
communities not included in the C-SDTP.
Kenya
women have a right to own land according to law, however socio-cultural practices favour male inheritance. Only
about 7 percent women own land alone. Without secure rights to land, women’s participation in and benefit from
land uses such as dairy is inhibited. Yet women provide up to 75% of agricultural labour in addition to heavy workloads
related to unpaid childcare and other domestic chores. They produce food crops for domestic consumption and
provide labour for commercial farming where they are paid a pittance. Women also have less access to information,
extension services and climate smart technologies. The situation is compounded by the delineation of agriculture as a
function of the county government necessitating coordination and cooperation between the national and county
governments.
For the various activities within the livestock sub-sector, women contribute between 60-80 percent of the labour-
force, especially in ASAL areas. On average, women work longer hours (12.9 hours) than men (8.2 hours), yet they
earn less because most of these hours are taken by unremunerated work despite contribution to mainstream
economic activities. Enrolment of both boys and girls in primary and secondary schools has been increasing from 2009
8
The policy for gender equality and women empowerment (Tanzania sera ya maendeleo ya wanawake na jinsia) 2000.
9 The Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania 1977 and Zanzibar 1984.
7

=== PAGE 152 ===
to 2018 and is almost at par with 49.1 percent boys and 47.3 percent girls. Females also account for 41.3 percent of
public and private university enrolments, 43 percent of technical and TVET institutions and 69.2 percent adult
education learners. Performance of girls has shown remarkable improvements especially in Modern Agriculture,
Manufacturing, Wholesale finance and insurance. Generally, boys perform better than girls, but girls also perform well.
Maternal mortality is improving, the Kenya Demographic and Health Survey (KDHS) 2014 the ratio stood at 362 deaths
per 100,000 live births compared to a high ratio of 488 deaths per 100,000 in the 2008-09 KDHS. The prevalence of
HIV is higher among women compared to men. In 2017, the National adult HIV prevalence rate had reduced and was
estimated at 4.9% with prevalence higher among women (5.2%) than men (4.5%). Retrogressive and harmful cultural
practices continue to limit women’s empowerment. Prevalence of FGM in Kenya was 32% in 2003; 27% in 2008/9; and
21% in 2014 for women 15 – 24yrs. Prevalence of FGM varies among ethnicities was highest among the Somali – 94%;
Samburu – 86%; Kisii 84; and Maasai – 78%.
Climate change is one of the greatest environmental and development challenges facing the world today. Women
bear most burden related to gender roles such as in access to water for domestic use and livestock. Dairy provides an
opportunity for women to earn income from the sale of dairy products, have decent jobs, and improve their nutrition
and provide for their household’s general wellbeing.
Youth empowerment. Youth in East Africa accounts for over 40 percent of those between the ages of 15-35. Youth
unemployment remains high and is higher than among young women than men. In rural areas youths are informally
employed (and underemployed) in subsistence agriculture and family-based livelihood activities. This demographic
dividend has tremendous potential to transform the supply and demand of food and will impact the agri-food industry.
As the largest employer in the country, the agriculture sector remains a key entry point for job creation, inclusive
growth and poverty reduction.
However, most young people face barriers to participate in dairy due to huge capital and operational investments
required. Involving the youth in dairy farming is crucial as it provides a platform to tap into the potential of a young,
educated population that can be trained and skilled to meet input and services delivery gaps necessary to develop
sustainable agri-value chains and food systems. Youth are resourceful, innovative and crucial for the future of the dairy
sector. Youth’s openness towards new practices can be key in development of, for example, new and environmentally
responsible dairy practices and to fully utilize the potential of new technologies such as ICT for the dairy sector. For
example, it is evident that the 23% growth of the Kenyan dairy sector triggered by increased demand of milk has
resulted to many employment opportunities along in support activities for agriculture. The youth mainly involved in
the informal jobs, which are majorly self-employment opportunities, include mobile milk traders, milk bars and shops
and kiosks. Youth participation in dairy is hampered by limited access to productive resources, including land, capital,
limited entrepreneurial skills, poor rural infrastructure, mindset barriers and drudgery of farm labour due to limited
access to modern technologies. Addressing these constraints will raise the industry’s productivity, which in turn would
create more jobs for the young women and men.
The 2003 Rwandan Constitution enshrines gender equality and social inclusion and sets out the obligations of the
State. In 2019, MINAGRI launched its Gender and Youth Mainstreaming Strategy aimed at providing women and youth
with increased knowledge and access to services, as well as enabling them to participate equally in the value chain.
The youth population in Uganda comprises of both the educated/skilled and the unskilled living majority in rural areas.
Two-thirds of the labour force is below 35 years. Although 65.5 per cent of the population works in agriculture, its
contribution to national GDP is only 29 per cent. For the youth, having access to productive assets, being linked to a
market, have an opportunity for access to credit and finance, and working with modern and digital technologies are
important. Specially, creating jobs and decent employment for youth in dairy and beef value chain, can reduce rural
8

=== PAGE 153 ===
poverty, improve food security and nutrition in the country. In Tanzania. Youth (15-35 years) and children (0-15 years)
account for 75% of the population, with a median age of 18 years old. Two-thirds of Tanzania’s labour force is younger
than 35 years. Around half of the 16 million youth are, however, engaged in farming (off-farm agribusiness: 24%).
Young men more often than young women find non-agriculture employment, approximately 60% versus 40%.
The Government of Tanzania (GoT), specifically the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), is implementing the Build a Better
Tomorrow – Youth Agribusiness Initiative 2022-2030 (BBT-YAI), with the following strategic objectives: i) inspire youth
through implementing behaviour/attitude-changing communication strategy; ii) empower youth through training
mentoring and coaching; iii) engage youth in profitable and sustainable management of agribusinesses; iv) enable
youth-led enterprises by improving business environment; and v) coordinate effectively youth agribusiness support
initiatives for synergy and efficiency. Through partnerships between the private sector, NGOs and government
institutions, the MoA anticipates achieving 12,000 new agribusiness enterprises in villages across the country, for
which 200,000 youth are trained via internship and 15,000 youth are mentored through incubation programmes. For
livestock specifically, youth involvement is less well documented. There are eight Youth Incubation Centres for beef
and goat fattening that will take 240 and 1,000 youth in 2022/23 and 2023/24 respectively. Collective action for the
youth has been explored and has successfully worked in Zanzibar, as a result of the Agricultural Sector Development
Programme–Livestock (ASDP-L) project. Communal Cowsheds for dairy are a type of Livestock Farmer Field School (L-
FFS) that is dependent on social cohesion from which youth learn and farm dairy together10. The Communal Cowshed
Concept could serve as a dairy production incubator for youth, having the young farmers passing through and starting
their own dairy business from there.
Kenya’s population is largely young, with 35.7 million Kenyans (75.1%) below the age of 35 years and offers a dynamic
workforce that is highly adaptable, with a high uptake of technological innovations. Yet, youth record a high
unemployment rate of 35%. The key challenges for youth participation in agriculture include negative perception and
attitude to agriculture, inadequate skills, knowledge, and information such as in dairy farming, limited agricultural
innovation, limited access to finance and resources such as land. The GoK has put in place various legal, institutional
and policy frameworks to empower the youth at national level and county levels. However, most counties are yet to
enact youth policies.
Marginalized and vulnerable groups. In Rwanda, the 2003 Constitution does not recognize the economic, social and
cultural rights of the Batwa and it only refers indirectly to them under the term “historically marginalized
communities”, a term that during the constitution-making process was generally understood to refer to the Batwa.
The Constitution of Uganda provides a list of indigenous communities under its Third Schedule and bears no
compatibility with the definitions of indigenous peoples under international and regional human rights law – in
particular the emphasis on the right to self-identification – and can therefore not be interpreted as a similar legal
protection of the rights of indigenous peoples within the meaning of international and regional human rights law.
However, the National land policy does make considerations for pastoralists such as the Karamoja community living in
the North. Tanzania consists of over 100 distinct ethnic groups (in majority indigenous of Bantu and Nilotic origin) and
with no group dominating. However, Tanzania policy is conservative in specifically identifying indigenous peoples.
Ethnic controversy and conflict are low in Tanzania compared to neighbouring countries. Tension between peoples of
sedentary smallholder mix farming and pastoralism is, however, increasing with climate change. Sector
transformations, private financial investments, and policies favour sedentary over pastoral livelihoods.
Protection of pastoral peoples’ rights can be difficult, since they often migrate (in marginal areas) across national
borders and are not seen as indigenous to a nation, region or district. In the Southern Highlands and Zanzibar,
indigenous people are sedentary smallholder farmers combining agriculture, horticulture and livestock farming. From
10 IFAD 2022. https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/47116743/Stocktaking_ESA_web.pdf/cc8f6720-6dc1-5a92-f61b-
4bcccf4d1d15?t=1671547955602
9

=== PAGE 154 ===
Tabora and Singida, indigenous pastoralists migrate to Mbeya and Iringa in search for grazing. In Tanga pastoralists
and smallholders, both indigenous to Tanga, coexist with their free-grazing livestock, sharing communal pastures.
Cross-border migration from Kenya and Rwanda respectively takes place. GoT allocated land owned by the National
Ranching Company to new farmers (including pastoralists deciding to become farmers) through tripartite loans.
Consultation with selected members of the Maasai community in Matebete Village, Mbarali district in Mbeya region,
revealed that 12,750 hectares of land that they currently use for their settlements and livestock grazing used to be the
government ranch in the 1970s. The beneficiaries of this land, however, still move their cattle to other areas in search
for fodder and water, especially during dry season. C-SDTP is not expected to target indigenous people’s territories
and will not alter their culture nor marginalize them, neither should DaIMA.
An estimated 79,000 people identify as indigenous in Kenya, and are found among the pastoralist communities of
Turkana, Rendille, Borana, Maasai, Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, Gabra, Pokot and Endorois communities. Some of these
groups may be found living in the project areas of Nandi, Elgeyo Marakwet and West Pokot. They experience land and
resource tenure insecurity, poor service delivery, weak political representation, as well as general discrimination and
exclusion. It is also important to recognize that they are valuable partners and holders of local traditional knowledge
that can improve nutrition and enhance biodiversity. Marginalised groups also include Persons Living with HIV and
AIDS (PLWHAs) and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs), who are estimated to be about 4.6% of the population.
People living with Disability. The EAC Secretariat has developed a regional EAC Policy on Persons with Disabilities
(PWD) 2009 and each country has a related Policy and institutional framework to manage affairs of the PWDs. People
with disabilities are among the most vulnerable groups in society. They are often undereducated, untrained,
unemployed or underemployed. They are also likely to be extremely poor – especially women, youth and those living
in rural areas. In Tanzania, movements supporting / protecting the rights of people with disability are quite well
established. In the four countries, different disabled persons’ organisations and the umbrella organisation regularly
take part in discussions with the government on issues affecting the lives of people with disabilities. Therefore, there
is need to systematically equity, and ultimately equality of people with disability and living in rural areas where they
rely on agriculture and related activities with the rest of the rural population. This can be achieved by providing them
with opportunities to engage in agri-business and supporting them with access to training, finance and productive
resources to participate in the dairy sector.
Nutrition. There has been modest progress towards achieving global nutrition targets in the East Africa region.
However, not a single country in the subregion is on course to meet the targets for anemia in women of reproductive
age (aged 15 to 49 years), low birth weight, diabetes among men, diabetes among women, obesity among men, and
obesity among women. The latest data shows that anaemia affects an estimated 31.9% of women of reproductive age.
Some 13.4% of infants have a low weight at birth in the Eastern Africa subregion. East Africa still experiences a
malnutrition burden among children aged under 5 years. The average prevalence of overweight is 4.0% - the second
lowest compared to other subregions in Africa with sufficient data. The prevalence of stunting is 32.6%, which is
significantly higher than the global average of 22.0%. Conversely, the East Africa subregion's prevalence of wasting is
5.2%, which is lower than the global average of 6.7%. In addition, the region's adult population also faces a
malnutrition burden: an average of 7.0% of adult (aged 18 and over) men live with diabetes, compared to 6.5% of
women. Meanwhile, 12.1% of women and 3.5% of men live with obesity11.
In Rwanda, anaemia among children went down from 52% in 2005 to 38% in 2010 but this prevalence is still high.
Among children under one year of age, seven out of ten are suffering from anaemia. Among pregnant women, (20%)
were found to be anaemic. Seven percent of Rwandan women are too thin and 16 percent are overweight or obese.
11 https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/eastern-africa assessed 13 December 2023
10

--- Table 1 on Page 154 ---
In Rwanda, anaemia among children went down from 52% in 2005 to 38% in 2010 but this prevalence is still high.
Among children under one year of age, seven out of ten are suffering from anaemia. Among pregnant women, (20%)
were found to be anaemic. Seven percent of Rwandan women are too thin and 16 percent are overweight or obese.

=== PAGE 155 ===
Overweight and obesity is higher in urban areas with 30% prevalence for women in the City of Kigali. Vitamin A and
Iodine deficiency has reduced more than anaemia, which mainly affects pregnant women and children six to 24
months. During pregnancy and from 6-24 months are periods of rapid growth and more iron is needed. The demand
cannot be met by diet alone. In 2010, anaemia prevalence in Rwanda was 25% during pregnancy and 17% among
women of reproductive age. More than 70% of children 6-12 months were found to be anaemic. Malnutrition of young
children adds permanent risks to their health, growth and cognitive development as well as a loss to their economic
productivity estimated at up to 10% over a lifetime. Cumulating these negative effects can result in economic losses
of up to 3% of GDP.
In Uganda, gender relations play an important role in food security and nutrition management in the community.
Women produce most of the food and with limited resources, but they have no control over this food. Food and
nutrition data available for Uganda are over two decades old and need to be updated. Even so, in 2003, the infant
mortality rate was at 88.4 per 1,000 live births while the under-five mortality rate was 152 per 1000 live births. The
Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) was estimated to be 495 per 100,000 live births.12 Pockets of malnutrition, famine
and hunger exist and childhood under-nutrition still persists. 40 percent of deaths among children were due to
malnutrition. Over thirty-eight per cent of the children below 5 years were stunted, 4.0 per cent were wasted and 22.5
per cent were under weight.13 Micro-nutrient deficiencies are common, especially vitamin A deficiencies which had a
prevalence rate of 5.4%, iron deficiency anaemia was slightly more than 50%, while 10% of the women population
were undernourished. The total goitre rate ranged between 60-70%14. Under-nutrition is widespread, affecting mainly
children less than 5 years old, school-going-age children, adolescents, women in the reproductive age, internally
displaced persons and prisoners.15
Malnutrition in Tanzania remains high. Over 34% of children under the age of five are stunted and nearly 45% of
women of reproductive age suffer from anaemia. The most affected regions, with a prevalence of stunting exceeding
40%, include the semi-arid areas of Ruvuma (41%), Iringa (47%), Rukwa (48%), Kigoma (42%), Njombe (54%), and
Songwe (43%). In Pemba North, 39%, and, in Pemba South, 31%, of children are stunted. In Zanzibar, stunting rates
range from 20 to 24% in Stone Town and Unguja North, respectively.14% of children under five are underweight (too
thin for age). Inadequate caring and feeding practices, low nutrition education on dietary needs of different age groups
(young children, adolescent girls, women of reproductive age, pregnant and lactating mothers, etc.) remain an issue.
Studies also show that 59% of the Tanzanian population cannot afford a nutritionally adequate diet. To improve access
to milk, a nutritious (high protein animal source food), dairy farmers need to be trained on the importance of allocating
some of the milk (mainly evening milk) for household consumption and the importance of making other animal source
foods such as chicken and eggs available for consumption at home, rather than selling. For the sake of nutrition,
protection of women’s livelihood options such as poultry, and collective action in the milk cooperative will empower
these women on knowledge on nutrition. DaIMA, partners e.g. GoT, HPI etc can support school milk feeding programs
by applying lessons from past successful interventions such as in Kenya whereby providing school milk increased
nutrition, attendance and enrolment.
In Kenya, lack of access to adequate and diversified diet results in various forms of nutrition problems. In 2011, over 2
million children (35%) were reported to be stunted. Children under five years are particularly affected by deficiencies
in vitamin A (84% of children), iron (73.4%), and zinc (51%). Women, especially pregnant women, are among the most
vulnerable with a high risk of iron deficiency (60% among pregnant woman) and vitamin A. An estimated 16% of adult
12 UDHS, 2000/2001
13 ibid
14 Uganda government 2003. The Uganda Food and Nutrition Policy
15 ibid
11

--- Table 1 on Page 155 ---
Overweight and obesity is higher in urban areas with 30% prevalence for women in the City of Kigali. Vitamin A and
Iodine deficiency has reduced more than anaemia, which mainly affects pregnant women and children six to 24
months. During pregnancy and from 6-24 months are periods of rapid growth and more iron is needed. The demand
cannot be met by diet alone. In 2010, anaemia prevalence in Rwanda was 25% during pregnancy and 17% among
women of reproductive age. More than 70% of children 6-12 months were found to be anaemic. Malnutrition of young
children adds permanent risks to their health, growth and cognitive development as well as a loss to their economic
productivity estimated at up to 10% over a lifetime. Cumulating these negative effects can result in economic losses
of up to 3% of GDP.

=== PAGE 156 ===
males suffer from iron deficiency (anaemia). Kenya is also increasingly faced with diet-related non-communicable
diseases, especially in urban areas. These are mainly caused by excessive energy intake associated with purchased
meals and processed foods and decreasing levels of physical activity in urban settings. Additionally, millions of children
and adults suffer from the ill health effects of food-borne diseases.
Gender Based Violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH). In Rwanda, cultural and
patriarchal stereotypes and attitudes perpetuate GBV. Negative gendered attitudes, roles and expectations such as a
culture of silence, traditional settlement of GBV cases within families is common. This compromises justice for
survivors. Men and boys are often left out of the dialogue and seen as perpetrators rather than allies in GBV prevention.
For male survivors, service seeking is limited mainly by the fear of ridicule, loss of influence and space in the community
of men. Some forms of GBV are culturally accepted complicates and compromises response measures. Coupled with
gendered power imbalances, the culture of silence and the high levels of tolerance and non-reporting, the practice of
GBV in Rwanda has created an internal self-sustaining cycle which can only be broken through combined efforts of
transformative and strategic engagement with communities and their leaders and law enforcement16.
In Uganda, the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey revealed that seven in 10 women who had suffered sexual
violence neither sought help nor told anyone. Factors that contribute to under-reporting of GBV include social stigma
and shame, fear of reprisal, concerns about confidentiality and being believed, and, in some cultural settings, a high
tolerance for violence. Most Ugandans think the police take GBV cases seriously, but majorities also see domestic
violence as a private rather than a criminal matter and think that women who report GBV to the authorities will face
negative reactions from the community. The negative social norms often accept violence such as wife battering, child
marriage, FGM, and in some cases rape as normal societal occurrences.17 Sexual gender-based violence predisposes
survivors to HIV, unwanted teenage pregnancies, and mental illnesses like depression. This leads to dropouts among
adolescent girls and young women (AGYW), increased risk of HIV transmission, and socio-economic challenges related
to child pregnancies. Uganda has a high prevalence of SGBV (22%) among women 15-49 years. While SGBV among
AGYW does not necessarily lead to pregnancy, an analysis of District Health Information System (DHIS2) data indicates
that an increase in SGBV among AGYW occurred with an increase in teenage pregnancies.18
Tanzania has a supportive policy and legal framework for GBV. However, many forms of GBV, including intimate
partner violence and rape, are tolerated by both men and women—although the justifications for acceptance differ.
Women and girls are also frequently blamed for causing or provoking GBV. In part due to blame and shame, women
and girls rarely report GBV to authorities or seek other kinds of treatment or support. For example, President Kikwete
publicly stated that GBV should be included as one of the Millennium Development Goals. Furthermore, Tanzania’s
National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction lists violence against women as one of its indicators of poverty—
which is rare among poverty reduction strategy papers in other countries.19
The Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, shows that 45 percent of women aged 15-49 have experienced either
physical or sexual violence, while nearly half (47 percent) of those ever married experienced either emotional, physical
or sexual violence. Women are also largely at risk of FGM/C, the prevalence rate in Kenya being 27 percent.
Furthermore, children also experience sexual violence which are usually perpetrated by persons the victims know.
16 Republic of Rwanda 2011. National Policy against Gender-Based Violence.
http://197.243.22.137/migeprof/fileadmin/_migrated/content_uploads/GBV_Policy-2_1_.pdf
17 UNFFPA 2024. Ending Gender Based Violence and Harmful Practices. https://uganda.unfpa.org/en/topics/ending-gender-based-violence-and-
harmful-practices
18 Sexual Gender-Based Violence among Adolescent Girls and Young Women 10-24 Years during COVID-19 Pandemic, Bukedi Region, Eastern
Uganda. Uganda National Institute of Public Health. Quarterly Epidemiological Bulletin: October–December, 2022 Volume 7 / Issue 4 /Article No.
4.
19 USAID 2008. Gender-based Violence in Tanzania: An Assessment of Policies, Services, and Promising Interventions.
http://www.healthpolicyplus.com/archive/ns/pubs/hpi/Documents/1454_1_TZ_GBV_Summary_FINAL_6_8_11_acc.pdf
12

--- Table 1 on Page 156 ---
Tanzania has a supportive policy and legal framework for GBV. However, many forms of GBV, including intimate
partner violence and rape, are tolerated by both men and women—although the justifications for acceptance differ.
Women and girls are also frequently blamed for causing or provoking GBV. In part due to blame and shame, women
and girls rarely report GBV to authorities or seek other kinds of treatment or support. For example, President Kikwete
publicly stated that GBV should be included as one of the Millennium Development Goals. Furthermore, Tanzania’s
National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction lists violence against women as one of its indicators of poverty—
which is rare among poverty reduction strategy papers in other countries.19
The Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, shows that 45 percent of women aged 15-49 have experienced either
physical or sexual violence, while nearly half (47 percent) of those ever married experienced either emotional, physical
or sexual violence. Women are also largely at risk of FGM/C, the prevalence rate in Kenya being 27 percent.
Furthermore, children also experience sexual violence which are usually perpetrated by persons the victims know.

=== PAGE 157 ===
However, social stigma and family shame result in the knowledge of the abuse being kept within the family. At times,
families are paid “damage money” to buy their silence. This culture of secrecy serves to aid the impunity of the
perpetrators.20 In regard to GBV and Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment, DaIMA will seek to support prevention
of GBV and SEAH, by creating awareness, supporting reporting and referral of cases through establishment of Grievance
Redress Mechanisms in the IFAD baseline projects as detailed in the Gender Action Plan.
Programme beneficiaries
DaIMA will benefit about 590,000 households (HHs) of which 145,000 HHs will be involved in dairy value chains. The
project will target 40 %women, 20 % youth (50 % female) and 5 % vulnerable groups including minorities and PWDs.
The majority are dairy farmers in intensive and semi-intensive systems who currently sell or aim to sell milk in formal
and informal markets. These smallholder dairy farmers have generally between 1 to 5 dairy cows (6 to 10 kg of
milk/cow/day) in zero-grazing/intensive or semi-zero grazing/semi-intensive systems. They are the essential segment
of producers who need to be scaled to support the formalization of the dairy sector and foster sustainable
intensification based on sound investments and viable business development (see Feasibility Study and Market
Studies). Dairy value chain support will also benefit medium and large commercial farmers (6 or more dairy cows, 5-9
kg of milk/cow/day in semi-intensive systems, 12 or more kg/cow/day in intensive systems). Under Output 2.3, the
Programme will also benefit (i) pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, and (ii) medium- and large-scale extensive farmers
through the rehabilitation/ improved management of 268,000 hectares of rangelands. Entry points to reach dairy
farmers will also benefit from the Programme’s support, including dairy cooperatives and milk collection centres
(MCCs), L-FFS and Pastoralist field schools (PFS), farmers and community-based organisations. These smallholder
farmers will be mainly targeted through Component 1 and Component 2. Beneficiaries of Component 3 will be the
larger formal stakeholders in the value chain (dairy cooperatives, private enterprises, processors, input suppliers) who
have the capacity (with the support of technical assistance) to prepare business plans for green investments, submit
funding applications, and manage implementation. These formal stakeholders will provide backward and forward
linkages, extension services and agro supplies to the smallholders.
20 2012. Sexual and Gender Based Violence in Kenya: A Call For Action Overview of Gender Based violence
https://ncpd.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Policy-Brief-26-Sexual-and-Gender-Based-Violence-in-Kenya.pdf
13

--- Table 1 on Page 157 ---
However, social stigma and family shame result in the knowledge of the abuse being kept within the family. At times,
families are paid “damage money” to buy their silence. This culture of secrecy serves to aid the impunity of the
perpetrators.20 In regard to GBV and Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment, DaIMA will seek to support prevention
of GBV and SEAH, by creating awareness, supporting reporting and referral of cases through establishment of Grievance
Redress Mechanisms in the IFAD baseline projects as detailed in the Gender Action Plan.

=== PAGE 158 ===
Targeting strategy and approaches
The targeting strategy will comprise of: (i) geographic targeting, to identify participating Districts and regions and sites
in Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda, where dairy has been developed and there is potential to develop the
identified VC interventions, and where mature clustered farmers exist for marketing potential. The programme
intervention areas are identified based on the integration of: (i) the climate risk hotspots; (ii) absolute methane
emissions from the dairy sector; (iii) soil carbon sequestration potential in pastures and rangelands; (iv) milk
production by district/county; and (v) complementarity with other international financing institutions (IFI)-funded
interventions, more particularly from IFAD (see figure 1 below); (ii) direct targeting of the vulnerable households,
including those women headed, youth, vulnerable and marginalized and PWDS to reach the 40 per cent and 30 per
cent quota for youth (iii) self-targeting, with activities geared towards the needs of small and medium producers that
are engaged in dairy and iv) Enabling and capacity-building measures to develop the capacity and self-confidence of
those with less of a voice and less power so that they can articulate their needs and participate in planning, decision-
making and project activities.
PART 2: GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN
DaIMA will target 40 per cent women, 30 per cent youth, and 5 per cent comprising of persons living with disabilities
(PWDs), indigenous people. Women, youth and PWDs will be targeted with technological solutions to reduce methane
and GHG emissions, and the financial support services to sustain efficient production and marketing processes.
Indigenous people will be protected by ensuring that they will not be displaced from their ancestral land; children will
benefit from nutrition interventions, which will include milk provision through the school feeding program and other
interventions such as mother nutrition education.
The objective of this DaIMA GESI action plan is to ensure that women, youth, people with disabilities and marginalized
groups have equal opportunities to participate in, and benefit from, the program as men in these communities. Social
inclusion considerations for these groups will be achieved by increasing their participation in project activities,
economic empowerment opportunities, access to information and skills as well as linkage to market and value
addition. In this regard, the action plan primarily proposes to integrate GESI actions within the project activities and
sub-activities and only proposes separate GESI actions such as those to aggress GBV and SEAH where a direct fit is not
guaranteed with core DaIMA activities.
14
T
O
h
t
e
h
t a
-
e r
-
-
-
r g
s w
e t b e n e f ic ia r ie s f o r D a IM A w ill in c lu d e :
s m a llh o ld e r d a ir y fa r m e r s / e n t r e p r e n e u r s , p a s t o r a lis t s , in p u t a n d s e r v ic e p r o v id e r s in c lu d in g d a ir y
p r o c e s s o r s a n d t h e ir c o m m u n it ie s , in c lu d in g w o m e n , y o u t h , c h ild r e n a n d v u ln e r a b le g r o u p s s u c h a s
p e o p le w it h d is a b ilit ie s a n d in d ig e n o u s p e o p le in v o lv e d in d a ir y k e e p in g .
h o w ill b e n e f it in o r d e r t o f a c ilit a t e s e r v ic e s t o s m a llh o ld e r d a ir y f a r m e r s w ill in c lu d e ;
f in a n c ia l s e r v ic e p r o v id e r s : P a r t ic ip a t in g F in a n c ia l In s t it u t io n s ( P F Is ) w h ic h w ill b e o ff e r in g fin a n c ia l
s e r v ic e s t o t h e s m a ll h o ld e r d a ir y e n t r e p r e n e u r s a n d M S M E m a r k e t s e .g ., d a ir y c o o p e r a t iv e s a n d
S A C C O s a n d o t h e r m ic r o -fin a n c e in s t it u t io n s ( M F Is ) .
o t h e r s e r v ic e p r o v id e r s : s u c h a s a d v is o r y a n d e x t e n s io n s t a f f, in p u t s u p p lie r s , a g r o v e t s , v a lu e c h a in
a c t o r s ;
p r o g r a m m a n a g e m e n t : D a IM A F a c ilit y C o o r d in a t io n U n it a t IF A D a n d im p le m e n t in g p a r t n e r s o r fo c a l
p o in t s a t c o u n t r y s u b s id ia r ie s .

=== PAGE 159 ===
Purpose
The purpose of the DaIMA Programme is to increase smallholder dairy production and associated input and service
providers’ revenue, and/or reduce their production costs through reduced methane and other GHG emissions by
adopting the GHG emission reduction technologies and financial services to efficiently sustain production and
marketing processes.
Objectives of the Programme
i. To strengthen systemic and institutional capacities of the livestock sector to enable smallholder dairy
producers and local value chain actors to reduce CH4 and other GHG emissions
ii. To increase production, market knowledge and tools for smallholder dairy producers and private sector
value chain operators for a low-emission, climate-resilient, and sustainable pathway
iii. To enable smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain actors access to required
financial services to make the necessary transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient, and sustainable
livestock production and value chain development.
Theory of change, assumptions and risks
The programme will integrate GESI considerations into DaIMA Components and activities, complemented by targeted
interventions for women and youth to overcome the specific barriers identified. This approach will enable programme
opportunities to be expanded to women, young women and men, vulnerable groups and persons with disabilities,
while also addressing the main gaps and barriers they face to inclusion.
The GESI theory of change is founded on the need to identify and address systemic barriers and social and negative
gender norms that perpetuate inequalities and exacerbate barriers for women, youth and vulnerable groups that
preventing from equally participating in and benefitting from dairy production. Therefore, the integration of GESI
activities within the Programme Components is critical. Component 1 is about strengthened national capacities and
enabling environment for low-emission climate-resilient dairy sector, whereas Component 2 addresses low emission
and climate resilient primary dairy production and Component 3 on Green Dairy Financing Facility (GDFF).
DaIMA aims to address the following challenges: (i) strengthening climate resilience, (ii) reducing emissions across the
dairy value chain; (iii) the reduction of GHG emissions per kg of milk; and (iv) improving the livelihoods of dairy farmers
in East Africa. This requires a holistic approach to improving all aspects of the dairy sector, from improving policy,
institutional and service delivery environments to building the capacity of smallholder farmers including women, youth
and the marginalized. It also includes measures to facilitate access to finance and innovative technologies with
mitigation and adaptation benefits. As a result, female and youth dairy farmers and processors will be motivated to
adopt more efficient, climate-resilient practices that will increase incomes, reduce production costs, and help combat
climate change. Central to this transformative approach is the symbiosis of private sector support and financial access
within the dairy sector. This integration aims to foster market growth while promoting climate resilience and reducing
GHG emissions.
To address these gendered barriers, DaIMA will contribute to gender equality and women empowerment women by:
(i) Increasing women economic empowerment through access to improved dairy breeds, better access to productive
resources and services, marketing and value addition and access to finance by targeting women dairy smallholders in
dairy production; (iii) Balancing and reducing women workloads related to dairy keeping through improved
technologies, climate-resilient crop and sustainable productions and greater efficiency; (iv) increased women
participation, voice and decision-making in dairy farmer organizations and cooperatives (v) Increasing positive gender
and social norms such as joint benefits sharing through the GALS methodology and (vi) Contributing to policy
15

=== PAGE 160 ===
engagement by undertaking gender analyses or developing policy briefs in the planned related policy reviews. These
interventions will target women involved in dairy production, young females and males and vulnerable groups
including PWDs among beneficiary communities. Addressing barriers to gender equality and women empowerment,
youth, nutrition and social inclusion will ensure that project benefits will be equally distributed. This will be integrated
throughout the project activities strengthening capacity of those responsible for programme delivery and
strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation system to ensure sex and gender disaggregated data. The section
below highlights specific GESI interventions that will be integrated under each of the project activities for alignment
and ease of implementation by teams.
COMPONENT 1: STRENGTHENED NATIONAL CAPACITIES AND ENHANCED ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR LOW
EMISSIONS CLIMATE RESILIENT DAIRY SECTORS
1. Output 1.1: Climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment established.
Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate Dairy Sector policies, strategies and regulations for climate-change adaptation
and mitigation. In the four countries, the Programme will support the Ministries, Departments and aligned institutions
in charge of the dairy sector to review and formulate national policies, strategies, and regulations that are gender and
socially inclusive and essential for a sustainable transformation of the dairy sector, in line with the NDCs and NAPs.
This includes aspects related to mainstreaming CC adaptation and mitigation, and adopting export and import
regulations that favour sustainable development and private sector engagement and investment in the dairy value
chain (taxation of imports of dairy produce, specialized equipment, inputs, such as germplasm, fodder seeds, feed
additives, solar cooling, biodigesters, etc.). Resources will be provided to (i) mobilize national and international
expertise for policy review and formulation; (ii) facilitate stakeholder consultations to ensure that the policy review
and dialogues are inclusive; (iii) validation processes, and (iv) the preparation of policy briefs and communication
materials for popularization.
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Support the review and preparation of national dairy policies, strategies, and regulations to
mainstream climate-change adaptation and mitigation. Priorities in the four countries will be the following. In Kenya,
(i) the Dairy Industry Strategy and Investment Plan to guide the sustainable transition of the dairy sector; (ii) the draft
National Strategy and legal framework for Animal Feed and Fodder; (iii) a National Strategy for Animal Breeding and
breeding regulations (iv) the draft Dairy Industry Act (1958); (v) the Kenya Agricultural Sector Extension Policy (KASEP),
(v) the development of compost and bio-slurry standards; and (vi) milk and milk product standards on food safety and
quality. In Rwanda, the upcoming Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation 5 (PSTA5) provides a framework for a
low-carbon and climate-resilient agriculture sector. Within this framework, the Programme will support the review of:
(i) national climate and sectorial policies that are regulating the diary sector; a new agriculture and livestock policy for
Rwanda is currently under development which includes climate resilient livestock production; (ii) the regulatory
framework and standard operating procedures (SOP’s) for dairy value chain operators in direct collaboration with
Rwanda Food and Drugs Authority (FDA) and Rwanda Standards Board (RSB), for milk quality, standards and safety,
feed formulation, energy efficiency, and CC; (iii) the 2016 Ministerial Order to address new dairy value chain realities,
including the MCP-model and the need to regulate the raw milk market, whose actors are mainly women and young
men. Support will be given to the formulation of a national regulatory framework for the private veterinary practice
including for Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs) and Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS) facilitators with
considerations of increasing women and youth participation; (iv) support will also be given to RNDP for the formulation
of the dairy value chain (DVC) regulatory law empowering the platform to conduct overall DVC regulation as in EAC
member countries. In Tanzania, the Programme will support finalizing the draft national Livestock Policy, as well as
the review of: (i) the Animal Health Act (2003) to update aspects related to private practitioners; (ii) the Dairy Act to
update regulations on raw milk trade considering that raw milk is mainly traded by women and young men; (iii) the
16

=== PAGE 161 ===
formulation of disease contingency and control plans; (iii) the draft Tanzania Dairy Development Strategy and roadmap
to become carbon neutral, sustainable and inclusive. In Uganda, the Programme will support: (i) finalizing the National
Livestock Development Policy, integrating CC priorities (breeding, feeding), enabling policies for private sector
investments, research strategies on climate-resilient feed germplasm to offset predicted yield declines, as well as
rangeland ecology; (ii) the review of the Dairy Industry Act, the Animal Disease and Health Act, and the Animal Breeding
Act); (iii) support drafting regulations for animal identification, dairy cattle breeding, livestock insurance) to integrate
CC mitigation; (iv) review land policies and regulation to mitigate land tenure insecurity for dairy farmers.
The gender activity will review of existing IFAD investment project baselines to analyse the barriers for women, youth
and vulnerable groups and recommend actions where DaIMA will be operating. This will be undertaken using the Pro
WEAI approach adapting the IFAD Empowerment Indicator. And will include an analysis of (i) Existing laws, sectoral
policies ( in review), regulations, and institutional practices (ii) Cultural norms and beliefs related to women and men
in targeted communities in relation to dairy production (iii) Gender roles, responsibilities and Time Used in dairy
activities (iv)Access to and Control over Assets and Resources and (v) Patterns of power and decision-making to identify
gaps and opportunities for advancing gender equality and women empowerment. This analysis will recommend and
inform targeted interventions to address identified gender barriers and challenges specific to the dairy sector if not
already complimented by ongoing IFAD investments.
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Support the regional policy dialogue to mainstream climate-change adaptation and mitigation
in regional dairy policies, strategies, and regulations. In coordination with regional and national dairy platforms and
stakeholders, DaIMA will support a region-level EAC assessment and proposals for further regional alignment on dairy
sector regulations, including export and import regulations, to accelerate regional convergence in dairy standards and
market integration, and to enhance climate responsiveness. National stakeholders will be supported to participate in
regional events. Under this activity the programme will facilitate women, youth and vulnerable groups participation in
the events. This will include supporting women with childcare, special provisions for PWDs access and participation.
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 National dairy value chain governance and awareness creation. The aim of this activity is to
enhance dairy value chain governance and to mainstream the importance of climate-change in this process. At national
level, the national dairy boards (KDB, DDA, TDB, RNDP) and other relevant professional bodies of private stakeholders,
will be supported to create gender awareness in the dairy policy dialogue, to create awareness and education/capacity
building on climate, feed and dairy policies and regulations and how they affect women, youth and the vulnerable.
Sub-activity 1.1.1.4 District/regional/county level dairy value chain governance and planning. Local-level multi-
stakeholder platforms involving delegates from dairy value chain stakeholders will participate in the annual planning
and review of Programme activities. DaIMA will ensure participants women, youth dairy cooperative members, milk
collectors, milk processors, service providers of artificial insemination (AI), veterinary services, extension staff and local
government.
Activity 1.1.2 Launch awareness campaigns on nutritional benefits of milk and food safety aspects. This will be a
targeted support to milk consumption and nutrition awareness, accompanied by nutrition education and social
behaviour change among smallholder producer and consumer households, informal dairy value chain actors and milk
handlers in the school milk program. The aim is to improve nutritionally vulnerable groups’ consumption of milk,
therefore enhancing their individual health and nutrition. The Programme will support milk consumption and nutrition
awareness through increased availability, accessibility, affordability, and consumption of high-quality and safe dairy
products, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour change and communication (SBCC) to reach out
to informal dairy value chain actors, milk handlers at home and institutions and nutritionally vulnerable groups. This
17

=== PAGE 162 ===
activity will target 40 per cent women ensuring male engagement to increase the participation of men in improving
household nutrition. Women will be trained as ToTs and facilitated to roll out community outreach campaign sessions
and food exhibitions and demonstrations.
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Public awareness on the contribution of milk to nutrition and resilience, with focus on climate
vulnerable population. The awareness raising will use various community platforms such as extension, L-FFS,
MCC/cooperatives will include women and other vulnerable and marginalized groups meeting quotas. Topics will
include improved milk treatment, food safety, handling and nutritional benefits of dairy produce, pasteurized and
processed milk. In Rwanda, it will include participation in dairy fairs/expos under the auspices of RNDP to showcase
climate-friendly and energy efficient local processing and consumption of dairy products. In Tanzania and Uganda, the
Programme will scale up school milk programs for improved nutrition of vulnerable children especially those under
five years.
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Build capacity of dairy inspection to ensure milk quality and safety and reduce waste. Dairy
inspection is essential for sector-level milk quality and safety, thus encouraging formal market growth and reduction
of milk rejection and waste (less GHG emission intensities). The Programme will provide technical training and
equipment to the actors in the informal dairy sector, especially women and male youth, strengthen capacities of
inspections to ensure development and enforcement of milk quality and safety standards. Women and youth will be
considered among the inspectors to increase their capacity development and execution of inspection, creating jobs.
Activity 1.1.3 Improve land tenure security for sustainable dairy farming. The Programme will adopt a fit-for-purpose
approach to identify and mitigate tenure risks. Activities to mitigate this risk will vary depending on the type of land,
type of governance and sex and age of the person accessing and controlling the land. For pastoral and agropastoral
systems, the focus will be on the identification of use of rangelands by gender, their protection and supporting gender
and social inclusive participatory planning and management. In Rwanda, all land is registered and individually owned.
The focus will be on optimizing land productivity through land consolidation and land use planning. Activities will
include capacity building and support to participatory planning processes to create local-level capacities.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and preparation of training materials. The Programme will mobilize
specialized technical assistance to: (a) implement a rapid tenure governance capacity assessment, including a tenure
risk assessment for the Programme target areas analysing gender barriers for women; (b) develop training material to
increase local authorities’ capacity to secure gender and social inclusive tenure rights for dairy production and the
public’s capacity to identify and secure legitimate tenure rights. Based on the national tenure context, each dairy
production system’s tenure risks in terms of gendered access, use and security of land will be identified and assessed,
and appropriate gendered mitigating strategies will be proposed.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure at decentralized level. The focus will be on capacity building
of local authorities and raising public awareness on options to incrementally increase tenure security for women and
men of all ages and the vulnerable such as allocation of government land to youth groups. The Programme will support
public awareness campaigns on tools available to secure tenure rights for women, youth and the vulnerable.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3: Participatory planning of tenure for dairy farms on communal and customary land at local level.
The Programme will scale-up best practices in gender and social inclusive communal rangelands participatory planning
and management. This activity will support the participation of women as community members and leaders in the
planning of tenure for dairy farms on communal and customary land for example ensuring the community committees
include 40 percent women.
18

=== PAGE 163 ===
2. Output 1.2 Improved service delivery to the dairy sector
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthen veterinary services for better animal health, higher milk yields and reduced losses. A key
barrier to reduce GHG emissions and sustainably increase the productivity of dairy animals is animal health and
welfare. Climate change exacerbates the emergence and re-emergence of diseases and infestation (East Coast Fever
– ECF, helminths infestation, etc.). Healthier animals are more resilient to climate hazards and more productive, with
less milk to be discarded, leading to a reduction of “unproductive” GHG emissions. The higher revenues provide
incentives for farmers to adopt animal health and welfare measures, especially if the benefits are equitably distributed
among the men, women and youth in the household. To expand the outreach and capacity of veterinary services, the
Programme will invest in proximity animal health support, as well as in national diagnostic capacity of veterinary
laboratories while supporting equitable capacity development targeting women service providers.
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Support the installation of both private and public veterinarians and veterinary
paraprofessionals. The Programme will implement the animal health support and disease control system, using the
“One Health” approach. The approach will have three levels: (i) support private veterinarians and para-veterinarians,
in particular young female and male practitioners; (ii) recruit and support livestock extension workers, while ensuring
gender (sex and age) equity in participation at local level; (iii) provide additional training to lead female, male and
youthful farmers from the L-FFS for coaching their peers and assist private female and male para-veterinarians and
livestock extension workers. In Kenya, veterinary education, and training programs to women and men from both
private and public veterinarians and veterinary paraprofessionals in the Programme area will be enhanced. In Rwanda,
support will be provided for the installation of young female and male veterinary doctors and veterinary technicians
as private practitioners to enhance accessibility of services while creating jobs. In Tanzania, female and male Livestock
Extension Workers (LEWs) will be equipped and trained, and private male and female paravets will be incentivised to
ensure the last mile animal health and extension services. In Uganda, the Programme will build capacity of female and
male veterinarians, para-veterinarian technicians, and community-based animal health workers (CAHWs) on One
Health principles, disease diagnosis, emerging and re-emerging diseases because of CC.
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Strengthening diagnostic capacity of veterinary laboratories and capacity to test quality of
animal feed. In Kenya, the Programme will improve disease control (surveillance and monitoring, contingency
planning, and treatment) of targeted diseases including modern diagnostic equipment in regional centres (located in
Nairobi i.e. Kabete and Embakasi, Nakuru, Kericho, Eldoret, Karatina, Garissa and Mariakani), testing kits, telemedicine.
In Rwanda, four (4) satellite laboratories will receive additional equipment for serology (ELISA) and molecular diagnosis
(PCR) to enable rapid detection of infectious diseases, as well as equipment for handling biological waste and the
establishment of environmentally friendly practices. The Programme will also strengthen the national veterinary
laboratory (NVL) to handle advanced diagnostic capacity for viral diseases affecting livestock. In Tanzania, the
Programme will: (a) strengthen the Tanzanian Veterinary Laboratories Agency (TVLA) and the Central Veterinary
Investigation Laboratory in Zanzibar; (b) support the establishment of district mobile laboratories that will serve LEWs
local (para)vets; (c) train female and male laboratory technicians for each mobile laboratory. In Uganda, veterinary
laboratories will be strengthened (equipment, reagents, consumables for sample collection and mobile laboratory
facility) for detection of the diseases related to CC. It will also establish a national data management system on
emerging and re-emerging diseases because of CC (TAD and zoonosis). In each country, the Programme will: (i)
enhance the capacity to undertake feed testing in the national research institutions (KALRO in Kenya, RAB and UR-
CAVM in Rwanda, NARO in Uganda, TALIRI in Tanzania); this includes equipment, training of young female and male
researchers, and inputs for testing feed samples; (ii) undertake on-farm feed sampling and laboratory quality testing
(e.g., dry matter, carbohydrates, protein, fat, minerals, vitamins).
19

=== PAGE 164 ===
Activity 1.2.2 Strengthen extension services for low-carbon and climate resilient dairy sector. To reach out to men,
women and youth dairy farmers, raise awareness and build their capacity in the field of CC mitigation and adaptation,
the Programme will adopt innovative extension models and tools (including digital), and enhance the capacity of
extension services. This activity will involve improving delivery of public and private extension services at farm and
cooperative/ aggregation levels, by female and male local (district/county) livestock officers who coordinate the
community-based extension system. To provide proximity advisory services on climate-smart practices, the
Programme will provide support through Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS), affirmatively ensuring the
involvement of female lead and participant farmers, youth, in mixed crop-livestock systems and Pastoralist Field
Schools (PFS) in grazing and pastoralist systems.
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Preparation of training modules for extension in climate mitigation and adaptation measures.
If required, specific topics that are part of the proposed pathways under Outputs 2.2 and 2.3 and related to CC will be
added to the modules of the L-FFS (or other extension approaches). The topics in the training modules related to
climate-smart milk production and handling could include: fodder production, harvesting and conservation; use of
conserved silage and urea-molasses multi-nutrient blocks (UMMB); supplementation (use of non-conventional feed
resources e.g. sweet potato vines or tannin-rich plants reducing and inhibiting CH4 production) reproductive
management; health management including One-Health aspects and management of anti-microbials, biogas and
manure management, use of drought-resistant fodder, application of crop residues, seed production (certification,
traceability, quality control), improved diet formulation to reduce emission intensities (use of feed formulation
software, such as the innovative SNV-developed Rumen8® tool), and animal welfare, including housing in zero-grazing
practices. The guidelines will be prepared on improved fodder cultivar and climate-smart technologies, innovative
management practices for pasture and fodder production, and agroforestry practices (e.g. leguminous fodder trees as
standalone or line trees). The L-FFS modules will be developed with the support of national or international technical
assistance. The L-FFS modules will include gender modules with strategies and guidelines to support women, youth
and vulnerable groups participation DaIMA will support the selection of female and young trainers.
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Training of master trainers (ToTs) and facilitators of extension systems in climate-change related
topics. The Programme will support the strengthening of existing L-FFS and the establishment of new L-FFS (aiming at
40 percent women and 30 percent youth). To support the sustainability and scaling up of the L-FFS, existing L-FFS/ PFS
male and female master trainers and facilitators will be trained on the specific topics listed above. The training modules
will include Gender and related topics.
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3 Promote innovative extension tools. These innovative extension tools could include: (i)
participatory extension approaches, such as the Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture (PICSA),
which has been piloted in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania, (ii) e-extension tools by using bulk SMS and internet to reach
more farmers, provide highly captivating and interactive packages, partner with other stakeholders including targeting
youth in the development of content and capacity and to improve ability to access and share knowledge and skills on
farming technologies, (iii) TV, radio and social media networks. In addition, other innovative extension tools could
include: in Kenya, the use of the agro-weather platform namely Kenya Agricultural Observatory Platform (KAOP), a
digital platform developed through a joint initiative between the KALRO and the KMD, designed to provide weather
information to support decision-making in the agricultural sector in Kenya to develop capacity of extension officers
and producers on climate change adaptability. In Tanzania, the iCow app and or other innovative extension tool will
be developed and promoted. In Rwanda digital agriculture solutions such as the smart-nkunganire system provides
services to farmers.
20

=== PAGE 165 ===
3. Output 1.3: Improved GHG MRV capacities & monitoring of climate vulnerabilities
To reliably track progress on the ambitious climate goals of the national NDCs, state-of-the-art systems of
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) of GHG emissions are needed within the participating countries, along
with national capacity to manage such systems, more particularly in the livestock sector. This Output will enable
countries to report with accuracy on emissions in the dairy sub-sector in their national GHG inventories at Tier 2 level,
and address the institutional, planning and knowledge barriers identified in the ToC. It will also enable countries to
capture the impact of investments in dairy on GHG emissions in their NDC and therefore contribute to their climate
commitments. Improved MRV systems will ensure that participating countries can conduct their own GHG calculations
with cutting-edge methods, develop their own mitigation pathways and policies, and attract more public and private
climate finance, including through carbon credits. This Output will also address the issues related to the data for
climate vulnerability assessment and national feed balances, all contributing to improved climate resilience. Countries
will receive implementation support from ILRI (Mazingira Centre and research stations) to execute Activities 1.3.1 and
1.3.2.
Activity 1.3.1: Develop capacity in the country on MRV system. The Programme will identify critical capacity needs at
national and local levels to improve the operation of MRV systems by young and older women and men. This will help
developing consistent MRV systems for the dairy sub-sector that allows systematic updates, so that the impact of
interventions of the Programme, and beyond, can be monitored over time, and progress can be assessed against an
established baseline.
Sub-activity 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and development in capturing, recording, tracking, and reporting data on
dairy GHG emissions. This sub-activity will carry out in depth capacity assessments of existing MRV tools and
frameworks in the four countries, and the place of dairy in them. Based on these assessments, capacity development
will be provided to design activity data questionnaires for Tier 2 GHG emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers, weights,
productivity, feed rations, animal health interventions, manure management and grassland management) and develop
a data management system to ensure reliable flow of information between the various national and local agencies
involved in the MRV system. ILRI’s Mazingira Centre will provide trainings to young women and men from the countries
on data collection protocols adjusted to their needs to relevant stakeholders (technicians, university staff, staff of
national research institutes and ministries, and other relevant actors). ILRI will provide dedicated digital data collection
tools (e.g. ODK), data quality control, and calculation of GHG emissions for inventory reporting, following established
protocols.
Sub-activity 1.3.1.2: Developing MRV systems for the livestock sub-sector. This intervention will include baseline,
measurement of individual mitigation activities, impact assessment on absolute emissions and emission intensities
and institutional arrangements. To ensure sustainability and impact at scale, the sub-activity will update of national
livestock census questionnaires to include activity data requirements for GHG inventories outlined by IPCC on other
cattle and livestock. This will allow countries to track livestock productivity and to report on enteric CH and manure
4
CH and N O emissions, and soil carbon storage in grasslands/ rangelands, following international inventory guidelines,
4 2
using IPCC Tier 2 methodology.
Activity 1.3.2: Improve GHG emission measurements in dairy value chains. On-farm data like animal live weights and
milk yields are necessary to calculate Tier2 GHG emissions. Emission factors also need to be improved to reflect local
conditions (e.g., animal metabolism, feed composition). This activity will comprise the following sub-activities:
21

=== PAGE 166 ===
Sub-activity 1.3.2.1: Collect activity data on farm to calculate Tier 2 dairy emissions under various herd, feed, animal
health and manure management situations. The Programme will finance the collection on-farm activity data for
baseline and “with-project” situation, using digital tools (e.g. livestock Tier 2-specific ODK tool). This includes data on
animal numbers, weights, productivity, feed rations and manure management system. The measurements will be
disaggregated by sex and age of the owner if the animal. This sub-activity will be performed annually with the support
of ILRI, in direct partnership with national research institutions and academia of the four countries, to ensure
sustainability and replication through the transfer of capacity (see output 1.4). This activity will inform the
Programme’s M&E system and provide data for baseline and “with-project” situation.
Activity 1.3.4: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments. Together with improvements to extension services under
output 1.2, the Programme will seek to improve the accuracy and use of information (climate, feed availability) to last
mile-users in the dairy sector especially women as livestock caretakers. This will include building the capacity of
devolved CC units and decentralized meteorological offices to develop and disseminate climate and usage of
information services by different groups, including (i) impacts of CC on the dairy sector; and (ii) information on
availability of feed, through tools like national feed balance sheets.
Sub-activity 1.3.4.1: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments, including impacts on the dairy sector, at local level.
It will consist of carrying out dairy sector climate risk and vulnerability assessments at local level, based on historical
and projected climate data. This will involve the development of agro-climatic zone maps and Dairy Sector suitability
maps based on the current climate (1991-2020 period). The assessments will include gendered aspects related to
vulnerabilities faced by women and other groups such as pastoralists etc.
4. Output 1.4 Knowledge management and regional cooperation enhanced.
The Programme will facilitate transfer of knowledge through regional and South-South and Triangular Cooperation
(SSTC), with the objective to replicate the transformative practices for climate-resilient and low-carbon dairy adopted
by the Programme. The EAC / AU-IBAR will contribute to the implementation, by facilitating regional platforms, sharing
experiences, exporting best practices, and spearheading policy dialogue. ILRI Mazingira Centre, as a State-of-the-Art
environmental and regional research and education Centre, will also contribute. This Output will address the
institutional, planning and knowledge barriers identified in the ToC. Shared knowledge will enhance future low-carbon
planning in the dairy sector, minimize climate risks and enable participating countries to take advantage of available
climate smart opportunities within the region.
Activity 1.4.1. Support to Regional Centres of Excellence for technology validation and for maintaining a regional
database on practices, GHG emissions and adaptation indicators. To ensure sustainability and transfer of capacity to
national institutions, the Programme will provide scientific support combined with capacity development targeting
female and young officers in the “regional centres of excellence” to export knowledge regionally and globally on CC
and GHG emissions for the dairy value chain. National Centres of Excellence (or “knowledge hubs”) will include national
agricultural research institutions (e.g., KALRO in Kenya, NARO in Uganda, TALIRI in Tanzania, RAB in Rwanda), local
universities (e.g., Makerere in Uganda; University of Nairobi, Eldoret or Maseno; University of Dar es Salaam or Sokoine
University of Agriculture (SUA) in Tanzania). It will build on the legacy of the East Africa Agricultural Productivity
Programme (EAAPP, World Bank-funded), which has built Regional Centre of Excellence (RCoE) in the dairy sector in
Kenya.
22

--- Table 1 on Page 166 ---
 | Shared knowledge will enhance future low-carbon
planning in the dairy sector, minimize climate risks and enable participating countries to take advantage of available | 
climate smart opportunities within the region. | 

=== PAGE 167 ===
Sub-activity 1.4.1.1: Support to regional Centres of Excellence in technology validation and dissemination. The
Programme will assist the above-mentioned institutions with (i) technical trainings and protocols for GHG
measurements (emission factors, soil carbon storage) and estimation methods to build their own capacity for research,
MRV and technology validation linked to climate change mitigation, (ii) research capacity for conducting innovative
research such as optimizing the biogas process for enhanced energy and nutrient recovery and building efficient
biodigester technologies, (iii) vocational training and development of materials, standards, university-level educational
curricula and guidelines integrating youth and women, and (iv) knowledge, information and visibility products, related
to the four focus areas feeding, animal health, manure management and biogas, and grassland management and soil
carbon sequestration.
Sub-activity 1.4.1.2: Develop and maintain a regional database/ repository on practices, GHG emissions per sources
and systems, and climate change adaptation. This sub-activity will consist in developing, maintaining, and promoting
a regional database on best practices, and their impact on GHG emissions per source and livestock production system,
and adaptation indicators. ILRI has a large repository of training materials on its open-access “CGSpace” platform,
which will be leveraged, and made available to all actors in the Programme, with the support of the EAC.
Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional cooperation platforms and participation to regional/ global networks for
knowledge exchange and policy dialogue on climate-smart dairy sector transformation. The regional collaboration
platforms will include various public and private stakeholders, including the EAC, AU-IBAR, IFAD, FAO, ILRI, the East
and Southern Africa Dairy Association (ESADA), local government partners, centres of excellence, international
organisations and NGOs, and involve private sector platforms and networks (e.g. One Health Research and Education
Centre in Africa – OHRECA; Global Research Alliance Manure Management Network; Global Dairy Platform; Nutrient
Circularity Network; National Biogas Stakeholders Network in Kenya). The participants will include women and youth.
The Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD), through its Center for Pastoral Areas and Livestock
Development (ICPALD), will be invited to share it experience in facilitating appropriate and applicable knowledge,
research, and technology development, including their domestication, adoption, and transfer through regional
platforms.
Sub-activity 1.4.2.1: Regional platform for knowledge sharing and policy dialogue to enhance low-emission, climate
resilient dairy development. A regional platform – involving the above-mentioned entities - will be organised on a
rotational basis in each of the participating countries to share experiences and scientific innovations and best practices
implemented on farm. The regional platform will function as the knowledge management mechanism for the
Programme. It will capture and disseminate good practices and lessons learned from both public sector, private sector,
networks and the research and academic community. This sub-activity will provide evidence – generated from the
Programme M&E system - on the GHG efficiency gains (from breeding, artificial insemination/ herd management, feed,
animal health), circularity (manure management, recycling) and carbon sequestration. Success stories for replication
(e.g. Kenya for Tier 2 MRV), scientific innovations (animal nutrition / TIMPs, manure management for continuous
improvement) will be documented. It will finance annual regional workshops, conferences, seminars, tours (exchange
visits), meetings and policy briefs ensuring participation quotas for women and youth are met.
Sub-activity 1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global climate policy mechanisms. In practice, the sub-activity will
consist of a joint participation of the 4 countries in global and regional events (global science and policy mechanisms
on dairy and climate change) such as the Greenhouse Gas and Animal Agriculture Conference – GGAA 2025, the African
Climate Summit, the African Dairy Conference, and the UNFCCC COP). The objective will be to present the progress
and results from the Programme for scaling-up and replication, increase its visibility and engage with other countries
23

=== PAGE 168 ===
in sharing experience and learning. Participants in these conferences will include women, youth leaders and include
other intersectional / marginalizing attributes such as disability.
Sub-activity 1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC). This sub-activity will support the emergence of
a global network of experience and expertise on reducing GHG emissions, especially methane, in dairy production and
value chains, as well as financing solutions to support these reductions. This sub-activity will finance the participation
in knowledge-exchange programs, including through IFAD’s “Learning Routes” with e.g. Argentina, Brazil (Embrapa),
Costa Rica and Uruguay on Tier2 analysis and climate impact assessments in the dairy sector. Other initiatives for SSTC
will be identified and assessed by the Regional Steering Committee in collaboration with the EAC. It will finance study
tours and gender and socially inclusive country delegations to workshops to share innovations and scalable practices
generated by the Programme.
COMPONENT 2: LOW EMISSION AND CLIMATE RESILIENT PRIMARY DAIRY PRODUCTION
5. Output 2.1: Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened.
Activity 2.1.1 Strengthen dairy cooperatives on organizational management and service delivery. This activity aims
to strengthen cooperative, organizational, and technical capacities of dairy cooperatives, and raise their climate-
change and gender and social inclusion awareness of their management team. Also enhance the enrolment of women
and youth dairy value chain actors in the cooperative membership and leadership. Support will also be provided to
establish or enhance their network of MCCs and MCPs, and their business linkages.
Sub-activity 2.1.1.1 Strengthen the governance and management structures of dairy cooperatives. This sub-activity
will include: (i) training on cooperative governance and management practices for all management, supervisory and
general committees of dairy cooperatives, (ii) the business coaching of cooperatives by business development service
providers, (iii) where desirable, assistance for the registration as a formal dairy cooperative; and (iv) the participation
in national and regional events that are essential for dairy value chain governance, promoting inclusive policy, and
business dialogues.
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Strengthen capacity to reduce milk losses and ensure milk quality and safety. At the aggregation
stage, up to approximately 8 percent of the milk is lost via spillage and spoilage. Aiming at reducing unproductive GHG
emissions due to milk loss or quality loss, this sub-activity is to assist dairy cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs in upgrading
their technical capacity in milk quality control covering raw milk testing at milk collection, hygiene, and initial
processing beyond the sale of raw milk, in line with national and regional food safety standards. The support will assist
women and youth to acquire (i) basic equipment for milk collection (motorcycles, milk cans and can holders, testing
equipment), (ii) insulated milk transport vehicles (demonstration purpose); and (iii) training on milk quality, food safety
and hygiene including informal milk vendors, transporters and technical staff of cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs
ensuring women and youth participate.
Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Expand the outreach and capacity of dairy cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs. The targeted MCCs
and MCPs will be supported to develop gender and youth responsive action plans to ensure opportunities for youth
employment such as inclusive and equal employment opportunities ensuring women can work such as ‘zero tolerance’
to GBV and SEAH and other inclusive policies and practices. This may include trainings or technical assistance for such
institutional capacity building.
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4 Create gender awareness and roll out GALS among households of dairy farmers. Gender
transformative approaches will be integrated in the Programme. Capacity building and trainings for stakeholders on
24

=== PAGE 169 ===
gender equality and women empowerment will be rolled out across the four countries. This will be done for national,
regional and community level stakeholders. The enhanced Gender Action Learning System (GALS+) methodology will
be used to address power relations and inequalities especially targeting households and at group or community levels.
As men and women have diverse ways of coping and adapting to the adverse impacts of CC, GALS+ includes (i) an
integrated climate component to strengthen the mitigation measures and adaptive capacities of households and
communities to CC; (ii) nutrition and food safety aspects. DaIMA will support: (i) gender awareness and targeting
workshops for staff of implementation units and contractors; (ii) training lead farmers and cooperative committees in
the GALS methodology; (iii) rolling out of GALS in L-FFS households including support for community outreach sessions;
and (iv) national gender sensitization and training workshops for the management of dairy cooperatives. This activity
will include trainings on the prevention of GBV and SEA. Specifically, DaIMA will ensure awareness on GBV and
prevention of SEA training for each new employee, intern/fellow, volunteer, contractor, board member or partner as
part of their orientation. This may include development of Project guidelines or policy with clear reporting channels
and redress mechanisms.
Activity 2.1.2 Build and enhance Productive Alliances along the dairy value chain. The Programme will provide
support to productive alliances between farmer cooperatives and enterprises with farmer-allied engagement models,
and scaling-up of gender and social inclusive dairy clusters. This will enable female and young farmers to access
affordable, high-quality inputs and services.
Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Strengthen cooperatives’ capacity in business and financial management. The aim is to ensure
that dairy cooperatives and their MCCs) are run as viable business enterprises. Therefore, the Programme will support
cooperatives in building out business plans and partnerships for expanding and enhancing the services they offer
member farmers (e.g., facilitated feed and AI service purchases checked-off against milk sales) – serving as “dairy
hubs”. These dairy hubs will build capacity of young farmer leads as mentors to increase youth engagement. For
implementation, providers of business development services (BDS) will be mobilized. In addition, the members of dairy
cooperatives and MCCs will receive: (i) financial literacy training, financial management training and equipment
(software and IT equipment); (ii) gender-sensitive and inclusive business management and business plan development
training (using participatory tools such as RuralInvest, developed by FAO). This activity will support job placements for
trained young people in participating MCCs and MCPs as part of increasing their employability and creating jobs.
Further, youth trainees will receive business mentorship and coaching on business and financial management in well
performing dairy cooperatives and enterprises over an agreed period after completing their job placements.
Sub-activity 2.1.2.2. Build linkages along the dairy value chain. The suppliers of BDS will also provide capacity building
for negotiation of offtake agreements between cooperatives and private off takers (Productive Alliance model), as well
as public procurement (e.g. school or hospital procurement) for better milk prices guaranteed by contract. The aim is
to support establishing Productive Alliances with cooperatives and in designing, enhancing, and scaling key
components of their farmer engagement models, such as quality-based or volume-based price incentive terms offered
by processors, extension provision, and direct or facilitated provision of inputs and services. Through this support, a
pre-investment pipeline will be developed, and related financing needs identified. This support will facilitate youth
and women led alliances.
Sub-activity 2.1.2.3. Promote digitalization and traceability of dairy operations. The Programme will promote
digitalization and traceability to ensure quality and entry into formal supply arrangements that come with services,
and improved accounting (money and stock) for access to credit. Young technicians will be trained in these digital
solutions to scale up uptake and usage especially ensuring female farmers benefit. Use of transformative end-to-end
(E2) digital solutions is currently limited. Digitalized systems for monitoring on-farm activities, milk production
25

=== PAGE 170 ===
disaggregated by farm (gender of farmer), aggregation, transportation, and marketing will increase the efficiency and
transparency in the dairy value chain and cold chain. It will support off-takers and cooperatives to improve timely
payments to farmers, traceability of the quality of milk and linkage to advisory services where farmers might need
advisory interventions and access to finance. In the four countries, the Programme will enhance the capacity of milk
aggregators and cooperatives to improve their record-keeping and management through a digital cooperative and
MCC management information system (MIS) that will: (a) record the production of farmers, (b) track milk
flow/volumes and quality, (c) manage records of farmer payments allowing the development of digital profiles and
credit scores. Digital solutions developed by local agritechs and agri-fintechs (e.g. Emata in Uganda) or FAO (Collect
Mobile App) and youth led fintechs will be scaled-up to enable business operations management and credit-scoring
for better access to finance. A pilot will start with a limited number of cooperatives in each country and gradually
upgraded. The Programme will finance the required IT equipment and services.
Activity 2.1.3 Promote renewable energy (RE) and waste management technologies. The decarbonization of the dairy
value chain will be promoted. The Programme will focus on resource use efficiency and the substitution of fossil fuels
and firewood by green energy sources such as solar especially targeting female headed households or less wood-
intensive energy sources for milk cooling and processing. Insulated vehicles and solar energy supply are typically more
suitable solutions for larger MCCs (>3m3 Litres capacity). For processing, cold chain and quality preservation solutions
(e.g., cooling tanks, insulated / refrigerated trucks) are fundamental to business operations, yet not always used by
small-scale processors. Solar is the key mitigation solution and most applicable to relatively larger processors in the
short-term given high upfront costs (See Feasibility Study). Also, the management of waste and wastewater will be
promoted. There is limited adoption of waste management solutions along the value chain today. Processors only re-
use waste (e.g., by-product whey as feed) selectively and recycling is not a priority. Beneficiaries of the support would
be MCCs and SMEs.
Sub-activity 2.1.3.1 Assess the need and viability of renewable energy and waste management solutions. The aim
will be to assess the clean energy needs of dairy cooperatives and propose RE solutions (photovoltaic – PV, biogas
systems, etc.), energy-efficient equipment, and solid and water waste management solutions. The assessment will
look at scale and viability of such investments not just needs and potential tech solutions.
Sub-activity 2.1.3.2 Support the acquisition of renewable energy and waste management solutions. This would
include the upgrading or equipping of dairy cooperatives with suitable RE, PV-powered technology for milk coolers for
milk aggregation, milk transfer tanks, solar water heaters, water recycling systems, heat exchangers, milk pasteurizers,
butter churners and cheese makers. Solar energy will complement the existing electricity from national grid or
generated by standby generators to cool down milk to 4 Co. This activity will facilitate support for women to acquire
energy and labour-saving equipment for use in dairy at home or dairy value chain activities.
Sub-activity 2.1.3.3 Organize capacity building in energy efficiency and waste management. This training will focus
on the management of the RE solutions in dairy cooperatives, SMEs and MCCs. Such will include trainings for women
as lead trainers and participants in waste management activities.
6. Output 2.2: Breeding, feed and fodder, manure management improved.
Activity 2.2.1 Promote the adoption of climate-smart dairy breeds adapted to climate change. Breeding and genetic
improvement will aim at improving productivity and heat resistance of dairy cattle while preserving resilience of
livestock keeping systems by crossing indigenous and exotic breeds through artificial insemination (AI). Exotic breeds,
such as Holstein-Friesian or Jersey, are more vulnerable to high temperatures, and consequently to climate change,
26

=== PAGE 171 ===
but present a higher productive potential. Indigenous breeds, despite their lower productive potential and small size,
are a reservoir for resilience traits such as hardiness, mobility, rendering them more adaptable to extreme climatic
conditions and to certain diseases. Different generations of crossbreeds (exotic x native breeds) would contribute to
maintaining the resilience traits of indigenous breeds, while also adding productive traits to the gene pool, increasing
the offspring’s productivity in milk production, therefore contributing to reducing GHG emission intensity. Available
studies shows that improved dairy animals have a significantly lower GHG emission intensity per kg of milk due to their
higher production when compared to indigenous breeds. This activity will target women and youth to benefit from
distribution and ‘pass on’ of improved breeds to increase their economic empowerment.
Sub-activity 2.2.1.1 Make good quality semen for climate-smart breeds available, adaptable to extreme climatic
conditions and to diseases. The Programme will enhance availability and accessibility of germplasm of exotic that will
be crossed with local. This will be achieved through (i) the identification of potential climate-smart cattle breeds; (ii)
the import of sexed semen and/or embryos, if needed; (iii) the procurement of high genetic merit bulls to produce
sexed semen or no-sexed semen for national and regional use; (iii) the production and conservation of climate-smart
breeds' germplasm, using laboratory techniques like in-vitro fertilization, or simply artificial insemination (AI); and (iv)
capacity development of laboratory personnel including youth to produce sexed semen to increase production of dairy
heifers.
Sub-activity 2.2.1.2 Invest in breeding and AI centres. To solve bottlenecks in AI and embryo transfer, the Programme
will support scaling up capacities for production and distribution of liquid nitrogen, semen, and embryos. This includes
the availability of liquid nitrogen, storage and quality control equipment, dry ice pilots for conservation of semen, and
other specialized equipment. In addition, the following investment will be supported. In Kenya, the Programme will
involve the Kenya Livestock Breeders Association, which is specialised in extension and training, breed inspection and
registration, performance recording and reporting and feedback. In Rwanda, support will be given for the
establishment of semen and liquid nitrogen storage and distribution centers, as well as to the existing bull centre in
Songa Station to acquire micro-manipulators to enhance semen production operations. Moreover, RAB will be
strengthened in record keeping and continuous updates of the Studbook to identify resilient and high productive
crossbreeds. In Tanzania, support would be given to establish an AI centre in Southern Highland. Also, the feasibility
of an LN unit in Zanzibar will be analysed. In Uganda, this investment will strengthen the NAGRC and Data Bank to
improve the production and access to high-quality semen in small and medium size farms. DaIMA will facilitate women
and youth led farms to access high-quality semen at subsidized costs.
Sub-activity 2.2.1.3 Scale up the insemination of dairy cattle to make the herd more productive and climate resilient.
The Programme will (i) train AI technicians, who can be private inseminators, para-veterinarians, lead farmers of L-FFS
and District livestock officers (at least 30 percent youth and 40 percent women); (ii) scale up the insemination of dairy
cattle in the Programme intervention area; (iii) include aspects of the interaction between dairy cattle husbandry and
climate change in the L-FFS curriculum. In Kenya, the Programme will support the National Breeding Strategy and
Action Plan, in collaboration with the Kenya Livestock Breeders Association. Public and private partnerships (PPP) will
be promoted to have AI services accessible to the male and female farmers. In Rwanda, the breeding programme of
RAB will be scaled up including the training of more private AI technicians. In Tanzania, additional technicians will be
trained and equipped with start-up kits. In addition, bull centers will be established in regions where AI is not available.
In Uganda, more AI technicians will be trained by the NAGRC and will be equipped with AI kits focusing on the regions
where AI services are still poorly developed.
Sub-activity 2.2.1.4 Organize awareness campaigns and support breeders’ organizations. This activity will facilitate
female and youth members of dairy cooperatives and L-FFS groups to create awareness on the use of sexed-semen,
27

=== PAGE 172 ===
thus impacting the herd’s sex ratio, and further reduce absolute GHG emissions and the emission intensity per kg of
milk produced mainly by replacing many low-productive local cows with a few adapted and high performant
crossbreeds, thus reducing the herd size. In the four countries, support will be given to the breeders’ associations and
societies (that include women and youth in their membership) for animal registration and maintenance of breeding
standards.
Activity 2.2.2 Provide support for better animal care, herd management and disease prevention. In East Africa,
infectious diseases and parasites rank among the primary causes of livestock productivity and production loss.
Production losses through reduced performance (growth rates, milk yield) or animal loss through morbidity, mortality,
and abortion results in cows with relatively high GHG emission intensities. These losses affect people’s resilience to
CC, livelihoods and nutrition security and can affect human health through zoonotic disease transmission. In addition,
the growing importance of zero-grazing systems has implications for animal welfare, thus farmers will be encouraged
to consider animal well-being aspects. Day to day feeding and management is mainly a female and male youth gender
role in the four project countries. Although they may not own the dairy cattle, they should constitute a major target
group in this intervention.
Sub-activity 2.2.2.1 Organise trainings on animal husbandry, with a specific focus on animal health, animal welfare,
herd management and disease prevention. Updated modules of the L-FFS training on animal health and welfare, and
herd and reproduction management will be implemented. Female and young dairy farmers, managers and handlers
(feeding and milking) will receive training to better care for the animals and to adopt biosecurity measures to prevent
common diseases and pests that impact the production or suitability of the milk for human consumption. They will
also receive support to better manage their herds, reproduction calendar, and animal nutrition to reduce animal
mortality, heat stress and increase productivity, thus further reducing absolute CH emissions and the emission
4
intensity per unit of milk produced through targeted pro women and youth extension activities.
Sub-activity 2.2.2.2 Scale up the use of digital apps to monitor animal health and herd performance. Digital record
keeping on-farm (e.g., using iCow, DigiCow Africa, My Fugo) will be scaled up to monitor the productive and health
performances of the herd (e.g., records of calf mortality and causes, number of lame animals), to plan artificial
insemination, and guide herd management. The use of the app will be promoted through the L-FFS in interested groups
using youth as digital leads. The support includes: (i) training of L-FFS lead farmers including women on the use of the
apps; (ii) guiding L-FFS farmers in the use of the technology; (iii) equip the (youthful) farmers in the pilot with digital
tools e.g. by providing start-up gadgets and mobile phones. To implement the sub-activity, the Programme will work
with agritech companies including some youth led ones and start-ups to develop digital solutions that will enhance
transparency in farm data and operations, monitoring of CH emissions reduction and traceability of milk products
4
increase create job opportunities.
Sub-activity 2.2.2.3 Scale-up vaccination campaigns to mitigate the impact of climate change on the spread of
diseases. The Programme will scale up and extend the vaccination campaigns to target in priority dairy farmers in the
Programme area, who are members of various cooperatives and L-FFS. Youth will be supported to lead creative
campaigns such as using road shows and other community media. The vaccination campaign will focus on: (i) the
spread of East Coast Fever (ECF), Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) and Heartwater disease to new
production areas through an extended vaccination campaign, in Kenya; (ii) ECF, RVF and FMD in Rwanda; (iii) ECF,
FMD, RVF and CBPP in Tanzania; (iv) trans boundary animal diseases (TADs) like FMD, CBPP, and LSD in Uganda.
Activity 2.2.3 Promote climate-smart forage production and conservation. The adoption of climate resilient forage
varieties and conservation technologies is essential to reduce enteric methane emissions intensities in the dairy value
28

=== PAGE 173 ===
chain, while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle. The benefits are multiple and encompass CC adaptation through
adoption of a resilient forage variety (Lablab purpureus, Brachiaria sp., Cenchrus purpureus (Napier grass), Leucaena,
Calliandra, Panicum maximum (Giant Panicum)), improvements in soil fertility and increased capacity of farmers,
managers and handlers (feeding and milking) to meet forage production needs during dry periods and to respond to
climate-induced pests and diseases.
Sub-activity 2.2.3.1 Make certified forage seed available to private and community multipliers. This sub-activity will
(i) support the multiplication of breeder and foundation seeds for climate-smart, emission-reducing fodder by the
national mandated public services; (ii) facilitate a seed certification scheme and sensitize the private sector to produce
certified forage and fodder seeds.
Sub-activity 2.2.3.2 Support multiplication of climate-resilient seed for fodder crops and pastures. This sub-activity
will include contracting community and private seed multipliers (including the youth and women) for multiplication,
conservation of forage and pasture seeds. In each country, standard approaches will be used to multiply seeds and
make them available to L-FFS, PFS, cooperatives, and other groups.
Sub-activity 2.2.3.3 Build capacity of dairy farmers on forage production and conservation on intensive and semi-
intensive dairy farms. The L-FFS will be the knowledge-sharing vehicle to promote improved forage production and
conservation. The L-FFS will focus on (i) training on good forage management practices (e.g., grass and legume
intercropping, agroforestry, weed management, (ii) training and demonstration on small-scale irrigation to produce
forage crops; (iii) training and demonstrations of mechanization of forage production with fodder choppers/cutters
and conservation equipment; (iv) training and demonstrations on forage conservation practices, to respond to
seasonal feed availability and quality (e.g., protein content, digestibility) variations. Youth and women groups will be
supported to venture into commercial fodder production, which may include production using hydroponic
technology21.
Sub-activity 2.2.3.4 Access to water for animals and forage production in intensive and semi-intensive dairy systems.
The Programme will provide small-scale equipment for rainwater harvesting and recycling (e.g. individual dam sheets,
3m3 rooftop catchment water tanks and water distribution kits). This activity will target to provide green solutions for
women aiming to reduce workloads related to accessing water.
Activity 2.2.4 Promote climate-smart feeding practices to reduce enteric methane emissions. Appropriate diet
formulation is key to improve dairy cattle productivity, improve animal welfare, while reducing methane (CH4)
emissions. Balanced diets (more energy-dense or more digestible) decrease retention time in the rumen and reduce
ruminal fermentation and methane yield (kg CH /kg dry matter intake). Better nutrient utilization (e.g., avoiding
4
deficiencies or surpluses) reduces the environmental impact of livestock.
Sub-activity 2.2.4.2 Build capacity on appropriate feed formulation. In each country, the Programme will support the
capacity development of technical advisors, cooperative management, small feed processing plants and L-FFS lead
farmers on sustainable animal feed formulations such as total mixed rations (TMR) to enhance productive efficiency
and to mitigate GHG emissions.
Sub-activity 2.2.4.3 Promote appropriate diet formulation that reduces enteric methane emissions. In the four
countries, the L-FFS and the dairy cooperatives will be the vehicle to reach out to dairy farmers and promote
21.
29

=== PAGE 174 ===
appropriate feeding of dairy cattle. The Programme will: (i) provide start-up kits for youth and women in L-FFS to
monitor diet formulation to reduce methane yield (e.g., Rumen8 tool by SNV); (ii) run L-FFS of feed formulation,
including on the use of agroforestry leguminous fodder trees with methane inhibiting properties such as Calliandra sp.
for improved feed supplementation and carbon sequestration. The Programme will also pilot and leverage on the
existing innovative enteric methane inhibitors used as mixtures in feed to be adopted in zero-grazing and
commercial/intensive systems.
Activity 2.2.5 Increase sustainable nutrient recycling of manure and dairy waste to reduce emissions. Livestock
manure is a source of methane (CH ) and nitrous oxide (N O) emissions, as well as of pollutants such as ammonia (NH3)
4 2
and nitrate (NO3-). At the same time, manure contains essential nutrients and is often the primary source of crop
fertilization on smallholder dairy farms, as mineral fertilizers are too expensive or unavailable. In addition, its costs
have further increased due to recent events (COVID-19 pandemic, Ukraine war). Many smallholder farms are limited
in nutrients, which limits crop yields. Circular management of agricultural nutrients via livestock manure is the best
scalable option to overcome these limitations, improve soil health, and improve on-farm productivity. This has a
positive effect on livestock productivity, as better manure management also improves the nutrient availability for feed
and forages, which increases their growth, biomass yield and nutritional quality and ultimately improves milk
production. In addition, manure application reduces soil nutrient mining and soil degradation and prevents additional
CO emissions from loss of soil organic carbon.
2
Sub-activity 2.2.5.1 Manure management in intensive and semi-intensive dairy production systems. The Programme
will create awareness and build capacity on low-cost manure management for soil health and soil microbiome
improvement. The sub-activity will consist in providing trainings through L-FFS and demonstration farms, using existing
manuals developed by NARO in Uganda, ILRI, etc. on scalable and already tested manure management practices (pit
storage, manure ponds, manure covering with banana leaves, compaction, etc..) and manure use applications offering
livelihoods opportunities. This activity will target to include women and youth led farms as demonstration centres to
attract more women and youth to participate.
Sub-activity 2.2.5.2 Promote adapted animal housing. The Programme will promote adapted animal housing with the
possibility of separating solid and liquid manure. Good example of animal housing promoted by Heifer International
can be scaled up targeting women and youth dairy farmers.
Sub-activity 2.2.5.3 Manure management in extensive systems (pastoral and agro-pastoral dairying regions). The
Programme will: (i) run L-FFS/PFS for promoting manure collection from communal kraals for use, sale/ income
generation at community level; and (ii) establish community manure sheds to promote manure collection, storage and
covering for better manure management and reduce emissions. This activity will target to support women and youth
led groups.
Activity 2.2.6 Build capacity for on-farm use of biodigesters and biogas. Biogas digesters utilize microorganisms to
break down organic matter such as livestock manure or other organic waste, during which biogas and a nutrient-rich
by-product (called digestate or bio-slurry) are produced. This technology offers a clean source of energy for people
who do not have access to clean cooking fuels. In addition, it creates a biofertilizer (for use as organic fertiliser on
nearby fields), reduces methane emissions (up to 70-90 percent compared to liquid manure storage) and ammonia
and nitrous oxide emissions. Biodigesters can reduce deforestation and empower women by reducing the time they
spent collecting firewood. As part of the low-carbon pathways, the Programme will encourage the uptake of on-farm
biodigesters for intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms. Women are the main consumers of biogas and should be
30

=== PAGE 175 ===
involved in trainings on how the setup works as well as identifying where outside and inside the house the equipment
should be placed not to curtail the functionality of the kitchen.
Sub-activity 2.2.6.1 Support capacity building in biodigester management. The Programme will support the training
and accreditation of biodigester technicians and consumers, with a particular focus on women and youth, in the target
districts. In addition to installation-related aspects of biogas valorisation and quality management, including safe
working standards.
Sub-activity 2.2.6.2 Support investments in biodigesters at the household level. The Programme will support
investments in biodigesters for dairy farms ensuring women and jointly owned farms are supported in the intervention
area.
7. Output 2.3: Pasture and grasslands management improved
Activity 2.3.1 Strengthen rangeland governance structures for communal grazing areas. This activity will finance
interventions to improve rangeland management (including access to water), mainly in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.
Engagement and awareness raising among local stakeholders involved in landscape management is essential for locally
led adaptation and people-centred planning.
Sub-activity 2.3.1.1 Participatory rangeland management planning. In selected districts/counties, the Programme will
(i) map and conduct a capacity assessment of existing community governance structures (including status of women
participation and opportunities to increase representation of women), formal (e.g. village land committees,
environmental committees, water use committees, local government, district) and informal entities (grazing
committees, traditional committees, clan leaders); (ii) support community governance structures to produce pasture
and rangelands management plans, including land tenure to secure tenure rights, water access, as well as possible
conflict resolution over land and water use, and (iii) support the development, revitalization and strengthening of laws/
charters and by-laws governing the use of communal resources (including water). The groups to be supported will be
require meeting the women and youth quotas in representation.
Activity 2.3.2. Restoration of degraded pasture lands, including access to water. This activity will finance
interventions to restore rangelands.
Sub-activity 2.3.2.1 Training on rangeland and pasture management. The Programme will facilitate L-FFS/PFS aimed
at guiding and engaging farmers towards improving the management of rangelands and pastures. L-FFS will focus on
(i) rotational grazing, (ii) management of grazing intensity ( destocking and restocking i.e. sale of animals during the
dry season and restocking during seasons of high food availability to reduce pressure on pastures), (iii) integration of
sylvo-pastoral practices (multipurpose leguminous trees) for better carbon sequestration and reduction of livestock
exposure to heat stress conditions, by providing shade for animals (more particularly around water harvesting points),
and (iv) biochar production, elaborated from invasive bush species. This activity will support female and youth farmers
with animal shades and biochar production.
Sub-activity 2.3.2.2 Rangelands restoration. This sub-activity, focusing on communal grazing areas, will focus on: (i)
reseeding and integration of legumes with grasses in natural pastures, (ii) integration of multipurpose leguminous
trees and shrubs (improved agro-forestry systems) and control of invasive tree species, (iii) preservation of traditional
non-forest tree products (medicinal and other) known to women mainly and (iv) implementation of soil and water
31

=== PAGE 176 ===
conservation practices to increase water availability and biomass productivity. Women and youth groups will be
supported with tree seedlings
Sub-activity 2.3.2.3 Water availability. Depending on the country, to enhance access to water for dairy cattle in
extensive systems, the Programme will invest in water harvesting systems such as micro-dams, small-scale valley-
dams, construction/ rehabilitation of charco dams and rock-catchments schemes. Feasibility studies will be carried out
before the start of the work to assess sustainability. The Programme will also enhance the capacity of the community-
based water supply organizations (COWSOs) to better manage and operate all water harvesting and storage
infrastructures. The design of water infrastructure will follow the guidelines of the local government authorities and
integrate gender sensitive facilities such as toilet and sanitation blocks and washing bays.
COMPONENT 3: GREEN DAIRY FINANCING FACILITY (GDFF)
Component 3 aims to enhance access to finance and support the implementation of climate-smart solutions and
practices, thereby facilitating the transition to sustainable, low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy value chains.
Component 3 will have two key outputs: (3.1) the establishment of an investment window, and (3.2) the establishment
of a Technical Assistance (TA) Facility. Eligible businesses for GDPs will need to exhibit clear ambitions to invest,
develop or distribute climate-smart technologies, productivity-enhancing technologies or SHF extension services and
have a track record of SHF allyship. Investment decisions will be made on a case-by-case basis depending on business
need. The GDFF’s credit decisions will be based on a thorough assessment of potential investees’ ability to repay and
to invest in products tailored for women and youth. Dairy Loan Products will target smaller businesses, and investees
will be eligible to receive light-touch pre-deal TA to translate investment needs into investment requests, and they can
be connected to other DaIMA components to access any post-deal TA support needed.
Through the (3.1) Investment window established, the main objective of the GDFF is to facilitate the larger-scale
transition to sustainable, low-carbon, climate-resilient dairy value chains in Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania. To
do so, the GDFF will improve access to finance for underserved dairy value chain SMEs that operate as farmer-allied
enterprises and are therefore well-integrated—or have the ambition to be well-integrated—across the value chain.
These enterprises will be required to show considerations for women and youth farmers in their business plans and
business operations.
Output 3.1 on the Technical Assistance Facility, low-emission cold chains and inefficient, low-loss milk processing
units will be established and upgraded. This will overcome the limited processing infrastructure and inadequate
utilization capacity barriers. The eligible facilities will receive technical assistance (TA) to integrate Gender action plans
into their business plans. Key expected outputs expected from the units will be to (i) create jobs for male and female
youth aged 18-35 years as part of their workforce (ii) Be gender-responsive and create an inclusive policy environment
whereby women and men have equal opportunities. Only units with gender (sex and age) sensitive and socially
inclusive policies and practices shall participate in the project. These units will target to employ 40% women, 30%
youth and vulnerable groups.
Activity 3.1.1 Fund set up. This activity aims to establish the GDFF fund as a functioning entity with the required
policies, structures and staffing, and to crowd in private commercial capital in pursuit of the programme’s climate
impact ambitions. The GDFF staffing and structure will include provisions for gender and youth expertise.
Sub-Activity 3.1.1.2 Investor engagement and negotiation (led by Fund Manager, in coordination with IFAD). The
Fund Manager will be responsible for identifying, engaging and carrying out due diligence on prospective investors.
The Fund Manager will develop criteria for screening investors demonstrate forward and backward linkages with
women and youth enterprises.
32

=== PAGE 177 ===
Activity 3.1.2 Identify eligible businesses for investment. While this will focus on developing a screening framework
to assess prospective investees for potential impact and financial return. This activity will ensure identification of
women and youth led businesses by making gender and youth provisions in the screening framework.
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.1 Develop screening framework. The Fund Manager will establish a screening framework to ensure
consistency in investment decisions. This screening framework will be underpinned by a taxonomy of investment
categories which are justified and eligible for investment including those that facilitate women and youth
empowerment by creating jobs and employment opportunities.
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.2 Pipeline development and screening. The pipeline for the GDFF will be sourced through three
main channels; (i) GDFF Investment Advisors, (ii) DaIMA’s PCUs, and (iii) TA providers under Component 2. Investment
Advisors will screen prospective investees against pre-defined screening criteria, which will include women and youth
considerations and quotas to ensure uptake.
Activity 3.1.3 Climate-smart lending products and services are rolled out by GDFF to eligible businesses. These will
include labour and energy saving products aimed at reducing workloads for women. The two products: Green Dairy
Partnerships and Dairy Loans will ensure the partnerships promote business working with women and youth farmers.
The Dairy loan tickets will be developed to ensure the ticket sizes are affordable and accessible to these groups.
Provisions for community outreach will be made through different media to ensure uptake. The Fund Manager’s
gender and youth expert will be responsible for monitoring this.
Output 3.2 Technical Assistance Facility established. The Green Dairy Financing Facility will invest in climate-resilient
dairy producers, off-takers, processors, and livestock businesses. Tailored financial products with technical assistance
will increase access to finance and affordable credit for on-farm investments especially for youth, women and
vulnerable groups. Women and youth will receive tailored BDS and financial literacy modules that incorporate gender
transformative approaches such as confidence building, communication skills and agency building. The GDFF will use
a technical assistance (TA) facility to maximise both impact and returns by enhancing the capacity of investees
(including on gender and youth sensitive approaches) to implement effective strategies, improve operational
efficiencies and achieve growth.
Activity 3.2.1 Prospective investees will receive targeted pre-deal TA under Output 3.2. Noting that Component 2
also provides funding to assist dairy cooperatives in acquiring renewable energy and waste management solutions
(see Sub-Activity 2.1.3.2), Investment Advisors will liaise with the TA providers of Component 2 to ensure targeting of
women and youth linked enterprises.
Sub-Activity 3.2.1.1 Pre-Deal Development for Dairy Loan Products. These businesses will receive light touch TA to
translate their investment needs, into a well-defined investment request prior to the deal. Tailored support will be
developed to support women and youth friendly loan products.
Activity 3.2.2 Post-deal TA: Providing ongoing support post-deal to ensure successful implementation, monitor
progress and ensure outcomes are met. Activity 3.2.2 focuses on providing post-deal TA to Green Dairy Partnership
investees, ensuring that outcomes are achieved. The type and level of support will be tailored based on the specific
needs identified for each business. This TA will coach, mentor and profile good case examples of women and youth
investments for learning exchanges and scale-up. Considering the Dairy Loans will be short-term, Dairy Loan investees
especially women, youth and vulnerable groups may be considered for follow-ups in place of post-deal TA.
Implementation arrangements
The GESI action plan shall be implemented through implementation partner or Service Providers activities as defined
by the project and IFAD supported investment projects.
33

=== PAGE 178 ===
DaIMA will seek implementing partners with experience working on gender equality and women empowerment, youth
sensitive programmes, nutrition and social inclusion, with emphasis on community centred approaches promoting
integration of young men and women, vulnerable groups, persons with disabilities. This may include youthful
enterprises, NGOs, the academia and researchers.
Component 3: Programme management. Actions to strengthen the GESI dimensions of programme management:
● Support for GESI Action Plan implementation will be provided through the Technical Assistance, which includes
capacity building at different levels including for implementing partners and end beneficiaries.
● A GESI specialist for each Country operation shall ensure the roll out of the GESI action plan for each country.
Additional expertise will be procured under the GDFF and Technical assistance sub activities to ensure access and
uptake for women and youth. The specific TA will include; (i) capacity strengthening and technical support to
partner staff and agents; (iii) the recruitment of experienced service providers to support outreach, gendered
approaches and capacity building at the community level; (iv) liaison with the Monitoring and Evaluation team;
and (v) ongoing GESI technical support during implementation.
● Include a specific commitment to gender-responsive planning in the terms of reference of the implementation
teams from partner organizations. This shall be backed by capacity strengthening on identifying and addressing
gender issues. Annual performance reviews, aligned to the Logframe targets will track performance on delivering
GEWE and GESI goals.
● Select implementing partners (input and service providers) with a proven commitment to community
participatory approaches and gender equality, and staff with the relevant GESI skills. The implementing partners
shall be held accountable for delivering on GESI targets.
● Ensure that annual work plans and budgets are prepared, delivered and tracked from a gender perspective, and
that the funds allocated and/ or locked to implement gender-related activities are appropriate.
● Ensure the DaIMA project and implementing partners promote facilities, processes and policies are gender-
responsive, supporting gender parity in recruitment, promotion, and retention of staff; equal pay between women
and men for the same grade of employment; life-work balance; policies and communications on the prevention
of sexual exploitation, discrimination, harassment and the abuse of authority.22
● Ensure the systematic integration of GESI considerations – including attention to representation and expertise –
in the programme’s governance, operational procedures, technical expert advisory bodies and decision-making
structures.
Monitoring, evaluation and knowledge management will:
● Support to planned any additional gender and social norms assessments for the dairy interventions where the
baselines of IFAD country projects may not be adequate. Gender and social norms assessment studies on dairy may
preceed the alignment of the DaIMA GESI strategy and IFAD investment gender strategies. In order to increase the
inclusion of women, youth and people with disabilities and facilitate their economic empowerment in the dairy
interventions, assessment questions will be integrated into baselines, mid-terms and end term reviews of the IFAD
country projects to understand gender and social status and monitor improvements over the lifecycle of DaIMA.
The findings will help inform the detailed GESI strategies for each of the IFAD project to ensure that the
22 Detailed in the DAIMA grievance procedures.
34

=== PAGE 179 ===
implementation of DaIMA will lead to more effective interventions to increase inclusion in climate smart dairy
enterprises.
● Ensure all data in the logframe are disaggregated by sex, age, location and disability, where appropriate (including
targets and data on youth23) using standard formats at all levels of implementation.
● Ensure the integration of the IFAD empowerment index to measure gender transformation which applies the
principles of the Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (Pro-WEAI) at baseline, mid-term and end-term
studies and adjust project interventions as required to address any negative impacts.
● Train staff on inclusive collection, analysis and interpretation of disaggregated data at various levels: from the
communities, service providers to DaIMA focal points at country subsidiaries considering female enumerators
where possible at household.
● Track performance indicators, including by sex, age, location of the dairy entrepreneurs, input and service
providers including MSME. Establish and monitor mechanisms for tracking progress on targets and outputs
between the different levels of programme management and service providers.
● Support IFAD baseline investment annual outcome surveys to monitor and analyse benefits for women and men
of different ages. Develop recommendations for project actions if required to narrow the gender gaps.
● Undertake studies on good practices leading to gender-responsive dairy enterprise outcomes and impacts and
organize knowledge management and sharing events to disseminate findings.
● Ensure GESI issues and climate smart dairying actions are addressed during supervision missions and mid-term
review. Make provision for additional TA if it is recognized that the programme is failing to deliver on GESI targets
during the project implementation.
23 The youth target of 20% of beneficiaries needs to be disaggregated by sex; that is, 40% of the youth target is young women.
35

=== PAGE 180 ===
GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN MATRIX
Impact Statement: IF technological solutions for reducing methane and other greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and increasing climate resilience are adopted by dairy farmers and milk
processors in East Africa, and IF financial services that enhance revenue or lower
production costs are utilized, THEN a decrease in farm-level methane emissions and
a reduction in supply chain GHG emissions will be observed. This is BECAUSE a
transition to net-zero dairy production will be perceived as economically beneficial
Outcome Statement: to farmers, pastoralists, and dairy sector processors.
DAIMA will secure climate change-resilient dairy enterprise dependent livelihoods
with the benefits of food and nutrition security for women, men, youth and
vulnerable groups. Business and employment opportunities and incomes will
improve with more equitable benefits to all key players DAIMA intends to achieve
the following gender-responsive outcomes:
1. Strengthened systemic and institutional capacities of the livestock sector, which
will enable smallholder dairy producers and local value chain actors to reduce CH4
and other GHG emissions
2. Increased production, market knowledge and tools for smallholder dairy
producers and private sector value chain operators for a low-emission, climate-
resilient, and sustainable pathway
3. Enabled access to required financial services to make the necessary transition to
low-carbon, climate-resilient, and sustainable livestock production and value chain
development, for smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain
actors.
The overall budget required to implement the GESI responsive DAIMA program is
estimated to be USD 2,399,608
Gender
Budget in
sensitive
USD for
Timel based on
Outputs, activities and sub-activities Indicators and Targets Responsibilities the 4
ine women
countries
participa
combined
-tion
COMPONENT 1: STRENGTHENED NATIONAL CAPACITIES AND ENHANCED MLF, MoALD, MAAIF, 520,818
ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR LOW EMISSIONS CLIMATE RESILIENT DAIRY RAB Yes
SECTORS
36

--- Table 1 on Page 180 ---
Impact Statement:
Outcome Statement: | IF technological solutions for reducing methane and other greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and increasing climate resilience are adopted by dairy farmers and milk
processors in East Africa, and IF financial services that enhance revenue or lower
production costs are utilized, THEN a decrease in farm-level methane emissions and
a reduction in supply chain GHG emissions will be observed. This is BECAUSE a
transition to net-zero dairy production will be perceived as economically beneficial
to farmers, pastoralists, and dairy sector processors.
DAIMA will secure climate change-resilient dairy enterprise dependent livelihoods
with the benefits of food and nutrition security for women, men, youth and
vulnerable groups. Business and employment opportunities and incomes will
improve with more equitable benefits to all key players DAIMA intends to achieve
the following gender-responsive outcomes:
1. Strengthened systemic and institutional capacities of the livestock sector, which
will enable smallholder dairy producers and local value chain actors to reduce CH4
and other GHG emissions
2. Increased production, market knowledge and tools for smallholder dairy
producers and private sector value chain operators for a low-emission, climate-
resilient, and sustainable pathway
3. Enabled access to required financial services to make the necessary transition to
low-carbon, climate-resilient, and sustainable livestock production and value chain
development, for smallholder dairy producers and local private sector value chain
actors.
The overall budget required to implement the GESI responsive DAIMA program is
estimated to be USD 2,399,608 |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outputs, activities and sub-activities | Indicators and Targets | Timel
ine | Responsibilities | Budget in
USD for
the 4
countries
combined |  | Gender | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | sensitive | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | based on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | women | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | participa | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | -tion | 
COMPONENT 1: STRENGTHENED NATIONAL CAPACITIES AND ENHANCED
ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR LOW EMISSIONS CLIMATE RESILIENT DAIRY
SECTORS |  |  | MLF, MoALD, MAAIF,
RAB | 520,818 | Yes |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 180 ---
Budget in
USD for
the 4
countries
combined

--- Table 3 on Page 180 ---
Timel
ine

=== PAGE 181 ===
Output 1.1: Climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment established.
Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate Dairy Sector policies, strategies and
regulations for climate-change adaptation and mitigation. In the four countries, Number of policies and By
the Programme will support the Ministries, Departments and aligned institutions
strategies prioritized Year
in charge of the dairy sector to review and formulate national policies, strategies,
for gender analysis 3
and regulations that are gender and socially inclusive and essential for a
review (Target at least
sustainable transformation of the dairy sector, in line with the NDCs and NAPs
one per country)
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Support the preparation of gender and social analysis for the Number gender By MLF, MoALD, MAAIF, 525,636 Yes
national dairy policies, strategies, and regulations to mainstream climate-change analysis and Year RAB
adaptation and mitigation. recommendations
3
In the four countries, Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. For all four countries, supported per country
there will be (at least one per
(i) (Dairy Act) regulation of the raw milk market, country)
(ii) Support will be given to the formulation of a national regulatory framework for
the private veterinary practice including for Community Animal Health Workers
(CAHWs) and Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS) facilitators Existing/new laws,
regulations, policies or
strategies proposed to
policy makers for
approval, ratification
or amendment
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 National dairy value chain governance and awareness Number of female Annu MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 515,000 Yes
creation. The aim of this activity is to enhance dairy value chain governance and to participants in the ally
mainstream the importance of climate-change in this process. At national level, national policy
the national dairy boards (KDB, DDA, TDB, RNDP) and other relevant professional dialogues held (40%
bodies of private stakeholders, will be supported to participate in the dairy policy women in each
dialogue, to create awareness and education/capacity building on climate, feed country)
and dairy policies and regulations. Support women participation (4 countries)
Sub-activity 1.1.1.4 District/regional/county level dairy value chain governance Number of female Annu MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 320,000 Yes
and planning. Local-level multi-stakeholder platforms involving delegates from participants in the ally
dairy value chain stakeholders will participate in the annual planning and review district policy
of Programme activities. Participants will include dairy cooperative female and dialogues held (<40%
male members, milk collectors, milk processors, service providers of artificial women)
insemination (AI), veterinary services, extension staff and local government.
Support women participation in District/local platforms. Functioning multi-
stakeholder platforms
37

--- Table 1 on Page 181 ---
Output 1.1: Climate-responsive policy and regulatory environment established.
Activity 1.1.1: Review and formulate Dairy Sector policies, strategies and
regulations for climate-change adaptation and mitigation. In the four countries,
the Programme will support the Ministries, Departments and aligned institutions
in charge of the dairy sector to review and formulate national policies, strategies,
and regulations that are gender and socially inclusive and essential for a
sustainable transformation of the dairy sector, in line with the NDCs and NAPs | Number of policies and
strategies prioritized
for gender analysis
review (Target at least
one per country) | By
Year
3 |  |  | 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1 Support the preparation of gender and social analysis for the
national dairy policies, strategies, and regulations to mainstream climate-change
adaptation and mitigation.
In the four countries, Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. For all four countries,
there will be
(i) (Dairy Act) regulation of the raw milk market,
(ii) Support will be given to the formulation of a national regulatory framework for
the private veterinary practice including for Community Animal Health Workers
(CAHWs) and Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS) facilitators | Number gender
analysis and
recommendations
supported per country
(at least one per
country)
Existing/new laws,
regulations, policies or
strategies proposed to
policy makers for
approval, ratification
or amendment | By
Year
3 | MLF, MoALD, MAAIF,
RAB | 525,636 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3 National dairy value chain governance and awareness
creation. The aim of this activity is to enhance dairy value chain governance and to
mainstream the importance of climate-change in this process. At national level,
the national dairy boards (KDB, DDA, TDB, RNDP) and other relevant professional
bodies of private stakeholders, will be supported to participate in the dairy policy
dialogue, to create awareness and education/capacity building on climate, feed
and dairy policies and regulations. Support women participation (4 countries) | Number of female
participants in the
national policy
dialogues held (40%
women in each
country) | Annu
ally | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 515,000 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.1.4 District/regional/county level dairy value chain governance
and planning. Local-level multi-stakeholder platforms involving delegates from
dairy value chain stakeholders will participate in the annual planning and review
of Programme activities. Participants will include dairy cooperative female and
male members, milk collectors, milk processors, service providers of artificial
insemination (AI), veterinary services, extension staff and local government.
Support women participation in District/local platforms. | Number of female
participants in the
district policy
dialogues held (<40%
women)
Functioning multi-
stakeholder platforms | Annu
ally | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 320,000 | Yes

=== PAGE 182 ===
supported including
women farmers
Activity 1.1.2 Launch awareness campaigns on nutritional benefits of milk and Year MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 412,818 Yes
food safety aspects. This will be a targeted support to milk consumption and No of women in milk 2-5
nutrition awareness, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour campaign events per
change among smallholder producer and consumer households, informal dairy county/ district and
value chain actors and milk handlers in the school milk program. The aim is to nationally per year
improve nutritionally vulnerable groups’ consumption of milk, therefore (<40%)
enhancing their individual health and climate resilience. The Programme will
support milk consumption and nutrition awareness through increased availability,
accessibility, affordability, and consumption of high-quality and safe dairy
products, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour change and
communication (SBCC) to reach out to informal dairy value chain actors, milk
handlers at home and institutions and nutritionally vulnerable groups. Support
food/nutrition demos in events.
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Public awareness on the contribution of milk to nutrition and No. of women, men MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 612,818 Yes
resilience, with focus on climate vulnerable population. The awareness raising in participating in forums
all four countries will use various community platforms such as extension, L-FFS, (<40% women)
MCC/cooperatives that should include women and marginalized groups. Topics
will include improved milk treatment, food safety and nutritional benefits of dairy
produce, pasteurized and processed milk.
In Rwanda, it will include women, youth participation in dairy fairs/expos under
the auspices of RNDP to showcase climate-friendly and energy efficient local
processing and consumption of dairy products. In Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya the
Programme will scale up school milk programs for improved nutrition of
vulnerable children.
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Build capacity of dairy inspection to ensure milk quality and Number and gender MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 512,818 Yes
safety and reduce waste in all four countries. Dairy inspection is essential for (sex and age) of
sector-level milk quality and safety, thus encouraging formal market growth and trained inspectors
reduction of milk rejection and waste (less GHG emission intensities). The (<40% women)
Programme will provide technical training and equipment for women and male
youth, strengthen capacities of inspections to ensure development and
enforcement of milk quality and safety standards. Gender inclusion will be
considered among the inspectors identified for capacity development and
execution of inspection. Women and youth will be supported to attend/travel to
trainings.
38

--- Table 1 on Page 182 ---
 | supported including
women farmers |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.2 Launch awareness campaigns on nutritional benefits of milk and
food safety aspects. This will be a targeted support to milk consumption and
nutrition awareness, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour
change among smallholder producer and consumer households, informal dairy
value chain actors and milk handlers in the school milk program. The aim is to
improve nutritionally vulnerable groups’ consumption of milk, therefore
enhancing their individual health and climate resilience. The Programme will
support milk consumption and nutrition awareness through increased availability,
accessibility, affordability, and consumption of high-quality and safe dairy
products, accompanied by nutrition education and social behaviour change and
communication (SBCC) to reach out to informal dairy value chain actors, milk
handlers at home and institutions and nutritionally vulnerable groups. Support
food/nutrition demos in events. | No of women in milk
campaign events per
county/ district and
nationally per year
(<40%) | Year
2-5 | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 412,818 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1 Public awareness on the contribution of milk to nutrition and
resilience, with focus on climate vulnerable population. The awareness raising in
all four countries will use various community platforms such as extension, L-FFS,
MCC/cooperatives that should include women and marginalized groups. Topics
will include improved milk treatment, food safety and nutritional benefits of dairy
produce, pasteurized and processed milk.
In Rwanda, it will include women, youth participation in dairy fairs/expos under
the auspices of RNDP to showcase climate-friendly and energy efficient local
processing and consumption of dairy products. In Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya the
Programme will scale up school milk programs for improved nutrition of
vulnerable children. | No. of women, men
participating in forums
(<40% women) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 612,818 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2 Build capacity of dairy inspection to ensure milk quality and
safety and reduce waste in all four countries. Dairy inspection is essential for
sector-level milk quality and safety, thus encouraging formal market growth and
reduction of milk rejection and waste (less GHG emission intensities). The
Programme will provide technical training and equipment for women and male
youth, strengthen capacities of inspections to ensure development and
enforcement of milk quality and safety standards. Gender inclusion will be
considered among the inspectors identified for capacity development and
execution of inspection. Women and youth will be supported to attend/travel to
trainings. | Number and gender
(sex and age) of
trained inspectors
(<40% women) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 512,818 | Yes

=== PAGE 183 ===
Activity 1.1.3 Improve land tenure security for sustainable dairy farming. The % no. of studies MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 712,818 Yes
Programme will adopt a fit-for-purpose approach to identify and mitigate tenure supported on women
risks. This activity will support in country study to document land tenure risks, and youth land tenure
challenges and opportunities for women and produce policy briefs. For pastoral risks
and agropastoral systems, the focus will be on the identification of use of
rangelands by gender, their protection and supporting gender and social inclusive
participatory planning and management. In Rwanda, all land is registered and
individually owned. The focus will be on optimizing land productivity through land
consolidation and land use planning. The project will include capacity building and
support to participatory planning processes to create awareness of land rights for
women and youth local-level capacities.
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and preparation of training Number of identified MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 320,818 Yes
materials. The Programme will mobilize specialized technical assistance to: land tenure capacity
(a) develop training material to increase local authorities’ capacity to secure development materials
gender and social inclusive tenure rights for dairy production and the public’s with gender modules
capacity to identify and secure legitimate tenure rights. Based on the national developed (at least
tenure context, each dairy production system’s tenure risks in terms of gendered one per country)
access, use and security of land will be identified and assessed, and appropriate
mitigating strategies will be proposed. Beneficiaries (M/F)
gaining increased
secure access to land
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure at decentralized level. No. of local authorities MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 612,818 Yes
In all four countries the focus will be on capacity building of local authorities and trained (M/F) to secure
raising public awareness on options to incrementally increase tenure security for land tenure for
women, men and youth and the vulnerable (e.g. disability, ethnicity). The women, youth per
Programme can support public awareness campaigns on tools available to secure country
tenure rights. (<40% women)
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3: Participatory planning of tenure for dairy farms on communal No. female and male MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 212,818 Yes
and customary land at local level. participants per
In the four countries, the Programme will document and scale-up best practices country
including women and youth in communal rangelands participatory planning and (<40% women)
management.
Increased participation
of beneficiaries in the
forums ( M/F)
39

--- Table 1 on Page 183 ---
Activity 1.1.3 Improve land tenure security for sustainable dairy farming. The
Programme will adopt a fit-for-purpose approach to identify and mitigate tenure
risks. This activity will support in country study to document land tenure risks,
challenges and opportunities for women and produce policy briefs. For pastoral
and agropastoral systems, the focus will be on the identification of use of
rangelands by gender, their protection and supporting gender and social inclusive
participatory planning and management. In Rwanda, all land is registered and
individually owned. The focus will be on optimizing land productivity through land
consolidation and land use planning. The project will include capacity building and
support to participatory planning processes to create awareness of land rights for
women and youth local-level capacities. | % no. of studies
supported on women
and youth land tenure
risks |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 712,818 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Mapping of local tenure risks and preparation of training
materials. The Programme will mobilize specialized technical assistance to:
(a) develop training material to increase local authorities’ capacity to secure
gender and social inclusive tenure rights for dairy production and the public’s
capacity to identify and secure legitimate tenure rights. Based on the national
tenure context, each dairy production system’s tenure risks in terms of gendered
access, use and security of land will be identified and assessed, and appropriate
mitigating strategies will be proposed. | Number of identified
land tenure capacity
development materials
with gender modules
developed (at least
one per country)
Beneficiaries (M/F)
gaining increased
secure access to land |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 320,818 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Developing capacity on land tenure at decentralized level.
In all four countries the focus will be on capacity building of local authorities and
raising public awareness on options to incrementally increase tenure security for
women, men and youth and the vulnerable (e.g. disability, ethnicity). The
Programme can support public awareness campaigns on tools available to secure
tenure rights. | No. of local authorities
trained (M/F) to secure
land tenure for
women, youth per
country
(<40% women) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 612,818 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.1.3.3: Participatory planning of tenure for dairy farms on communal
and customary land at local level.
In the four countries, the Programme will document and scale-up best practices
including women and youth in communal rangelands participatory planning and
management. | No. female and male
participants per
country
(<40% women)
Increased participation
of beneficiaries in the
forums ( M/F) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 212,818 | Yes

=== PAGE 184 ===
Output 1.2 Improved service delivery to the dairy sector No. of women trained MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 591,770 Yes
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthen veterinary services for better animal health, higher milk per country
yields and reduced losses. (<40% women)
In all four countries interventions in disease control (focus on prevention).
Healthier animals are more resilient to climate hazards and more productive, with
less milk to be discarded, leading to a reduction of “unproductive” GHG emissions. Households reporting
The higher revenues provide incentives for farmers to adopt animal health and adoption of
welfare measures, especially if the benefits are equitably distributed among the new/improved inputs,
men, women and youth in the household. To expand the outreach and capacity of technologies or
veterinary services to women, the Programme will support community outreach practices
to female farmers and train women service providers at community levels.
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Support the installation of both private and public Number of female MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 859,770 Yes
veterinarians and veterinary paraprofessionals by providing travel grants. trained laboratory
The Programme will implement the animal health support and disease control personnel on use of
system, using the “One Health” approach in all four countries. The approach will the facilities in the lab
have three levels: (i) support private veterinarians and para-veterinarians, in and in the field
particular young female and male practitioners;
(ii) recruit and support livestock extension workers, while ensuring gender (sex
and age) equity in participation at local level;
(iii) provide additional training to lead female, male and youthful farmers from the
L-FFS for coaching their peers and assist private female and male para-
veterinarians and livestock extension workers.
In Kenya, veterinary education, and training programs to women and men from Number of female
both private and public veterinarians and veterinary paraprofessionals in the technicians trained
Programme area will be enhanced. In Rwanda, support will be provided for the (<40%)
installation of young female and male veterinary doctors and veterinary
technicians as private practitioners to enhance accessibility of services while
creating jobs. In Tanzania, female and male Livestock Extension Workers (LEWs) Number of CAHWs
will be equipped and trained, and private male and female paravets will be trained Target: 40%
incentivised to ensure the last mile animal health and extension services. women, 30% youth
In Uganda, the Programme will build capacity of female and male veterinarians,
para-veterinarian technicians, and community-based animal health workers
(CAHWs) on One Health principles, disease diagnosis, emerging and re-emerging
diseases because of CC.
Activity 1.2.2 Strengthen extension services for low-carbon and climate resilient Number of women MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 459,770 Yes
dairy sector. In all four countries, reach out to men, women and youth dairy receiving extension
farmers, raise awareness and build their capacity in the field of CC mitigation and
40

--- Table 1 on Page 184 ---
Output 1.2 Improved service delivery to the dairy sector
Activity 1.2.1 Strengthen veterinary services for better animal health, higher milk
yields and reduced losses.
In all four countries interventions in disease control (focus on prevention).
Healthier animals are more resilient to climate hazards and more productive, with
less milk to be discarded, leading to a reduction of “unproductive” GHG emissions.
The higher revenues provide incentives for farmers to adopt animal health and
welfare measures, especially if the benefits are equitably distributed among the
men, women and youth in the household. To expand the outreach and capacity of
veterinary services to women, the Programme will support community outreach
to female farmers and train women service providers at community levels. | No. of women trained
per country
(<40% women)
Households reporting
adoption of
new/improved inputs,
technologies or
practices |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 591,770 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Support the installation of both private and public
veterinarians and veterinary paraprofessionals by providing travel grants.
The Programme will implement the animal health support and disease control
system, using the “One Health” approach in all four countries. The approach will
have three levels: (i) support private veterinarians and para-veterinarians, in
particular young female and male practitioners;
(ii) recruit and support livestock extension workers, while ensuring gender (sex
and age) equity in participation at local level;
(iii) provide additional training to lead female, male and youthful farmers from the
L-FFS for coaching their peers and assist private female and male para-
veterinarians and livestock extension workers.
In Kenya, veterinary education, and training programs to women and men from
both private and public veterinarians and veterinary paraprofessionals in the
Programme area will be enhanced. In Rwanda, support will be provided for the
installation of young female and male veterinary doctors and veterinary
technicians as private practitioners to enhance accessibility of services while
creating jobs. In Tanzania, female and male Livestock Extension Workers (LEWs)
will be equipped and trained, and private male and female paravets will be
incentivised to ensure the last mile animal health and extension services.
In Uganda, the Programme will build capacity of female and male veterinarians,
para-veterinarian technicians, and community-based animal health workers
(CAHWs) on One Health principles, disease diagnosis, emerging and re-emerging
diseases because of CC. | Number of female
trained laboratory
personnel on use of
the facilities in the lab
and in the field
Number of female
technicians trained
(<40%)
Number of CAHWs
trained Target: 40%
women, 30% youth |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 859,770 | Yes
Activity 1.2.2 Strengthen extension services for low-carbon and climate resilient
dairy sector. In all four countries, reach out to men, women and youth dairy
farmers, raise awareness and build their capacity in the field of CC mitigation and | Number of women
receiving extension |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 459,770 | Yes

=== PAGE 185 ===
adaptation, the Programme will adopt innovative extension models and tools services through LFFS
(including digital), and enhance the capacity of extension services. This activity will (<40%)
involve improving delivery of public and private extension services at farm and
cooperative/ aggregation levels, by female and male local (district/county)
livestock officers who coordinate the community-based extension system. To Households reporting
provide proximity advisory services on climate-smart practices, the Programme an increase in
will provide support through Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS), including male production
and female lead and youth, in mixed crop-livestock systems and Pastoralist Field
Schools (PFS) in grazing and pastoralist systems.
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Preparation of training modules for extension in climate No. of gender MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 659,770 Yes
mitigation and adaptation measures. If required, specific topics that are part of transformative
the proposed pathways under Outputs 2.2 and 2.3 and related to CC will be added modules developed for
to the modules of the mixed gender L-FFS (or other extension approaches). The L- L-FFS
FFS modules will be developed with the support of national or international (Target one per
technical assistance. Also gender transformative training modules on the country)
implementation of guidelines will be developed. Trainers will be constituted by
young and middle-aged women and men.
No. of female trainers
trained (<40%)
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Training of master trainers (ToTs) and facilitators of extension Number of women MLF, RAB, MoALD, 579,770 Yes
systems in climate-change related topics. The Programme will support the TOTs trained (<40%) MAAIF
strengthening of existing L-FFS and the establishment of new L-FFS (aiming at 40
percent women and 30 percent youth). To support the sustainability and scaling
up of the L-FFS, existing L-FFS/ PFS male and female master trainers and Households reporting
facilitators will be trained on the specific topics listed above. adoption of
environmentally
sustainable and
climate- resilient
technologies and
practices
(disaggregated)
Output 1.3: Improved GHG MRV capacities & monitoring of climate vulnerabilities Number of young MLF, RAB, MoALD, 643,250 Yes
women trained by MAAIF
Sub-activity 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and development in capturing, Mazingira (<40%)
recording, tracking, and reporting data on dairy GHG emissions. This sub-activity
will carry out in depth capacity assessments of existing MRV tools and frameworks
41

--- Table 1 on Page 185 ---
adaptation, the Programme will adopt innovative extension models and tools
(including digital), and enhance the capacity of extension services. This activity will
involve improving delivery of public and private extension services at farm and
cooperative/ aggregation levels, by female and male local (district/county)
livestock officers who coordinate the community-based extension system. To
provide proximity advisory services on climate-smart practices, the Programme
will provide support through Livestock Farmer Field Schools (L-FFS), including male
and female lead and youth, in mixed crop-livestock systems and Pastoralist Field
Schools (PFS) in grazing and pastoralist systems. | services through LFFS
(<40%)
Households reporting
an increase in
production |  |  |  | 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Preparation of training modules for extension in climate
mitigation and adaptation measures. If required, specific topics that are part of
the proposed pathways under Outputs 2.2 and 2.3 and related to CC will be added
to the modules of the mixed gender L-FFS (or other extension approaches). The L-
FFS modules will be developed with the support of national or international
technical assistance. Also gender transformative training modules on the
implementation of guidelines will be developed. Trainers will be constituted by
young and middle-aged women and men. | No. of gender
transformative
modules developed for
L-FFS
(Target one per
country)
No. of female trainers
trained (<40%) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 659,770 | Yes
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2 Training of master trainers (ToTs) and facilitators of extension
systems in climate-change related topics. The Programme will support the
strengthening of existing L-FFS and the establishment of new L-FFS (aiming at 40
percent women and 30 percent youth). To support the sustainability and scaling
up of the L-FFS, existing L-FFS/ PFS male and female master trainers and
facilitators will be trained on the specific topics listed above. | Number of women
TOTs trained (<40%)
Households reporting
adoption of
environmentally
sustainable and
climate- resilient
technologies and
practices
(disaggregated) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 579,770 | Yes
Output 1.3: Improved GHG MRV capacities & monitoring of climate vulnerabilities
Sub-activity 1.3.1.1: Capacity assessment and development in capturing,
recording, tracking, and reporting data on dairy GHG emissions. This sub-activity
will carry out in depth capacity assessments of existing MRV tools and frameworks | Number of young
women trained by
Mazingira (<40%) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 643,250 | Yes

=== PAGE 186 ===
in the four countries, and the place of dairy in them. Based on these assessments, Number of women
capacity development will be provided to design activity data questionnaires for (<40%) as
Tier 2 GHG emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers, weights, productivity, feed iii. AI tech Trainees
rations, animal health interventions, manure management and grassland ii. Lead farmers
management) and develop a data management system to ensure reliable flow of iii. New AI technology
information between the various national and local agencies involved in the MRV
system. ILRI’s Mazingira Centre will provide trainings to young women and men
from the four countries on data collection protocols adjusted to their needs to
relevant stakeholders (technicians, university staff, staff of national research
institutes and ministries, and other relevant actors). ILRI will provide dedicated
digital data collection tools (e.g. ODK), data quality control, and calculation of GHG
emissions for inventory reporting, following established protocols.
Activity 1.3.4: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments. Together with No. of women trained MLF, RAB, MoALD, 34,250 Yes
improvements to extension services conducted by women and men under output in devolved CC units MAAIF
1.2, the Programme will seek to improve the accuracy and use of information (<40%)
(climate, feed availability) to last mile-users in the dairy sector. This will include
building the capacity of devolved CC units and decentralized meteorological
offices to develop and disseminate climate information services, including (i)
impacts of CC on the dairy sector; and (ii) on availability of feed, through tools like
national feed balance sheets.
Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional cooperation platforms and participation to MLF, RAB, MoALD, 824,250 Yes
regional/ global networks for knowledge exchange and policy dialogue on climate- MAAIF
smart dairy sector transformation.
Sub-activity 1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global climate policy Number of women and
mechanisms. In practice, the sub-activity will consist of a joint participation of the youth farmers
4 countries in global and regional events (global science and policy mechanisms on supported to attend
dairy and climate change) such as the Greenhouse Gas and Animal Agriculture 0regional campaign
Conference – GGAA 2025, the African Climate Summit, the African Dairy activities (<40%
Conference, and the UNFCCC COP). The objective will be to present the progress women )
and results from the Programme for scaling-up and replication, increase its
visibility and engage with other countries in sharing experience and learning. Households reporting
Participants include women, youth, those with disability and marginalized they can influence
decision-making of
local authorities
(disaggregated)
42

--- Table 1 on Page 186 ---
in the four countries, and the place of dairy in them. Based on these assessments,
capacity development will be provided to design activity data questionnaires for
Tier 2 GHG emissions in dairy (e.g. animal numbers, weights, productivity, feed
rations, animal health interventions, manure management and grassland
management) and develop a data management system to ensure reliable flow of
information between the various national and local agencies involved in the MRV
system. ILRI’s Mazingira Centre will provide trainings to young women and men
from the four countries on data collection protocols adjusted to their needs to
relevant stakeholders (technicians, university staff, staff of national research
institutes and ministries, and other relevant actors). ILRI will provide dedicated
digital data collection tools (e.g. ODK), data quality control, and calculation of GHG
emissions for inventory reporting, following established protocols. | Number of women
(<40%) as
iii. AI tech Trainees
ii. Lead farmers
iii. New AI technology |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.3.4: Climate risk and vulnerability assessments. Together with
improvements to extension services conducted by women and men under output
1.2, the Programme will seek to improve the accuracy and use of information
(climate, feed availability) to last mile-users in the dairy sector. This will include
building the capacity of devolved CC units and decentralized meteorological
offices to develop and disseminate climate information services, including (i)
impacts of CC on the dairy sector; and (ii) on availability of feed, through tools like
national feed balance sheets. | No. of women trained
in devolved CC units
(<40%) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 34,250 | Yes
Activity 1.4.2: Establish regional cooperation platforms and participation to
regional/ global networks for knowledge exchange and policy dialogue on climate-
smart dairy sector transformation.
Sub-activity 1.4.2.2: Participation in regional and global climate policy
mechanisms. In practice, the sub-activity will consist of a joint participation of the
4 countries in global and regional events (global science and policy mechanisms on
dairy and climate change) such as the Greenhouse Gas and Animal Agriculture
Conference – GGAA 2025, the African Climate Summit, the African Dairy
Conference, and the UNFCCC COP). The objective will be to present the progress
and results from the Programme for scaling-up and replication, increase its
visibility and engage with other countries in sharing experience and learning.
Participants include women, youth, those with disability and marginalized | Number of women and
youth farmers
supported to attend
0regional campaign
activities (<40%
women )
Households reporting
they can influence
decision-making of
local authorities
(disaggregated) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 824,250 | Yes

=== PAGE 187 ===
Sub-activity 1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC). This sub- No. of women MLF, RAB, MoALD, 1,142,500 Yes
activity will support the emergence of a global network of experience and supported to take part MAAIF
expertise on reducing GHG emissions, especially methane, in dairy production and in the South-to-South
value chains, as well as financing solutions to support these reductions. This sub- exchange learnings
activity will finance the participation in knowledge-exchange programs, including (<40%)
through IFAD’s “Learning Routes” with e.g. Argentina, Brazil (Embrapa), Costa Rica
and Uruguay on Tier2 analysis and climate impact assessments in the dairy sector.
Other initiatives for SSTC will be identified and assessed by the Regional Steering
Committee in collaboration with the EAC. It will finance study tours and
participation of country delegations (including women and youth) to workshops to
share innovations and scalable practices generated by the Programme.
Yes
No. of women in
COMPONENT 2: LOW EMISSION AND CLIMATE RESILIENT PRIMARY DAIRY executive committees
PRODUCTION leadership in MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 520,500
Output 2.1: Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened. cooperatives (<40%)
Activity 2.1.1 Strengthen dairy cooperatives on organizational management and
service delivery. This activity aims to strengthen cooperative, organizational, and
technical capacities of dairy cooperatives, and raise their climate-change and
gender and social inclusion awareness of their management team. Support the
enrolment of women and youth dairy value chain actors in the cooperative
membership and leadership. Support will also be provided to establish or enhance
women only networks in MCCs and MCPs, and their business linkages.
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Strengthen capacity to reduce milk losses and ensure milk No of women MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 1,420,500 Yes
quality and safety. At the aggregation stage, up to approximately 8 percent of the supported with milk
milk is lost via spillage and spoilage. Aiming at reducing unproductive GHG handing equipment
emissions due to milk loss or quality loss, this sub-activity is to assist dairy (<40%)
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs in upgrading their technical capacity in milk quality
control covering raw milk testing at milk collection, hygiene, and initial processing
beyond the sale of raw milk, in line with national and regional food safety No. of women trained
standards. The support will assist to acquire (i) basic equipment for milk collection on milk quality and
(motorcycles, milk cans and can holders, testing equipment), (ii) insulated milk safety (<40%)
transport vehicles (demonstration purpose); and (iii) training on milk quality, food
safety and hygiene for informal milk vendors (often women), transporters (often Percentage of
men) and technical staff of cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs. people/households
reporting an increase
in production /milk
sales (M/F)
43

--- Table 1 on Page 187 ---
Sub-activity 1.4.2.3: South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC). This sub-
activity will support the emergence of a global network of experience and
expertise on reducing GHG emissions, especially methane, in dairy production and
value chains, as well as financing solutions to support these reductions. This sub-
activity will finance the participation in knowledge-exchange programs, including
through IFAD’s “Learning Routes” with e.g. Argentina, Brazil (Embrapa), Costa Rica
and Uruguay on Tier2 analysis and climate impact assessments in the dairy sector.
Other initiatives for SSTC will be identified and assessed by the Regional Steering
Committee in collaboration with the EAC. It will finance study tours and
participation of country delegations (including women and youth) to workshops to
share innovations and scalable practices generated by the Programme. | No. of women
supported to take part
in the South-to-South
exchange learnings
(<40%) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 1,142,500 | Yes
COMPONENT 2: LOW EMISSION AND CLIMATE RESILIENT PRIMARY DAIRY
PRODUCTION
Output 2.1: Smallholders’ and cooperative capacity development strengthened.
Activity 2.1.1 Strengthen dairy cooperatives on organizational management and
service delivery. This activity aims to strengthen cooperative, organizational, and
technical capacities of dairy cooperatives, and raise their climate-change and
gender and social inclusion awareness of their management team. Support the
enrolment of women and youth dairy value chain actors in the cooperative
membership and leadership. Support will also be provided to establish or enhance
women only networks in MCCs and MCPs, and their business linkages. | No. of women in
executive committees
leadership in
cooperatives (<40%) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 520,500 | Yes
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2 Strengthen capacity to reduce milk losses and ensure milk
quality and safety. At the aggregation stage, up to approximately 8 percent of the
milk is lost via spillage and spoilage. Aiming at reducing unproductive GHG
emissions due to milk loss or quality loss, this sub-activity is to assist dairy
cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs in upgrading their technical capacity in milk quality
control covering raw milk testing at milk collection, hygiene, and initial processing
beyond the sale of raw milk, in line with national and regional food safety
standards. The support will assist to acquire (i) basic equipment for milk collection
(motorcycles, milk cans and can holders, testing equipment), (ii) insulated milk
transport vehicles (demonstration purpose); and (iii) training on milk quality, food
safety and hygiene for informal milk vendors (often women), transporters (often
men) and technical staff of cooperatives, MCCs and MCPs. | No of women
supported with milk
handing equipment
(<40%)
No. of women trained
on milk quality and
safety (<40%)
Percentage of
people/households
reporting an increase
in production /milk
sales (M/F) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 1,420,500 | Yes

=== PAGE 188 ===
Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Expand the outreach and capacity of dairy cooperatives, MCCs No of MCCs and MCPs MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 920,500 Yes
and MCPs. The targeted MCCs and MCPs will be supported to develop gender and supported on gender
youth responsive action plans e.g. ensure opportunities for youth employment as and youth approaches
well as inclusive and equal employment opportunities ensuring women can work
such as ‘zero tolerance’ to GBV and SEAH and other inclusive policies and
practices. This may include trainings or technical assistance for such institutional Beneficiaries reporting
capacity building. This activity will include trainings on the prevention of GBV and reduction of GBV (M/F)
SEA
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4 Create gender awareness and roll out GALS among No of women and men MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 2,920,500 Yes
households of dairy farmers. The GALS trainings will first train TOTs in each TOTs trained on GALS
country and then roll out regional, community trainings. In each community GALS (<40% women)
facilitators will be trained. The GALS facilitators will train households and identify
gender champions who will undertake community outreach and sessions. Gender
transformative approaches will be integrated in the Programme activities as much
as possible. However specific GALS sessions and trainings for stakeholders on Beneficiaries reporting
gender equality and women empowerment will be rolled out across the four reduced or more
countries. This will be done for national, regional and community level balanced workloads for
stakeholders. This will include exchange visits and learning events. Support women
trainings in GALS to encourage men sharing household and farm workloads and
positive gender norms.
Activity 2.1.2 Build and enhance Productive Alliances along the dairy value chain. No of women and MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 425,500 Yes
The Programme will provide support to productive alliances between farmer youth led groups
cooperatives and enterprises with farmer-allied engagement models, and scaling- participating (<40%
up of gender and socially inclusive dairy clusters. This activity will support women women)
and youth led farmer groups to participate in the Alliances
Activity 2.1.2.3 Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Strengthen cooperatives’ capacity in business No. of jobs/placements MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 1,920,500 Yes
and financial management. The aim is to ensure that dairy cooperatives and their for youth (M/F)
MCCs) are run as viable business enterprises. This activity will support job
placements for trained young people in participating MCCs and MCPs as part of percentage of rural
increasing their employability and creating jobs. Further, youth trainees will receive producer organizations
business mentorship and coaching on business and financial management through engaged in formal
paid for placements in well performing dairy cooperatives and enterprises over an partnerships/agreeme
agreed period after completing their job placements. nts or contracts with
public or private
entities supporting
youth
Output 2.2: Breeding, feed and fodder, manure management improved. MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 923,502 Yes
44

--- Table 1 on Page 188 ---
 |  |  |  |  | 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.3 Expand the outreach and capacity of dairy cooperatives, MCCs
and MCPs. The targeted MCCs and MCPs will be supported to develop gender and
youth responsive action plans e.g. ensure opportunities for youth employment as
well as inclusive and equal employment opportunities ensuring women can work
such as ‘zero tolerance’ to GBV and SEAH and other inclusive policies and
practices. This may include trainings or technical assistance for such institutional
capacity building. This activity will include trainings on the prevention of GBV and
SEA | No of MCCs and MCPs
supported on gender
and youth approaches
Beneficiaries reporting
reduction of GBV (M/F) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 920,500 | Yes
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4 Create gender awareness and roll out GALS among
households of dairy farmers. The GALS trainings will first train TOTs in each
country and then roll out regional, community trainings. In each community GALS
facilitators will be trained. The GALS facilitators will train households and identify
gender champions who will undertake community outreach and sessions. Gender
transformative approaches will be integrated in the Programme activities as much
as possible. However specific GALS sessions and trainings for stakeholders on
gender equality and women empowerment will be rolled out across the four
countries. This will be done for national, regional and community level
stakeholders. This will include exchange visits and learning events. Support
trainings in GALS to encourage men sharing household and farm workloads and
positive gender norms. | No of women and men
TOTs trained on GALS
(<40% women)
Beneficiaries reporting
reduced or more
balanced workloads for
women |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 2,920,500 | Yes
Activity 2.1.2 Build and enhance Productive Alliances along the dairy value chain.
The Programme will provide support to productive alliances between farmer
cooperatives and enterprises with farmer-allied engagement models, and scaling-
up of gender and socially inclusive dairy clusters. This activity will support women
and youth led farmer groups to participate in the Alliances | No of women and
youth led groups
participating (<40%
women) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 425,500 | Yes
Activity 2.1.2.3 Sub-activity 2.1.2.1 Strengthen cooperatives’ capacity in business
and financial management. The aim is to ensure that dairy cooperatives and their
MCCs) are run as viable business enterprises. This activity will support job
placements for trained young people in participating MCCs and MCPs as part of
increasing their employability and creating jobs. Further, youth trainees will receive
business mentorship and coaching on business and financial management through
paid for placements in well performing dairy cooperatives and enterprises over an
agreed period after completing their job placements. | No. of jobs/placements
for youth (M/F)
percentage of rural
producer organizations
engaged in formal
partnerships/agreeme
nts or contracts with
public or private
entities supporting
youth |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 1,920,500 | Yes
Output 2.2: Breeding, feed and fodder, manure management improved. |  |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 923,502 | Yes

=== PAGE 189 ===
Sub-activity 2.2.1.3 Scale up the insemination of dairy cattle to make the herd
more productive and climate resilient. The Programme will (i) train AI technicians, No. of female
who can be private inseminators, para-veterinarians, lead farmers of L-FFS and technicians trained
District livestock officers (at least 30 percent youth and 40 percent women); (ii) (<40% women)
scale up the insemination of dairy cattle in the Programme intervention area; (iii)
include aspects of the interaction between dairy cattle husbandry and climate
change in the L-FFS curriculum. In Kenya, the Programme will support the National
Breeding Strategy and Action Plan, in collaboration with the Kenya Livestock No. of women
Breeders Association. Public and private partnerships (PPP) will be promoted to equipped with start-up
have AI services accessible to the male and female farmers. In Rwanda, the kits (<40%)
breeding programme of RAB will be scaled up including the training of more
private AI technicians. In Tanzania, additional technicians will be trained and
equipped with start-up kits. In addition, bull centers will be established in regions
where AI is not available. In Uganda, more AI technicians will be trained by the
NAGRC and will be equipped with AI kits focusing on the regions where AI services
are still poorly developed.
Campaigns and support breeders’ organizations. The campaigns will target male, percentage of
female and youth members of dairy cooperatives and L-FFS groups to create supported rural
awareness on the use of sexed-semen, thus impacting the herd’s sex ratio, and producers who are
further reduce absolute GHG emissions and the emission intensity per kg of milk members of rural
produced mainly by replacing many low-productive local cows with a few adapted producer organizations
and high performant crossbreeds, thus reducing the herd size. In the four reporting new or
countries, support will be given to the breeders’ associations and societies for improved services
animal registration and maintenance of breeding standards. provided by their
organization
Activity 2.2.2 Provide support for better animal care, herd management and Number of women MLF, RAB, MoALD, 327,123 Yes
disease prevention. Day to day feeding and management is mainly a female and trained (< 40% women MAAIF
male youth gender role in the four project countries. Women will be trained. and 30% youth)
Sub-activity 2.2.2.1 Organize trainings on animal husbandry, with a specific focus Number of women and MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 525,500 Yes
on animal health, animal welfare, herd management and disease prevention youth trained
targeting women and youth. Updated modules of the L-FFS training on animal (< 40% women and
health and welfare, and herd and reproduction management will be implemented. 30% youth)
Dairy farmers, managers and handlers (feeding and milking) will receive training to
better care for the animals and to adopt biosecurity measures to prevent common
diseases and pests that impact the production or suitability of the milk for human
consumption. They will also receive support to better manage their herds,
reproduction calendar, and animal nutrition to reduce animal mortality, heat
45

--- Table 1 on Page 189 ---
Sub-activity 2.2.1.3 Scale up the insemination of dairy cattle to make the herd
more productive and climate resilient. The Programme will (i) train AI technicians,
who can be private inseminators, para-veterinarians, lead farmers of L-FFS and
District livestock officers (at least 30 percent youth and 40 percent women); (ii)
scale up the insemination of dairy cattle in the Programme intervention area; (iii)
include aspects of the interaction between dairy cattle husbandry and climate
change in the L-FFS curriculum. In Kenya, the Programme will support the National
Breeding Strategy and Action Plan, in collaboration with the Kenya Livestock
Breeders Association. Public and private partnerships (PPP) will be promoted to
have AI services accessible to the male and female farmers. In Rwanda, the
breeding programme of RAB will be scaled up including the training of more
private AI technicians. In Tanzania, additional technicians will be trained and
equipped with start-up kits. In addition, bull centers will be established in regions
where AI is not available. In Uganda, more AI technicians will be trained by the
NAGRC and will be equipped with AI kits focusing on the regions where AI services
are still poorly developed.
Campaigns and support breeders’ organizations. The campaigns will target male,
female and youth members of dairy cooperatives and L-FFS groups to create
awareness on the use of sexed-semen, thus impacting the herd’s sex ratio, and
further reduce absolute GHG emissions and the emission intensity per kg of milk
produced mainly by replacing many low-productive local cows with a few adapted
and high performant crossbreeds, thus reducing the herd size. In the four
countries, support will be given to the breeders’ associations and societies for
animal registration and maintenance of breeding standards. | No. of female
technicians trained
(<40% women)
No. of women
equipped with start-up
kits (<40%)
percentage of
supported rural
producers who are
members of rural
producer organizations
reporting new or
improved services
provided by their
organization |  |  |  | 
Activity 2.2.2 Provide support for better animal care, herd management and
disease prevention. Day to day feeding and management is mainly a female and
male youth gender role in the four project countries. Women will be trained. | Number of women
trained (< 40% women
and 30% youth) |  | MLF, RAB, MoALD,
MAAIF | 327,123 | Yes
Sub-activity 2.2.2.1 Organize trainings on animal husbandry, with a specific focus
on animal health, animal welfare, herd management and disease prevention
targeting women and youth. Updated modules of the L-FFS training on animal
health and welfare, and herd and reproduction management will be implemented.
Dairy farmers, managers and handlers (feeding and milking) will receive training to
better care for the animals and to adopt biosecurity measures to prevent common
diseases and pests that impact the production or suitability of the milk for human
consumption. They will also receive support to better manage their herds,
reproduction calendar, and animal nutrition to reduce animal mortality, heat | Number of women and
youth trained
(< 40% women and
30% youth) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 525,500 | Yes

=== PAGE 190 ===
stress and increase productivity, thus further reducing absolute CH4 emissions
and the emission intensity per unit of milk produced.
Sub-activity 2.2.2.2 Scale up the use of digital apps to monitor animal health and Number of women and MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 1,720,500 Yes
herd performance. Digital record keeping on-farm (e.g., using iCow, DigiCow Africa, youth supported with
My Fugo) will be scaled up to monitor the productive and health performances of digital tools (< 40%
the herd (e.g., records of calf mortality and causes, number of lame animals), to women and 30%
plan artificial insemination, and guide herd management. The use of the app will be youth)
promoted through the L-FFS in interested groups. The support includes: (i) training
of L-FFS lead mixed gender farmers on the use of the apps; (ii) guiding L-FFS farmers
in the use of the technology; (iii) equip the (youth) farmers in the pilot with digital
tools. To implement the sub-activity, the Programme will work with agritech
companies and start-up to develop digital solutions that will enhance transparency
in farm data and operations, monitoring of CH4 emissions reduction and traceability
of milk products.
Activity 2.2.3 Promote climate-smart forage production and conservation. The Number of women MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 920,500 Yes
adoption of climate resilient forage varieties and conservation technologies is benefitting from
essential to reduce enteric methane emissions intensities in the dairy value chain, climate and energy
while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle. The benefits are multiple and saving technologies
encompass CC adaptation through adoption of a resilient forage variety (Lablab tools (< 40%)
purpureus, Brachiaria sp., Cenchrus purpureus (Napier grass), Leucaena,
Calliandra, Panicum maximum (Giant Panicum)), improvements in soil fertility and
increased capacity of farmers, managers and handlers (feeding and milking) to percentage of
meet forage production needs during dry periods and to respond to climate- people/households
induced pests and diseases. reporting a significant
reduction in time spent
Sub-activity 2.2.3.3 Build capacity of dairy farmers on forage production and collecting cooking fuel
intensive dairy farms. The L-FFS will be the gender inclusive knowledge-sharing
vehicle to promote improved forage production and conservation. The L-FFS will
focus on (i) training on good forage management practices (e.g., grass and legume
intercropping, agroforestry, weed management, (ii) training and demonstration
on small-scale irrigation to produce forage crops; (iii) training and demonstrations
of mechanization of forage production with fodder choppers/cutters and
conservation equipment; (iv) training and demonstrations on forage conservation
practices, to respond to seasonal feed availability and quality (e.g., protein
content, digestibility) variations. Mixed gender Youth groups will be supported to
venture into commercial fodder production, which may include production using
hydroponic technology.
46

--- Table 1 on Page 190 ---
stress and increase productivity, thus further reducing absolute CH4 emissions
and the emission intensity per unit of milk produced. |  |  |  |  | 
Sub-activity 2.2.2.2 Scale up the use of digital apps to monitor animal health and
herd performance. Digital record keeping on-farm (e.g., using iCow, DigiCow Africa,
My Fugo) will be scaled up to monitor the productive and health performances of
the herd (e.g., records of calf mortality and causes, number of lame animals), to
plan artificial insemination, and guide herd management. The use of the app will be
promoted through the L-FFS in interested groups. The support includes: (i) training
of L-FFS lead mixed gender farmers on the use of the apps; (ii) guiding L-FFS farmers
in the use of the technology; (iii) equip the (youth) farmers in the pilot with digital
tools. To implement the sub-activity, the Programme will work with agritech
companies and start-up to develop digital solutions that will enhance transparency
in farm data and operations, monitoring of CH4 emissions reduction and traceability
of milk products. | Number of women and
youth supported with
digital tools (< 40%
women and 30%
youth) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 1,720,500 | Yes
Activity 2.2.3 Promote climate-smart forage production and conservation. The
adoption of climate resilient forage varieties and conservation technologies is
essential to reduce enteric methane emissions intensities in the dairy value chain,
while increasing milk yields of dairy cattle. The benefits are multiple and
encompass CC adaptation through adoption of a resilient forage variety (Lablab
purpureus, Brachiaria sp., Cenchrus purpureus (Napier grass), Leucaena,
Calliandra, Panicum maximum (Giant Panicum)), improvements in soil fertility and
increased capacity of farmers, managers and handlers (feeding and milking) to
meet forage production needs during dry periods and to respond to climate-
induced pests and diseases.
Sub-activity 2.2.3.3 Build capacity of dairy farmers on forage production and
intensive dairy farms. The L-FFS will be the gender inclusive knowledge-sharing
vehicle to promote improved forage production and conservation. The L-FFS will
focus on (i) training on good forage management practices (e.g., grass and legume
intercropping, agroforestry, weed management, (ii) training and demonstration
on small-scale irrigation to produce forage crops; (iii) training and demonstrations
of mechanization of forage production with fodder choppers/cutters and
conservation equipment; (iv) training and demonstrations on forage conservation
practices, to respond to seasonal feed availability and quality (e.g., protein
content, digestibility) variations. Mixed gender Youth groups will be supported to
venture into commercial fodder production, which may include production using
hydroponic technology. | Number of women
benefitting from
climate and energy
saving technologies
tools (< 40%)
percentage of
people/households
reporting a significant
reduction in time spent
collecting cooking fuel |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 920,500 | Yes

=== PAGE 191 ===
Activity 2.2.6 Build capacity for on-farm use of biodigesters and biogas. Biogas Number of women MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 2,500,000 Yes
digesters utilize microorganisms to break down organic matter such as livestock supported with
manure or other organic waste, during which biogas and a nutrient-rich by- biodigesters, biogas
product (called digestate or bio slurry) are produced. This technology offers a tools (< 40%)
clean source of energy for people who do not have access to clean cooking fuels.
In addition, it creates a biofertilizer (for use as organic fertiliser on nearby fields),
reduces methane emissions (up to 70-90 percent compared to liquid manure
storage) and ammonia and nitrous oxide emissions. Biodigesters can reduce
deforestation and empower women by reducing the time they spent collecting
firewood. As part of the low-carbon pathways, the Programme will encourage the
uptake of on-farm biodigesters for intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms.
Including women are the main consumers of biogas.
Sub-activity 2.2.6.1 Support capacity building in biodigester management. The Number of youths
Programme will support the training and accreditation of biodigester technicians trained as biodigesters,
and consumers, with a particular focus on women and youth, in the target biogas technicians (<
districts. In addition to installation-related aspects of biogas valorisation and 30%)
quality management, including safe working standards.
Sub-activity 2.3.2.2 Rangelands restoration. This sub-activity, focusing on Number of women MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF 2,000,000 Yes
communal grazing areas, will focus on: (i) reseeding and integration of legumes supported with
with grasses in natural pastures, (ii) integration of multipurpose leguminous trees biodigesters, biogas
and shrubs (improved agro-forestry systems) and control of invasive tree species, tools (< 40%)
(iii) preservation of traditional non-forest tree products (medicinal and other)
known to women mainly and (iv) implementation of soil and water conservation
practices to increase water availability and biomass productivity.
COMPONENT 3: GREEN DAIRY FINANCING FACILITY (GDFF)
Activity 3.1.1 Fund set up. This activity aims to establish the GDFF fund as a Gender and youth Annu Regional 50,000 Yes
functioning entity with the required policies, structures and staffing, and to crowd expert identified and in al
in private commercial capital in pursuit of the programme’s climate impact post (Yr2-
ambitions. The GDFF staffing and structure will include provisions for gender and 6)
youth expert.
Sub-Activity 3.1.1.2 Investor engagement and negotiation (led by Fund Manager, Gender and youth Annu Regional 50,000 Yes
in coordination with IFAD). The Fund Manager will be responsible for identifying, expert identified and in al
engaging and carrying out due diligence on prospective investors. The Fund post (Yr2-
Manager will develop criteria for screening investors demonstrate forward and 6)
backward linkages with women and youth enterprises. Expertise may be needed
to support youth and women screening
47

--- Table 1 on Page 191 ---
Activity 2.2.6 Build capacity for on-farm use of biodigesters and biogas. Biogas
digesters utilize microorganisms to break down organic matter such as livestock
manure or other organic waste, during which biogas and a nutrient-rich by-
product (called digestate or bio slurry) are produced. This technology offers a
clean source of energy for people who do not have access to clean cooking fuels.
In addition, it creates a biofertilizer (for use as organic fertiliser on nearby fields),
reduces methane emissions (up to 70-90 percent compared to liquid manure
storage) and ammonia and nitrous oxide emissions. Biodigesters can reduce
deforestation and empower women by reducing the time they spent collecting
firewood. As part of the low-carbon pathways, the Programme will encourage the
uptake of on-farm biodigesters for intensive and semi-intensive dairy farms.
Including women are the main consumers of biogas.
Sub-activity 2.2.6.1 Support capacity building in biodigester management. The
Programme will support the training and accreditation of biodigester technicians
and consumers, with a particular focus on women and youth, in the target
districts. In addition to installation-related aspects of biogas valorisation and
quality management, including safe working standards. | Number of women
supported with
biodigesters, biogas
tools (< 40%)
Number of youths
trained as biodigesters,
biogas technicians (<
30%) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 2,500,000 | Yes
Sub-activity 2.3.2.2 Rangelands restoration. This sub-activity, focusing on
communal grazing areas, will focus on: (i) reseeding and integration of legumes
with grasses in natural pastures, (ii) integration of multipurpose leguminous trees
and shrubs (improved agro-forestry systems) and control of invasive tree species,
(iii) preservation of traditional non-forest tree products (medicinal and other)
known to women mainly and (iv) implementation of soil and water conservation
practices to increase water availability and biomass productivity. | Number of women
supported with
biodigesters, biogas
tools (< 40%) |  | MLF, RAB, KDB, MAAIF | 2,000,000 | Yes
COMPONENT 3: GREEN DAIRY FINANCING FACILITY (GDFF) |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 3.1.1 Fund set up. This activity aims to establish the GDFF fund as a
functioning entity with the required policies, structures and staffing, and to crowd
in private commercial capital in pursuit of the programme’s climate impact
ambitions. The GDFF staffing and structure will include provisions for gender and
youth expert. | Gender and youth
expert identified and in
post | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 50,000 | Yes
Sub-Activity 3.1.1.2 Investor engagement and negotiation (led by Fund Manager,
in coordination with IFAD). The Fund Manager will be responsible for identifying,
engaging and carrying out due diligence on prospective investors. The Fund
Manager will develop criteria for screening investors demonstrate forward and
backward linkages with women and youth enterprises. Expertise may be needed
to support youth and women screening | Gender and youth
expert identified and in
post | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 50,000 | Yes

=== PAGE 192 ===
Activity 3.1.2 Identify eligible businesses for investment. While this will focus on Number of women and Annu Regional 50,000 Yes
developing a screening framework to assess prospective investees for potential youth businesses al
impact and financial return. This activity will ensure identification of women and identified (< 40% (Yr2-
youth led businesses by making gender and youth provisions in the screening women, youth < 30%) 6)
framework.
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.1 Develop screening framework. The Fund Manager will No. of taxonomies Annu Regional 312,000 Yes
establish a screening framework to ensure consistency in investment decisions. suitable for women al
This screening framework will be underpinned by a taxonomy of investment and youth (Yr2-
categories which are justified and eligible for investment including those that 6)
facilitate women and youth empowerment by creating jobs and employment
opportunities.
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.2 Pipeline development and screening. The pipeline for the No. of women and Annu Regional 525000 Yes
GDFF will be sourced through three main channels; (i) GDFF Investment Advisors, youth qualifying for al
(ii) DaIMA’s PCUs, and (iii) TA providers under Component 2. Investment Advisors investments (< 40% (Yr2-
will screen prospective investees against pre-defined screening criteria, which will women, youth < 30%) 6)
include women and youth considerations and quotas to ensure uptake. Undertake
mobilization drives for women and youth investees
Activity 3.1.3 Climate-smart lending products and services are rolled out by GDFF No. of women and Annu Regional 3,150,000 Yes
to eligible businesses. These will include labour and energy saving products aimed youth accessing al
at reducing workloads for women. The two products: Green Dairy Partnerships climate smart products (Yr2-
and Dairy Loans will ensure the partnerships promote business working with and services (< 40% 6)
women and youth farmers. The Dairy loan tickets will be developed to ensure the women, youth < 30%)
ticket sizes are affordable and accessible to these groups. Undertake community
outreach will be made through different media to ensure uptake by these groups percentage of
people/households
reporting using
financial services
Output 3.2 Technical Assistance Facility established. The Green Dairy Financing No. of women and Annu Regional 4,150,000 Yes
Facility will invest in climate-resilient dairy producers, off-takers, processors, and youth receiving al
livestock businesses. Tailored financial products with technical assistance will targeted BDS. Financial (Yr2-
increase access to finance and affordable credit for on-farm investments literacy (< 40% women, 6)
especially for youth, women and vulnerable groups. Women and youth will youth < 30%)
receive tailored BDS and financial literacy modules that incorporate gender
transformative approaches such as confidence building, communication skills and percentage of financial
agency building. The GDFF will use a technical assistance (TA) facility to maximise actors offering women
both impact and returns by enhancing the capacity of investees (including on and youth centric
gender and youth sensitive approaches) to implement effective strategies, products
improve operational efficiencies and achieve growth.
48

--- Table 1 on Page 192 ---
Activity 3.1.2 Identify eligible businesses for investment. While this will focus on
developing a screening framework to assess prospective investees for potential
impact and financial return. This activity will ensure identification of women and
youth led businesses by making gender and youth provisions in the screening
framework. | Number of women and
youth businesses
identified (< 40%
women, youth < 30%) | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 50,000 | Yes
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.1 Develop screening framework. The Fund Manager will
establish a screening framework to ensure consistency in investment decisions.
This screening framework will be underpinned by a taxonomy of investment
categories which are justified and eligible for investment including those that
facilitate women and youth empowerment by creating jobs and employment
opportunities. | No. of taxonomies
suitable for women
and youth | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 312,000 | Yes
Sub-Activity 3.1.2.2 Pipeline development and screening. The pipeline for the
GDFF will be sourced through three main channels; (i) GDFF Investment Advisors,
(ii) DaIMA’s PCUs, and (iii) TA providers under Component 2. Investment Advisors
will screen prospective investees against pre-defined screening criteria, which will
include women and youth considerations and quotas to ensure uptake. Undertake
mobilization drives for women and youth investees | No. of women and
youth qualifying for
investments (< 40%
women, youth < 30%) | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 525000 | Yes
Activity 3.1.3 Climate-smart lending products and services are rolled out by GDFF
to eligible businesses. These will include labour and energy saving products aimed
at reducing workloads for women. The two products: Green Dairy Partnerships
and Dairy Loans will ensure the partnerships promote business working with
women and youth farmers. The Dairy loan tickets will be developed to ensure the
ticket sizes are affordable and accessible to these groups. Undertake community
outreach will be made through different media to ensure uptake by these groups | No. of women and
youth accessing
climate smart products
and services (< 40%
women, youth < 30%)
percentage of
people/households
reporting using
financial services | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 3,150,000 | Yes
Output 3.2 Technical Assistance Facility established. The Green Dairy Financing
Facility will invest in climate-resilient dairy producers, off-takers, processors, and
livestock businesses. Tailored financial products with technical assistance will
increase access to finance and affordable credit for on-farm investments
especially for youth, women and vulnerable groups. Women and youth will
receive tailored BDS and financial literacy modules that incorporate gender
transformative approaches such as confidence building, communication skills and
agency building. The GDFF will use a technical assistance (TA) facility to maximise
both impact and returns by enhancing the capacity of investees (including on
gender and youth sensitive approaches) to implement effective strategies,
improve operational efficiencies and achieve growth. | No. of women and
youth receiving
targeted BDS. Financial
literacy (< 40% women,
youth < 30%)
percentage of financial
actors offering women
and youth centric
products | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 4,150,000 | Yes

=== PAGE 193 ===
Activity 3.2.1 Prospective investees will receive targeted pre-deal TA under Output No. of women and Annu Regional 550,000 Yes
3.2. Noting that Component 2 also provides funding to assist dairy cooperatives in youth linked al
acquiring renewable energy and waste management solutions (see Sub-Activity enterprises (< 40% (Yr2-
2.1.3.2), Investment Advisors will liaise with the TA providers of Component 2 to women, youth < 30%) 6)
ensure targeting of women and youth linked enterprises.
Percentage of
people/households
reporting improved
physical access to
processing and milk
storage facilities
Sub-Activity 3.2.1.1 Pre-Deal Development for Dairy Loan Products. These No. of women and Annu Regional 550,000 Yes
businesses will receive light touch TA to translate their investment needs, into a youth linked al
well-defined investment request prior to the deal. Tailored support will be enterprises benefiting (Yr2-
developed to support women and youth friendly loan products. from loan products 6)
developed (< 40%
women, youth < 30%)
Activity 3.2.2 Post-deal TA: Providing ongoing support post-deal to ensure No. of women and Annu Regional 5,150,000 Yes
successful implementation, monitor progress and ensure outcomes are met. youth linked al
enterprises (< 40% (Yr2-
women, youth < 30%) 6)
3.2.2 focuses on providing post-deal TA to Green Dairy Partnership investees, No. of women and Annu Regional 15,150,000 Yes
ensuring that outcomes are achieved. The type and level of support will be youth products al
tailored based on the specific needs identified for each business. This TA will developed (< 40% (Yr2-
coach, mentor and profile good case examples of women and youth investments women, youth < 30%) 6)
for learning exchanges and scale-up. Considering the Dairy Loans will be short-
term, Dairy Loan investees especially women, youth and vulnerable groups may
be considered for follow-ups in place of post-deal TA.
Programme management and coordination Yr 2-7 Regional 500,000 Yes
DaIMA Gender and Social Inclusion expert (full time)
M and E (support Baseline, mid-term and end term) to include Empowerment Yr1. Per country 4,123,320
indicator (for gender) and new and decent jobs indicator (youth) Yr2
and
Yr6
Grand Total 62,429,725
Reference list
49

--- Table 1 on Page 193 ---
Activity 3.2.1 Prospective investees will receive targeted pre-deal TA under Output
3.2. Noting that Component 2 also provides funding to assist dairy cooperatives in
acquiring renewable energy and waste management solutions (see Sub-Activity
2.1.3.2), Investment Advisors will liaise with the TA providers of Component 2 to
ensure targeting of women and youth linked enterprises. | No. of women and
youth linked
enterprises (< 40%
women, youth < 30%)
Percentage of
people/households
reporting improved
physical access to
processing and milk
storage facilities | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 550,000 | Yes
Sub-Activity 3.2.1.1 Pre-Deal Development for Dairy Loan Products. These
businesses will receive light touch TA to translate their investment needs, into a
well-defined investment request prior to the deal. Tailored support will be
developed to support women and youth friendly loan products. | No. of women and
youth linked
enterprises benefiting
from loan products
developed (< 40%
women, youth < 30%) | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 550,000 | Yes
Activity 3.2.2 Post-deal TA: Providing ongoing support post-deal to ensure
successful implementation, monitor progress and ensure outcomes are met. | No. of women and
youth linked
enterprises (< 40%
women, youth < 30%) | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 5,150,000 | Yes
3.2.2 focuses on providing post-deal TA to Green Dairy Partnership investees,
ensuring that outcomes are achieved. The type and level of support will be
tailored based on the specific needs identified for each business. This TA will
coach, mentor and profile good case examples of women and youth investments
for learning exchanges and scale-up. Considering the Dairy Loans will be short-
term, Dairy Loan investees especially women, youth and vulnerable groups may
be considered for follow-ups in place of post-deal TA. | No. of women and
youth products
developed (< 40%
women, youth < 30%) | Annu
al
(Yr2-
6) | Regional | 15,150,000 | Yes
Programme management and coordination
DaIMA Gender and Social Inclusion expert (full time) |  | Yr 2-7 | Regional | 500,000 | Yes
M and E (support Baseline, mid-term and end term) to include Empowerment
indicator (for gender) and new and decent jobs indicator (youth) |  | Yr1.
Yr2
and
Yr6 | Per country | 4,123,320 | 
Grand Total |  |  |  | 62,429,725 | 

=== PAGE 194 ===
1. FAO 2019. ESA Working Paper No. 11-02 Agricultural Development Economics Division. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nationswww.fao.org/economic/esa
2. NISR 2015. The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR). Demographic and Health Survey (2014/15). Kigali, National Institute of Statistics of
Rwanda.
3. NISR 2017. Statistical yearbook 2016. Kigali, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.
4. Agriculture Policy of Rwanda 2018
5. The National Development Plan III 2019/2020-2023/24, Uganda
6. Gender Policy 2007, Uganda
7. The policy for gender equality and women empowerment (Tanzania sera ya maendeleo ya wanawake na jinsia) 2000.
8. The Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania 1977 and Zanzibar 1984.
9. Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, KDHS, 2014.
10. Session paper no3 on national policy for eradication of FGM
11. Kenya national livestock policy 2018
12. Ellis, A et al 2007. Gender and Economic Growth in Kenya: Unleashing the Power of Women
13. World Health Organization Statistics (2018)
14. IFAD 2022. https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/47116743/Stocktaking_ESA_web.pdf/cc8f6720-6dc1-5a92-f61b-
4bcccf4d1d15?t=1671547955602
15. https://fil-idf.org/dairys-global-impact/school-milk-knowledge-hub/addressing-childhood-malnutrition-in-sri-lanka-3/
16. Meredith et al 2022. Moving beyond disciplinary silos: The potential for transdisciplinary research in Sport for Development.
https://jsfd.org/2022/06/01/moving-beyond-disciplinary-silos-the-potential-for-transdisciplinary-research-in-sport-for-development/
17. KIPPRA (2020). Exploring Kenya Dairy Industry for Job Creation for the Youth. Kenya Institute for Public Policy Research and Analysis KIPPRA Discussion
Paper No. 232 2020. Available at: https://kippra.or.ke/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Exploring-Kenya-Dairy-Industry-for-Job-Creation-for-the-Youth-
DP232.pdf
18. IFAD. 2019. Creating opportunities for rural youth. IFAD Report. https://www.ifad.org/ruraldevelopmentreport/
https://globalnutritionreport.org/resources/nutrition-profiles/africa/eastern-africa
19. Government of Rwanda 2014. National Food and Nutrition Policy
20. UDHS, 2000/2001
21. Uganda government 2003. The Uganda Food and Nutrition Policy
22. GoK 2011. National Food and Nutrition Security Policy
23. Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion. Final Report on the Study on Knowledge, Attitude and Practices on GBV, Perceived GBV Root Causes and IOSC
Service Delivery. Kigali, July 2019
24. UNFPA 2024. Ending Gender Based Violence and Harmful Practices. https://uganda.unfpa.org/en/topics/ending-gender-based-violence-and-harmful-
practices
25. Sexual Gender-Based Violence among Adolescent Girls and Young Women 10-24 Years during COVID-19 Pandemic, Bukedi Region, Eastern Uganda.
Uganda National Institute of Public Health. Quarterly Epidemiological Bulletin: October–December, 2022 Volume 7 / Issue 4 /Article No. 4.
50

--- Table 1 on Page 194 ---
NISR 2015. The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR). Demographic and Health Survey (2014/15). Kigali, National Institute of Statistics of
Rwanda.

=== PAGE 195 ===
26. Nakayiza, C. 2024. Gender-based violence ranks as top women’s-rights issue that Ugandans want government and society to address. Afrobarometer
Dispatch No. 792
27. https://www.afrobarometer.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/AD792-Gender-based-violence-ranks-as-top-womens-rights-issue-for-Ugandans-
Afrobarometer-4april24-.pdf
28. USAID 2008. Gender-based Violence in Tanzania: An Assessment of Policies, Services, and Promising Interventions.
29. http://www.healthpolicyplus.com/archive/ns/pubs/hpi/Documents/1454_1_TZ_GBV_Summary_FINAL_6_8_11_acc.pdf
30. World Bank 2017. Tanzania Gender-Based Violence Assessment: Scope, Programming, Gaps and Entry Points
31. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099155003312242676/pdf/P17605107388b40600a73a0ef1c83555589.pdf
32. 2012. Sexual and Gender Based Violence in Kenya: A Call For Action Overview of Gender Based violence
33. https://ncpd.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Policy-Brief-26-Sexual-and-Gender-Based-Violence-in-Kenya.pdf
34. 2012. Sexual and Gender Based Violence in Kenya: A Call For Action Overview of Gender Based violence
35. https://ncpd.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Policy-Brief-26-Sexual-and-Gender-Based-Violence-in-Kenya.pdf
36. Health Development Initiative (HDI) Rwanda 2023. Prevention of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment Policy 2023. https://hdirwanda.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/PSEAH-Policy.pdf
37. United Nations Secretary General’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13). This
Bulletin was published on 9 October 2003.
38. United Nations Secretary General Bulletin Prohibition of discrimination, harassment, including sexual Harassment and abuse of authority
(ST/SGB/2008/5). This Bulletin was published on 11February 2008.
39. IFAD, IFAD policy on gender equality and women's empowerment (Rome, 2012)
40. The project-level WEAI (pro-WEAI) measures women’s empowerment in various types of agricultural development projects.
https://weai.ifpri.info/versions/pro-weai
41. IFAD. 2022. How to integrate the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) in IFAD operations
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/45173373/htdn_gals.pdf/38ec05a9-d0a9-3559-6306-d73b5db540dc?t=1648470620545
51

=== PAGE 196 ===
___________
52
