=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20210913223644+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
ModDate: D:20210914091332+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 21.5.20060
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
4 – 7 October 2021
Virtual meeting
Provisional agenda item 15
14 September 2021
Consideration of funding proposals -
Addendum VI
Funding proposal package for FP174
Summary
This addendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate
resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the
Dominican Republic";
b) No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment*;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.
*includes the redacted version of the Secretariat’s assessment

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 99
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 112
Secretariat’s assessment 115
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 133
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
148
assessment
Gender documentation 151

=== PAGE 3 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in
Project/Programme title: the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the
Dominican Republic
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica,
Country(ies):
Panama and the Dominican Republic
Accredited Entity: Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)
Date of first submission: 2019/11/08
Date of current submission 2021/09/06
Version number V.10
CONNFOID ECNLACSIAIFLI CEAXDTEOR NO

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE b OF 96
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
"FP-CABEI-CENTRAL AMERICA-2019/11/08"

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
A
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3 OF 96
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or private
Programme Public
programme sector
A.3. Request for Not applicable
Proposals (RFP)
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme
targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget
devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: GCF contribution:
Enter number%
☐ Energy access and power generation: Enter number%
☐ Low-emission transport: Enter number%
A.4. Result area(s) ☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances: Enter number%
☐ Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
50%
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security: Enter number%
☐ Infrastructure and built environment: Enter number%
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services: 50%
1,084,441 people (direct);
1,364,044 people (indirect)
A.5. Expected mitigation Indicate t CO2eq over A.6. Expected
impact lifespan adaptation impact
N/A
A.7. Total financing
US$ 268.4 million
(GCF + co-finance)
A.9. Project size Large (Over USD 250 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding US$ 174.3 million
requested See annex 17.
☒ Grant US84.3 million ☐ Equity Enter number
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested ☒ Loan US$ 60.0 million ☐ Results-based
for the GCF funding Guarantee US$ 30 million payment Enter number
☒
A.11. Implementation
7 years A.12. Total lifespan 12 years
period
A.13. Expected date of Click or tap to enter a
A.14. ESS category I-2￼
AE internal approval date.
A.15. Has this FP been A.16. Has Readiness or
submitted as a CN Yes ☒ No PPF support been used Yes ☐ No ☒
☐
before? to prepare this FP?
A.17. Is this FP included A.18. Is this FP included
in the entity work Yes ☒ No in the country Yes ☒ No
☐ ☐
programme? programme?
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
A.19. Complementarity
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
and coherence
Yes ☒ No ☐

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  |  | Programme | A.2. Public or private
sector |  |  |  | Public |  | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) |  |  | Not applicable |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme
targets. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget
devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Mitigation: Reduced emissions from:
Energy access and power generation:
☐
Low-emission transport:
☐
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☐ Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
☒ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:
☒ Ecosystem and ecosystem services: |  |  |  |  |  | GCF contribution:
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
Enter number%
50%
Enter number%
Enter number%
50% | 
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact |  |  | Indicate t CO2eq over
lifespan | A.6. Expected
adaptation impact |  |  |  | 1,084,441 people (direct);
1,364,044 people (indirect) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | N/A |  | 
A.7. Total financing
(GCF + co-finance) |  |  | US$ 268.4 million | A.9. Project size |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  |  | US$ 174.3 million
See annex 17. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding |  |  | ☒ Grant US84.3 million
☒ Loan US$ 60.0 million
Guarantee US$ 30 million
☒ |  |  | ☐ Equity Enter number
☐ Results-based
payment Enter number |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period |  |  | 7 years | A.12. Total lifespan |  |  |  | 12 years |  | 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  |  | Click or tap to enter a
date. | A.14. ESS category |  |  |  | I-2￼ |  | 
 | A.15. Has this FP been |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | A.16. Has Readiness or |  |  | Yes ☐ No ☒ |  | 
 | submitted as a CN |  |  |  | PPF support been used |  |  |  |  | 
 | before? |  |  |  | to prepare this FP? |  |  |  |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP included |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | A.18. Is this FP included |  |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | 
 | in the entity work |  |  |  | in the country |  |  |  |  | 
 | programme? |  |  |  | programme? |  |  |  |  | 
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence |  |  | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 5 ---
A.2. Public or private
sector

--- Table 4 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 5 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact

--- Table 6 on Page 5 ---
A.6. Expected
adaptation impact

--- Table 7 on Page 5 ---
A.7. Total financing
(GCF + co-finance)

--- Table 8 on Page 5 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 9 on Page 5 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 10 on Page 5 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

--- Table 11 on Page 5 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 12 on Page 5 ---
Click or tap to enter a
date.

--- Table 13 on Page 5 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

=== PAGE 6 ===
A
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 4 OF 96
The programme will be executed by three institutions with clear roles according to their
capacities and role in the region
CABEI will be the accredited entity for the programme, but will also be directly executing the
major part of component 2 – output 4 - of the programme (activity 4.1 and activity 4.2) as
they will be directly responsible for the set up and management of the loan and guarantee
facilities of the programme. FAO will be the Executing entity for the Technical Assistance
facility under this component, (activity 4.3). CABEI will also be the executing entity for the
grant facility under output 2 (activity 2.3)
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) will play a major role in the execution of the
A.20. Executing Entity
capacity building, technical assistance and implementation of the Ecosystem based
information
Adaptation demonstration sites throughout the region as the Executing Entity of outputs 1
and 2 of the programme.
The Central-American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD) will play a
key role in political coordination among participant countries through the direct execution of
output 3 focused of gathering and disseminating key results and analysis derived from the
execution of the programme aiming at generating evidence to inform and mainstream
adaptation into key national policies and regional strategies.
A.21. Executive summary
1. The Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic are among the world's most
vulnerable tropical regions to the impacts of climate change, with Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, the
Dominican Republic and El Salvador recognised as being among the sixteen most vulnerable countries in the
world to extreme climate events for the period 1998-2017 (Eckstein, Hutfils and Winges 2018). The term "Dry
Corridor" emerged in the last three decades to describe the increasing frequency and intensity of droughts in the
region. These droughts are linked to El Niño events, which are occurring more frequently and intensely as a result
of climate change and have had severe impacts on agriculture and food security in the region. The impacts of
droughts during El Niño are contrasted by an increase in the frequency and severity of extreme rainfall events
linked to concurrent changes in La Niña. The resulting extreme rainfall leads to reductions in aquifer recharge, as
well as increased surface runoff and soil erosion. These impacts are exacerbated by poor land management
practices — which result in extensive environmental degradation — and widespread poverty.
2. With more than one million families in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones reliant on agriculture for their livelihoods,
the impacts of increasingly severe droughts over the past five years have resulted in the need for considerable
humanitarian assistance. In 2014 alone, intense drought resulted in an estimated US$465 million worth of
agricultural losses across the region, with more than 2.5 million people experiencing food insecurity. From 2015
to 2018, food insecurity has increased annually in the region, with indigenous populations, women and rural
communities the most likely to suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition. By the last quarter of 2018, 2.2 million
people had experienced crop losses that year, with 1.4 million urgently needing food assistance. These impacts
are expected to continue to worsen under future climate scenarios.
3. Climate projections for the region indicate that, by the end of the century, temperatures will increase by 3–3.5°C
under RCP4.5 and by 6–7°C under RCP8.5 (Lyra et al. 2017). At the same time, mean annual rainfall is projected
to decrease by 11% on average. These changes will be compounded by further changes in the El Niño-La Niña
cycle, which will result in prolonged droughts (Rauscher et al. 2008) as well as more frequent and intense extreme
rainfall events across the region. If average global temperatures reach 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, extreme
El Niño events are likely to happen twice as often — approximately every ten years as opposed to every 20 years
— with severe consequences for agriculture and food security. The impacts of future climate change will include
further decreases in important crop harvests such as maise, beans and coffee, leading to increased poverty, food
insecurity and migration from rural areas (Hannah et al. 2017). The land area suitable for growing these crops is
also expected to decrease across the region, which will be exacerbated by soil degradation linked to increased
rainfall intensity. Furthermore, as a result of climate change-related increases in temperature and drought
frequency, the extent of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones is predicted to expand. Currently, the Dry Corridor
encompasses ~64% of the municipalities in Central America and is expected to extend to ~85% by 2050. These
changes in temperature all also have an impact on the ranges of certain crop yields. For example, as cooler
highland areas warm up, they will become more suitable for specific crops which may be pushed beyond thermal
limits in lowland areas. However, the desire to shift crops into these highland areas will likely catalyse forest

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information | The programme will be executed by three institutions with clear roles according to their
capacities and role in the region
CABEI will be the accredited entity for the programme, but will also be directly executing the
major part of component 2 – output 4 - of the programme (activity 4.1 and activity 4.2) as
they will be directly responsible for the set up and management of the loan and guarantee
facilities of the programme. FAO will be the Executing entity for the Technical Assistance
facility under this component, (activity 4.3). CABEI will also be the executing entity for the
grant facility under output 2 (activity 2.3)
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) will play a major role in the execution of the
capacity building, technical assistance and implementation of the Ecosystem based
Adaptation demonstration sites throughout the region as the Executing Entity of outputs 1
and 2 of the programme.
The Central-American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD) will play a
key role in political coordination among participant countries through the direct execution of
output 3 focused of gathering and disseminating key results and analysis derived from the
execution of the programme aiming at generating evidence to inform and mainstream
adaptation into key national policies and regional strategies.
A.21. Executive summary | 
1. The Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic are among the world's most
vulnerable tropical regions to the impacts of climate change, with Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, the
Dominican Republic and El Salvador recognised as being among the sixteen most vulnerable countries in the
world to extreme climate events for the period 1998-2017 (Eckstein, Hutfils and Winges 2018). The term "Dry
Corridor" emerged in the last three decades to describe the increasing frequency and intensity of droughts in the
region. These droughts are linked to El Niño events, which are occurring more frequently and intensely as a result
of climate change and have had severe impacts on agriculture and food security in the region. The impacts of
droughts during El Niño are contrasted by an increase in the frequency and severity of extreme rainfall events
linked to concurrent changes in La Niña. The resulting extreme rainfall leads to reductions in aquifer recharge, as
well as increased surface runoff and soil erosion. These impacts are exacerbated by poor land management
practices — which result in extensive environmental degradation — and widespread poverty.
2. With more than one million families in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones reliant on agriculture for their livelihoods,
the impacts of increasingly severe droughts over the past five years have resulted in the need for considerable
humanitarian assistance. In 2014 alone, intense drought resulted in an estimated US$465 million worth of
agricultural losses across the region, with more than 2.5 million people experiencing food insecurity. From 2015
to 2018, food insecurity has increased annually in the region, with indigenous populations, women and rural
communities the most likely to suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition. By the last quarter of 2018, 2.2 million
people had experienced crop losses that year, with 1.4 million urgently needing food assistance. These impacts
are expected to continue to worsen under future climate scenarios.
3. Climate projections for the region indicate that, by the end of the century, temperatures will increase by 3–3.5°C
under RCP4.5 and by 6–7°C under RCP8.5 (Lyra et al. 2017). At the same time, mean annual rainfall is projected
to decrease by 11% on average. These changes will be compounded by further changes in the El Niño-La Niña
cycle, which will result in prolonged droughts (Rauscher et al. 2008) as well as more frequent and intense extreme
rainfall events across the region. If average global temperatures reach 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, extreme
El Niño events are likely to happen twice as often — approximately every ten years as opposed to every 20 years
— with severe consequences for agriculture and food security. The impacts of future climate change will include
further decreases in important crop harvests such as maise, beans and coffee, leading to increased poverty, food
insecurity and migration from rural areas (Hannah et al. 2017). The land area suitable for growing these crops is
also expected to decrease across the region, which will be exacerbated by soil degradation linked to increased
rainfall intensity. Furthermore, as a result of climate change-related increases in temperature and drought
frequency, the extent of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones is predicted to expand. Currently, the Dry Corridor
encompasses ~64% of the municipalities in Central America and is expected to extend to ~85% by 2050. These
changes in temperature all also have an impact on the ranges of certain crop yields. For example, as cooler
highland areas warm up, they will become more suitable for specific crops which may be pushed beyond thermal
limits in lowland areas. However, the desire to shift crops into these highland areas will likely catalyse forest | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 7 ===
A
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 5 OF 96
clearing in what are critical water recharge zones of river catchments, thereby reducing aquifer recharge. This
impact, coupled with an increase in extreme rainfall events, will increase the likelihood and severity of flooding.
Climate change will also increase the frequency of wildfires, causing further forest degradation and threatening
farming, forest-based livelihoods and fuelwood supply.
4. Without comprehensive adaptation interventions, agricultural losses will continue to increase, along with
ecosystem loss, water shortages, poverty and food insecurity. These impacts will ultimately increase the exposure
and sensitivity of communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones who are already extremely vulnerable to climate
change. However, several barriers currently constrain the adoption of climate-adaptive practices by vulnerable
communities. These barriers include limited: i) access to credit for adaptation interventions among vulnerable
populations; ii) access to financial resources for the implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA), water-
and resource-efficient technologies among the private sector; iii) knowledge and understanding of climate change
impacts as well as appropriate adaptation measures among decision-makers, communities and commercial
farmers; iv) limited integration of EbA and other adaptation measures into sectoral policies; v) technical capacity
within governments and local communities to implement EbA and other adaptation measures; and vi) development
of economic incentives for investment in sustainable natural resource management and EbA.
5. In response to the above-described climate threats, GCF loan, grant and guarantee finance are requested to
initiate a paradigm shift in the regional approach to catchment and water demand management in the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones. This shift will see governments of the seven participating countries — Guatemala, Honduras, El
Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and the Dominican Republic — promoting large-scale EbA. At the
same time, smallholder and commercial farmers, as well as entrepreneurs in rural communities, will have
increased access to the financial resources and technical skills required to implement impactful adaptation
interventions. A combination of GCF loan and grant finance, a guarantee, as well as a senior loan provided as co-
finance, will be used to establish three financial facilities at the regional level, namely: i) a grant facility to support
bottom-up selection and promotion of local EbA activities through non-reimbursable financing (US$28 million); ii)
an EbA lending facility for small- and large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level
(US$102.8 million); and iii) a guarantee facility that provides an additional layer of security to financial institutions
in order to promote EbA finance (US$30 million).
The facilities will be managed by CABEI with a blended financing structure, where the relevant funds in the form
of senior loans for the EbA lending facility are channelled via two separate streams towards end beneficiaries and
are blended at the level of IFIs: (1) one stream for CABEI’s co-financing funds, passing from CABEI’s balance
sheet as senior loans to the IFIs’ balance sheet within an existing Global Credit Line (GCL), and (2) a second
stream of GCF funds provided by CABEI (as trustee of the GCF funds) via limited recourse loans to the IFIs. The
co-financng ratio for the EbA lending facility among the CABEI Co-financing and the GCF funding provided to
each selected IFI shall be of 40:60, respectively.. Both streams are hence being blended at IFI level, and from
there channeled by the IFIs to the PFIs that directly on-lend to end beneficiaries.
A guarantee facility will be implemented by CABEI with the aim to increase IFIs appetite to take on further financing
to channel to PFIs by guaranteeing the PFI EbA finance performance. The grant facility will be channelling grant
funds to on-the-ground stakeholders (rural communities, providers of EbA solutions, among others), to be
distributed via two competitive bottom-up identification rounds for eligible projects per year, for four years (each
round providing USD 3.5 million to an expected number of 70 projects per round). The grant facility aims at
strengthening the identification, incubation and even acceleration of promising EbA solution in the localities, to
prepare EbA solution markets for commercial and mainstreamed EbA investment and finance favouring the
development of a business ecosystem around EbA. These mechanisms will make US$130.8 million available for
investment in EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies in the region (US$102.8 million from loans and
US$28 million from grants). The total grant request of US$84.3 million will be used in the following ways; i)
US$10.1 million will be used to strengthen the technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural
communities to implement EbA and other adaptation measures; ii) US$ 28.5 million will be used to implement
large-scale adaptation interventions — including EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies — in rural
communities across the region; iii) US$28 million will form the grant facility through which vulnerable communities
can access on-grants channelled through financial institutions; iv) US$6.3 million will be used to generate and
share information on climate change adaptation and finance across the region, and mainstream it into local and
national policies; v) US$6.5 million will be used to set up the financial mechanisms and strengthen the technical
capacity of CABEI accredited and non-regulated financial institutions to access and channel funds through them;
vi) US$4.2 million will be used for overall management and monitoring of programme activities (Independent
evaluations and PMC costs) ; and vii) US$0.7M will be requested as contingency. Additionally, national

=== PAGE 8 ===
A
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 6 OF 96
governments have committed US$51.3 million in co-finance which will further scale and mainstream EbA, water
and resource-efficiency in their respective countries.
6. Together, these interventions will catalyse the autonomous upscaling of EbA and water- and resource-efficient
technologies by combining technical capacity-building, policy instruments and accessible financial mechanisms.
This approach will transform the financial landscape in the region to enable vulnerable groups to access climate
finance and implement climate-resilient measures to strengthen their adaptive capacity. The proposed programme
will directly benefit ~1,084,441 people across the target catchments through on-the-ground interventions, with
~134,694 of these people also able to access loans for the implementation of adaptation measures through
financial mechanisms established under the programme (lending and guarantee facilities). Furthermore, the
combined impact of programme interventions will facilitate the uptake of adaptation measures beyond the target
municipalities, ultimately indirectly benefitting ~1,364,044 people across the region during the programme lifetime,
and thousands more into the future.
7. The programme will be executed by three institutions with clear roles according to their capacities and role in the
region. CABEI will be the accredited entity for the programme, but will also be directly executing the major part of
output 2 and 4 of the programme as they will be directly responsible for the set up and management of the three
financial facilities of the programme CABEI will therefore be the executing entity for activities 2.3 (grant facility),
4.1 and 4.2 (lending and guarantee facilities). FAO will be the Executing entity for the Technical Assistance facility
under output 4 (activity 4.3), supported by UNEP as technical advisor. The responsibility of output 4 is thus shared
between CABEI and FAO. FAO will also play a major role in the execution of the capacity building, technical
assistance and implementation of the Ecosystem based Adaptation demonstration sites throughout the region as
the Executing Entity of outputs 1 and 2 of the programme. CCAD will play a key role in political coordination among
participant countries through the direct execution of output 3 focused of gathering and disseminating key results
and analysis derived from the execution of the programme aiming at generating evidence to inform and
mainstream adaptation into key national policies and regional strategies. UNEP will provide technical advice to
CCAD for the development of technical knowledge products on financial mechanisms for EbA, methodologies for
ecosystem services valuation and technical guidelines for EbA implementation. UNEP will play a key role also as
technical advisor mainly on the financial component and the regional hub component contributing with all the
technical experience already developed in the region on the design and deployment of financial mechanisms for
EbA and on EbA mainstreaming into national policies.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 7 OF 96
G
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context
Context
8. The Dry Corridor of Central America consists of semi-arid and sub-humid ecosystems that cover most of the
Pacific slope of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua, as well as smaller areas of Costa Rica and
Panama (Figure 1). Similar climatic conditions are found in the arid and semi-arid areas (hereafter 'Arid Zones')
in the west of the Dominican Republic (Figure 1). The Dry Corridor is the most densely populated region of
Central America1, and the Arid Zones are home to a significant proportion of the Dominican Republic's
population — 12% of the total2, amounting to ~1.2 million people. In addition, Guatemala, Honduras, El
Salvador and Nicaragua have comparatively small Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, while Costa Rica,
Panama and the Dominican Republic are comparatively wealthy and have relatively low poverty levels3.
However, all these countries have high income inequality, with instances of extreme poverty — particularly in
rural areas.
Figure 1. Current (red) and projected extent in 2050 (red and dark grey) of the Central American Dry Corridor and the Dominican
Republic's Arid Zones4. The map is based on calculations by the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), using the
current climate distribution5, future scenarios6 and evapotranspiration estimations7,8.
9. Across the region, poverty in rural areas is significantly higher than in urban areas. Nearly 60% of people in the
Dry Corridor live in poverty9, while the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic have the highest poverty rate in
the country10. A further example is that in Costa Rica double the number of people in rural areas are living in
extreme poverty compared with in urban areas11. Similarly, in Panama, prevalence of extreme poverty is 27%
1 with a population of 10.5 million, representing ~22% of the total population of the six countries across which it extends
2 Brinkhoff, T. 2017. City Population. Available at: http://www.citypopulation.de.
3 Respective countries’ economic situations are described in Section B.5, with additional detail provided in Section 2.3 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
4 Projected 2050 extent based on Representative Concentration Trajectory (RCP) 8.5, since according to the latest Emissions Gap Report published by
UN Environment (2017), national commitments will only reach one third of the emissions reduction required by 2030 to meet current mitigation
objectives.
5 Hijmans et al., 2005. Very high resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. International Journal of Climatology, 25: 1965-1978.
6 Ramirez-Villegas & Jarvis, 2010. Downscaling Global Circulation Model outputs: The Delta Method. Decision and Policy Analysis Working Paper No.
1, CIAT. Available at: http://ccafs-climate.org/downloads/docs/Downscaling-WP-01.pdf
7 Allen et al., 2006. Evapotranspiración del cultivo: guías para la determinación de los requerimientos de agua de los cultivos. FAO, Rome; Droogers &
Allen, 2002. Estimating reference evapotranspiration under inaccurate data conditions. Irrigation and Drainage Systems 16: 33-45.
8 The calculations consider that a month is dry when the relationship between precipitation and evapotranspiration is less than 0.5.
9 living on under US$ 3.20 per day
10 As estimated in 2017. Thomas Brinkhoff: City Population, http://www.citypopulation.de
11 Borgen Project, 2017. Costa Rica’s Poverty Rate. Available at: https://borgenproject.org/about-costa-ricas-poverty-rate/.

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context | 
Context
8. The Dry Corridor of Central America consists of semi-arid and sub-humid ecosystems that cover most of the
Pacific slope of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua, as well as smaller areas of Costa Rica and
Panama (Figure 1). Similar climatic conditions are found in the arid and semi-arid areas (hereafter 'Arid Zones')
in the west of the Dominican Republic (Figure 1). The Dry Corridor is the most densely populated region of
Central America1, and the Arid Zones are home to a significant proportion of the Dominican Republic's
population — 12% of the total2, amounting to ~1.2 million people. In addition, Guatemala, Honduras, El
Salvador and Nicaragua have comparatively small Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, while Costa Rica,
Panama and the Dominican Republic are comparatively wealthy and have relatively low poverty levels3.
However, all these countries have high income inequality, with instances of extreme poverty — particularly in
rural areas.
Figure 1. Current (red) and projected extent in 2050 (red and dark grey) of the Central American Dry Corridor and the Dominican
Republic's Arid Zones4. The map is based on calculations by the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), using the
current climate distribution5, future scenarios6 and evapotranspiration estimations7,8.
9. Across the region, poverty in rural areas is significantly higher than in urban areas. Nearly 60% of people in the
Dry Corridor live in poverty9, while the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic have the highest poverty rate in
the country10. A further example is that in Costa Rica double the number of people in rural areas are living in
extreme poverty compared with in urban areas11. Similarly, in Panama, prevalence of extreme poverty is 27% |  | 

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 8 OF 96
G
in rural areas compared with only 4% in urban areas12. Most rural populations in the Dry Corridor and Arid
Zones depend on agriculture for their livelihoods, practising both subsistence and commercial farming, and
farming both crops and livestock. In addition to agriculture, plantation forestry supports the livelihoods of some
local communities.
Climate rationale
10. The Dry Corridor and Arid Zones are among the world's most vulnerable tropical regions to the impacts of
climate change13, with Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, the Dominican Republic and El Salvador recognised
as being among the fifteen most vulnerable countries in the world to extreme climate events14. The term "Dry
Corridor" emerged in the last three decades to describe the increasing frequency and intensity of droughts in
the region. These droughts are linked to El Niño15 events, which are occurring more frequently and intensely
as a result of climate change16, and have had severe impacts on agriculture and food security in the region.
Since agriculture and forestry are greatly affected by climatic conditions, the livelihoods of rural people in the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones are extremely sensitive to the impacts of climate change. For example, during the
2015 drought, over three million people experienced acute food insecurity17. These impacts are exacerbated
by poor land management practices — which result in extensive environmental degradation — and widespread
poverty. Furthermore, these communities have limited access to financial resources for the implementation of
adaptation interventions. Without urgent adaptation measures, the vulnerability of the region's population to
climate change impacts will increase. Further details of climate change risks and impacts for the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones are described below.
Climate change risks
11. Past climate trends and future projections show that the region's climate is changing in several ways, including:
i) temperatures increasing across the region; and ii) shifting rainfall patterns. In most parts of the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones, rain seasons are shortening and the intensity of midsummer droughts18 is increasing19.
Droughts that extend over a year or more are also becoming increasingly frequent and severe, mainly because
of the increasing frequency and intensity of El Niño events. Concurrently, extreme rainfall events are increasing
in frequency and severity because of changes in La Niña. Country-specific observed and predicted changes in
temperature and rainfall are presented in Section 3 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
12. Overall, temperatures across Central America are anticipated to continue to increase in future. By the end of
the century, temperatures are projected to increase by 3–3.5°C under a medium emissions scenario (RCP4.5)
and by as much as 6–7°C under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5)20 relative to the baseline of 1961–1990.
While the trend of increasing temperatures is consistent across Central America and the Caribbean, the
magnitude of change is expected to vary among countries and between geographical areas within countries
(Figure 2). Mean annual rainfall is projected to decrease across much of Central America by 2070 for both
medium (RCP4.5) and high (RCP8.5) emissions scenarios (Figure 3). In addition to the predicted future trends
in mean annual temperature and rainfall, extreme temperatures are predicted to increase in the coming
decades (Figure 4). From 2021–2050, daytime high temperatures (TXx)21 and night-time high temperatures
(TNx)22 are projected to increase everywhere in the region. Rates of warming are expected to be strongest over
the northern portion of the Dry Corridor, particularly over the eastern mountain slopes in Guatemala, Honduras,
12 Borgen Project, 2017. Panama’s Poverty Rate. Available at: https://borgenproject.org/panama-poverty-rate/.
13 IPCC (2014). Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
14 Kreft et al., 2016. Global Climate Risk Index 2017. Who suffers most from extreme weather events? Weather-related loss events in 2015 and 1996 to
2015. Bonn: Germanwatch e.V.
15 These form part of the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle, which is an irregularly periodic variation in winds and sea surface temperatures
over the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean. The warming phase is known as El Niño and the cooling phase as La Niña. The ENSO cycle strongly influences
the region’s climate.
16 Cai et al. 2015. ENSO and greenhouse warming. Nature Climate Change, 5: 849.
17 FAO. 2017. Chronology of the Dry Corridor: The impetus for resilience in Central America. Available at: http://www.fao.org/in-
action/agronoticias/detail/en/c/1024539
18 The rain season in the Dry Corridor lasts from May to October, interrupted in August by a period of lower precipitation known as the mid-summer
drought, canícula or veranillo.
19 Rauscher et al., 2008. Extension and intensification of the Meso-American mid-summer drought in the twenty-first century. Climate Dynamics 31: 551-
571.
20 Lyra, A., Imbach, P., Rodriguez, D., Chou, S.C., Georgiou, S. and Garofolo, L., 2017. Projections of climate change impacts on central America
tropical rainforest. Climatic Change, 141, pp.93-105.
21 Monthly maximum value of daily maximum temperature
22 Monthly maximum value of daily minimum temperature

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 9 OF 96
G
and Nicaragua. Similarly, temperatures of cold days23 are predicted to increase across the region. The rates of
these increases are projected to be strongest over the Pacific coasts of Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and
Guatemala24. In addition — and although rainfall in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones is expected to decrease
by 11% on average by the end of the century — extreme rainfall is predicted to increase significantly across
parts of the region by mid-century. The number of intense rainfall events25 and extremely intense rainfall
events26 occurring each year is predicted to increase (Figure 5). The R50mm index is used to represent
precipitation exceeding 50 mm/day which represents heavy rains, and projections show an increase in R50mm
in the Atlantic coast of Costa Rica and northern parts of Panama27. A similar trend is observed in projections
for the 90th percentile of precipitation index (R90p), which represents extreme precipitation, with rains heavier
than the R50mm, that are less frequent. The R90p indicator has been projected to have a strong increase in
the Atlantic coast of Panama, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua. The Pacific coast of Panama and Costa Rica also
shows some increase, but at a smaller rate. In the Pacific coast of El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala the
R90p projections show a decreasing trend, which is attributed to the decrease of winds or hurricane activity28.
13. Recent evidence29 and model simulations predict that the risk of drought will increase with climate change, as
more intense and prolonged El Niño events occur across the region30. Indeed, if average global temperatures
reach 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, extreme El Niño events are likely to happen twice as often —
approximately every 10 years as opposed to every 20 years. Both droughts and dry spells will increase in the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones as a result of climate change. Droughts are years or seasons when rainfall is below
average, while dry spells are defined as large number of consecutive days when minimal rain falls. From 2021–
2050, it is projected that parts of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zone will experience an increase in dry spells31,32.
While the number of dry spells is projected to decrease in parts of Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and
Honduras, it is expected to increase over the Pacific basin in Nicaragua and El Salvador, as well as in
Guatemala (Figure 6)33. In addition, annual mean water excess34 is projected to decrease across most parts of
the Dry Corridor (Figure 6). Projections for drought events in the region show an increase in drought length,
intensity and frequency under both a medium emissions scenario (RCP4.5) high emissions scenario (RCP8.5),
for both short-term and long-term droughts35. These increases are projected to be moderate in early decades
of the century (2011–2040), then become more pronounced at the mid-century (2041–2070) before becoming
extreme at the end of the century (2071–2100). During dry spells and droughts, there is a pronounced risk of
the spread of aridity in parts of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zone as the availability of water is reduced, which
could have lasting impacts on the local environment36. On an annual scale, the region currently experiences a
rainy season with two peaks separated by a dry period of weeks to over a month in duration, termed the mid-
summer drought (MSD). Projections for MSD trends under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) show an
increase in duration for the MSD period, which is projected to increase by an average of over a week.
Additionally, the MSD minimum precipitation is projected to decrease by an average of over 26%, with
23 Monthly minimum value of daily maximum temperature
24 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
25 Heavy rainfall events are defined as those in which rainfall reaches 50 mm per day.
26 Extremely heavy rainfall events are defined as those in which rainfall exceeds 50 mm per day.
27 Imbach resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0193570.
28 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America
at high spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
29 Guojian, W., 2017. Continued increase of extreme El Niño frequency long after 1.5 °C warming stabilization. Nature Climate Change 7, 568–572.
Available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate3351.
30 Fasullo, J. T., Otto-Bliesner, B. L., & Stevenson, S., 2018. ENSO’s changing influence on temperature, precipitation, and wildfire in a warming climate.
Geophysical Research Letters, 45, 9216–9225. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079022.
31 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
32 Dry spells affecting vegetation growth can be assessed through the relationship between actual (ET) and potential (ETP) evapotranspiration, which
combines the effects of precipitation, temperature, soil moisture, and vegetation cover, among other atmospheric conditions. Dry spells are defined as
the annual largest number of consecutive days when ET <= 0.5*ETP.
33 Imbach P, Molina L, Locatelli B, Roupsard O, Mahe´ G, Neilson R, et al. Modeling potential equilibrium states of vegetation and terrestrial water cycle
of Mesoamerica under climate change scenarios. J Hydrometeor. 2012; 13:665–680.
34 Annual mean water excess, defined as P-ETP, is a proxy of water availability from runoff. When P-ETP is positive, there is a surplus of water
availability, while when P-ET is negative, there is a deficit of water availability.
35 Depsky, N. and Pons, D., 2020. Meteorological droughts are projected to worsen in Central America’s Dry Corridor throughout the 21st
century. Environmental Research Letters, 16(1), p.014001.
36 Quesada-Hernandez, L.E., Calvo-Solano, O.D., Hidalgo, H.G., Perez-Briceno, P.M. and Alfaro, E.J., 2019. Dynamical delimitation of the
Central American Dry Corridor (CADC) using drought indices and aridity values. Progress in Physical Geography: Earth and Environment,
43(5), pp.627-642.

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 10 OF 96
G
statistically significant changes for the mountains and Pacific side in most of Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador,
and Guatemala37.Other studies assessing climate change impacts on water in the region have modelled
decreases in water availability by 210038,39. As a result of these climate change-related increases in
temperature and drought frequency, the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones are predicted to expand. Currently, the
Dry Corridor encompasses ~64% of the municipalities in Central America; it is expected to extend to ~85% by
2050 (Figure 1).
Figure 2. Difference between the baseline (1961–1990) and the future (2071–2100) annual mean temperature (°C) simulated by
the Eta-HadGEM2 model for: a) RCP4.5 (medium emissions); and b) RCP8.5 (high emissions) scenarios40.
Figure 3. Difference between the baseline (1961–1990) and the future (2070–2100) mean annual rainfall (mm/day) simulated by
the Eta-HadGEM2 model for a) RCP4.5 (medium emissions) and b) RCP8.5 (high emissions) scenarios41.
37 Maurer, E.P., Roby, N., Stewart-Frey, I.T. and Bacon, C.M., 2017. Projected twenty-first-century changes in the Central American mid-
summer drought using statistically downscaled climate projections. Regional Environmental Change, 17(8), pp.2421-2432.
38 Imbach P, Molina L, Locatelli B, Roupsard O, Mahe´ G, Neilson R, et al. Modeling potential equilibrium states of vegetation and terrestrial water cycle
of Mesoamerica under climate change scenarios. J Hydrometeor. 2012; 13:665–680.
39 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
40 Lyra, A., Imbach, P., Rodriguez, D., Chou, S.C., Georgiou, S. and Garofolo, L., 2017. Projections of climate change impacts on central America
tropical rainforest. Climatic Change, 141, pp.93-105.
41 Lyra, A., Imbach, P., Rodriguez, D., Chou, S.C., Georgiou, S. and Garofolo, L., 2017. Projections of climate change impacts on central America
tropical rainforest. Climatic Change, 141(1), pp.93-105.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 11 OF 96
G
Figure 4. Projected trends of extreme temperature indicators for Central America over the period 2021–2050, namely: a) TNx –
temperature of warm nights (˚C); b) TXx – temperature of warm days (˚C); c) TNn – temperature of cold nights42 (˚C); d) TXn –
temperature of cold days43 (˚C).44
Figure 5. Projected trends of extreme rainfall indicators for Central America over the period 2021–2050, namely: i) R50mm (days)
– heavy rainfall events, where rainfall exceeds 50 mm/day (left); and ii) R90p (mm) – extreme (90th percentile of) rainfall (right)45.
42 Monthly minimum value of daily minimum temperature
43 Monthly minimum value of daily maximum temperature
44 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
45 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 12 OF 96
G
Figure 6. Projected trends of drought indicators for Central America over the period 2021–2050, namely: i) dry spells, defined as
annual largest number of consecutive days when ET < = 0.5*ETP (left); and ii) annual P-ETP in (mm per year, right)46.
Climate change impacts
14. Climate change is already having severe impacts on communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. Indeed,
its impact on agriculture is commonly cited as a major driver of migration out of the region to North America,
especially from Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador47. In 2014, for example, severe drought across the
region resulted in an estimated US$465 million worth of agricultural losses, including basic grains, coffee and
livestock. In Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador alone, a total ~2.5 million people experienced food
insecurity as a result of approximately 75% loss of maise and bean crops48. In 2016, 50–90% of crop loss
resulted in 3.5 million people requiring humanitarian assistance across the region49. This trend is continuing,
with subsistence farmers in the Dry Corridor of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua having lost
more than half of their maise and bean crops in 2018, with 2.2 million people affected50. These recent droughts
have been unprecedented in their severity and the magnitude of their impacts. Such intense droughts are
expected to increase in frequency under future climate conditions and, in the absence of adaptation
interventions, people living in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones will continue to experience adverse impacts of
climate change51.
15. Future predicted impacts of climate change include decreased harvests of maise, beans, coffee and other
important crops, leading to increased poverty, food insecurity and migration from rural areas52. Reductions in
coffee yields have been predicted to be between 7% in 2020 and 39% in 2100 across all Central American
countries under climate change conditions53, while a similar study predicted reductions in maise yields of
between 4% in 2020 and 18% in 210054. These reductions will result from direct climate impacts (e.g. droughts
and floods) as well as indirect impacts on crops (e.g. declines in crop pollinators)55. Climate change will also
impact the land area suitable for growing specific crops, with declining areas expected for coffee and beans
across the region56. For example, El Salvador and Costa Rica are expected to experience decreases in land
suitability for growing coffee of 40% or more57. Similarly, modelling of maise indicates that land suitability is
46 Imbach, P., Chou, S.C., Lyra, A., Rodrigues, D., Rodriguez, D., Latinovic, D. et al., 2018. Future climate change scenarios in Central America at high
spatial resolution. PLoS ONE 13(4): e0193570. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0193570.
47 World Food Programme et al., 2017. Food security and emigration: Why people flee and the impact on family members left behind in El Salvador,
Guatemala and Honduras. Available at: https://www.wfp.org/content/2017-food-security-emigration-why-people-flee-salvador-guatemala-honduras
48 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2014. Drought in
Central America Situation Report No. 01 (as of December 10, 2014).
49 Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), 2016. Dry Corridor, Central America, Situation Report — June 2016.
50 FAO, 2018. Central America, Drought causes crop losses in “Dry Corridor” in Central America. GIEWS update 27 August 2018.
51 Further details regarding climate change impacts are presented in Section 7 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
52 Hannah et al., 2017. Regional modeling of climate change impacts on smallholder agriculture and ecosystems in Central America. Climatic Change
141: 29-45.
53 CEPAL y CAC/SICA, 2014a. Impactos potenciales del cambio climático sobre el café en Centroamérica, LC/MEX/L.1169, México, DF.
54 CEPAL y CAC/SICA, 2014b. Impactos potenciales del cambio climático sobre los granos basicos en CentroAmérica. LC/MEX/L.1123, México, DF
55 Imbach et al., 2017. Coupling of pollination services and coffee suitability under climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
56 Details of expected impacts are presented in Tables 7.1 and 7.2; Section 7 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
57 Hannah et al., 2017. Regional modeling of climate change impacts on smallholder agriculture and ecosystems in Central America. Climatic Change
141: 29-45.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 13 OF 96
G
likely to decrease by up to 34% in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua58. Although some cooler
highland areas that are currently unsuitable for these crops may become more suitable as temperature
increases, desire to shift crops into these areas will likely catalyse forest clearing in critical water recharge
zones of river catchments thereby reducing aquifer recharge59. This impact, coupled with an increase in
extreme rainfall events, will increase the likelihood and severity of flooding. Climate change will likely also
increase the frequency of wildfires, causing further forest degradation and threatening farming, forest-based
livelihoods and fuelwood supply60.
16. The climate change impacts described above are exacerbated by the baseline problems of forest loss and land
degradation, which result in decreased water supply and food security61. Without comprehensive adaptation
interventions, agricultural losses will continue to increase, along with ecosystem loss, water shortages, poverty
and food insecurity. This will ultimately increase the exposure and sensitivity of communities in the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones who are already extremely vulnerable to climate change.
17. The programme will target seven catchments for interventions — one in each of the participating countries. In
these catchments, the application of the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) allows for the analysis of
potential impacts of climate change in the programme’s target areas.The availability of historical observed
meteorological data and site-specific climate change projections are very limited. As observed in the following
figure, there are only 24 meteorological stations within the limits of the Dry Corridor. Only for three of the
countries, there were stations within the prioritized pilot sites and just one of them (Honduras) had complete
observed rainfall and temperature data for a period of over 30 years with less than 15% of discontinuity.
Figure 7a. Map of the meteorological stations in the Dry Corridor
Source: Authors, from http://climate.onebuilding.org/default.html
18. Input data: Data from Choluteca-baja are measurement stations that were verified locally and statistically. The
regional data set for the rainfall and temperature that was used in the Dominican Republic and Costa Rica, was
complemented and used as input was the CFSR obtained by the SWAT modelling online data system. The
Global Weather Data (SWAT, https://globalweather.tamu.edu ), is a product from the National Center for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP, https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/climate-forecast-system-
reanalysis-cfsr ) Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR). These have been continuously run over the 36-
58 Hannah et al., 2017. Regional modeling of climate change impacts on smallholder agriculture and ecosystems in Central America. Climatic Change
141: 29-45.
59 Bouroncle et al., 2017. Mapping climate change adaptive capacity and vulnerability of smallholder agricultural livelihoods in Central America. Climatic
Change, 141: 123–137.
60 Imbach et al., 2012. Modeling potential equilibrium states of vegetation and terrestrial water cycle of Mesoamerica under climate change scenarios.
Journal of Hydrometeorology, 13: 665-680.
61 Details are provided in Section 5 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 14 OF 96
G
year period of 1979 through 2014, and continuously updated in real time. The CFSR was designed and
executed as a global, high resolution, coupled atmosphere-ocean-land surface-sea ice system to provide the
best estimate of the state of these coupled domains. These results have been used in several publications and
evaluated with good validation results in different climates.
19. The results from the analysis undertaken in three basins in the Dry Corridor indicate that the foreseen impact
will be severe in the programme areas, with a total predicted decrease in average rainfall of 11%, which is
equivalent to a decrease of 655 mm/year under RCP 4.5 for 2050 and reaching up to 15% under RCP 8.5 for
2050. This decrease will also likely result in a significant delay in the timing of peak annual rainfall, with a shift
from the month of May to the month of June, with important implications for agricultural activities. Additionally,
climate change projections also predict substantial changes in the main hydrological variables in the
programme areas, with a significant decrease between 4.1% and 5.7% in soil humidity and 18% to 25% in
percolation for the Choluteca basin. These variables are critical for ecosystem maintenance and also for the
sustainability of the agricultural activity and soil stability. Results from the hydrological model are included in
the Feasibility Study in Annex 2 and Annex 31 of this proposal. Figure 7b below summarizes the changes in
main hydrological variables under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 for 2050 for the main hydrological variables in two
selected basins in the Dry Corridor. These analysis is also further specified and discussed in the draft EbA site-
specific plans developed for the programme sites in Honduras and Costa Rica (Annex 31).
Figure 7b. Modelled changes in Soil humidity, percolation and erosion under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 for 2050 for the Choluteca
(right), Rio Piedras (left) basins through SWAT. Complete analysis included in Annex 2 Feasibility Study and Annex 31 Site specific
plans
Countries Time Emission Future climate change in top indicators
Temperature Precipitation Aridity Soils Water
period scenario
(annual (annual actual moisture runoff
mean) mean) (annual (annual (annual
mean) mean) mean)
Guatemala 2041- RCP 4.5 +2ºC -2% 29% -12% 1%
(average from 5 2070 RCP 8.5 +3ºC -14% 2% -26% -19%
selected
2071- RCP 4.5 +2ºC -7% 2% -18% -22%
municipalities)
2100 RCP 8.5 +4ºC -25% -16% -44% -45%
RCP 8.5 +5.67ºC -21% 30% -27% -11%
Nicaragua 2041- RCP 4.5 +2ºC -4% 17% -10% 50%
(average from 5 2070 RCP 8.5 +3ºC 4% 33% -2% 14%
selected
2071- RCP 4.5 +2.4ºC -6% 25% -14% 9%
municipalities)
2100 RCP 8.5 +5ºC -14% 27% -25% 3%
El Salvador 2041- RCP 4.5 +1.2ºC -3% 8% -8% -6%
2070 RCP 8.5 +2ºC -8% 2% -13% -24%
RCP 4.5 +2ºC -10% 2% -15% -16%

--- Table 1 on Page 16 ---
Countries | Time
period | Emission
scenario |  |  |  | Future climate change in top indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Temperature
(annual
mean) | Temperature |  | Precipitation
(annual
mean) |  |  |  | Aridity |  |  | Soils |  |  | Water | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | (annual |  |  |  |  |  | actual |  |  | moisture |  |  | runoff | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | mean) |  |  |  |  |  | (annual |  |  | (annual |  |  | (annual | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mean) |  |  | mean) |  |  | mean) | 
Guatemala
(average from 5
selected
municipalities) | 2041-
2070 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -2% |  |  | 29% |  |  | -12% |  |  | 1% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +3ºC |  |  | -14% |  |  | 2% |  |  | -26% |  |  | -19% | 
 | 2071-
2100 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -7% |  |  | 2% |  |  | -18% |  |  | -22% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +4ºC |  |  | -25% |  |  | -16% |  |  | -44% |  |  | -45% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +5.67ºC |  |  | -21% |  |  | 30% |  |  | -27% |  |  | -11% | 
Nicaragua
(average from 5
selected
municipalities) | 2041-
2070 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -4% |  |  | 17% |  |  | -10% |  |  | 50% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +3ºC |  |  | 4% |  |  | 33% |  |  | -2% |  |  | 14% | 
 | 2071-
2100 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2.4ºC |  |  | -6% |  |  | 25% |  |  | -14% |  |  | 9% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +5ºC |  |  | -14% |  |  | 27% |  |  | -25% |  |  | 3% | 
El Salvador | 2041-
2070 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +1.2ºC |  |  | -3% |  |  | 8% |  |  | -8% |  |  | -6% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -8% |  |  | 2% |  |  | -13% |  |  | -24% | 
 |  |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -10% |  |  | 2% |  |  | -15% |  |  | -16% | 

--- Table 2 on Page 16 ---
Time
period

--- Table 3 on Page 16 ---
Emission
scenario

--- Table 4 on Page 16 ---
Precipitation
(annual
mean)

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 15 OF 96
G
(average from 5 2071- RCP 8.5 +4ºC -14% 4% -27% -42%
selected 2100
RCP 8.5 +4.8ºC 19% 18% -4% 71%
municipalities)
Panama 2041- RCP 4.5 +2ºC 26% -19% N/A N/A
(average from 5 2070 RCP 8.5 +3ºC 44% -13% N/A N/A
selected
2071- RCP 4.5 +2ºC 38% -3% N/A N/A
municipalities)
2100 RCP 8.5 +4ºC 100% -8% N/A N/A
The 2041- RCP 4.5 +1.8ºC -10% 6% -13% -21%
Dominican 2070 RCP 8.5 +2ºC -14% 12% -22% -25%
Republic 2071- RCP 4.5 +2ºC -15% 10% -18% -33%
(average from 5 2100 RCP 8.5 +4ºC -19% 26% -29% -41%
selected
municipalities)
Figure 7c. Modelled changes in Temperature, Precipitation, Aridity, Soils moisture, and Water runoff under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5
for 2041-2070 and 2071-2100. Average calculated based on data from 5 and 6 selected municipalites in each of the 7 countries.
Source: Authors, from SMHI, Climate Information, https://climateinformation.org/, last accessed: June 15th 2021.
20. In addition to the 2 detailed hydrological modelings produced, Figure 7c provides a summary of the climate
projections for the other 5 countries based on the Coupled Model Intercomparison project Phase 5 (CMIP5
from the Global Climate Models - GCM) and the Regional Climate Models from the Coordinated Regional
Downscaling experiment (CORDEX)62. The projected changes in soil humidity, aridity and water runoff are
consistent with the trends identified by the hydrological modelling: the annual precipitation is projected to
decrease significantly, from a range of -14% to -21% for RCP 8.5 in 2071-2100 in four of the five countries. A
similar trend is observed for soil moisture and water runoff’s variation, that are generally projected to decrease
throughout all four scenarios, while the annual mean erosion is generally increasing. Panamá’s modelling does
not seem to follow these general trends, but this is believed to be linked to the limited consistence among
models (no projections are provided on water runoff and soil moisture) which could explain this inconsistency
with the projections in the other countries.
21. Further results of the above hydrological modelling show a general positive impact of the interventions proposed
for the programme. The modelling has allowed for the comparison between different alternatives of
interventions, and demonstrates how increasing benefits are realised when the adaptation solutions are
introduced in combination rather than in isolation.
22. The study shows that adaptation measures have the potential to generate hydrological benefits at the level of
intervened use and at the basin scale; Increased water available for plants through improved soil moisture,
contribute in water recharge and reduced water erosion, are some main benefits; positive changes depend on
the type and magnitude of intervention. Implementation of adaptation measures holistically, meaning
simultaneous implementation of a group of these, shows the best results in hydrological processes and avoided
erosion. Accorindg to the results of this study, the best results occurred under the implementation of combined
adaptation measures at the medium and high levels.
23. Figure 8 summmarises the changes in the main hydrological variables after the implementation of EbA
interventions in comparison to the change expected under climate change (in red). The introduced EbA options
include: forest conservation (at the top), reforestation, agroforestry systems, irrigation systems, instalment of
vegetative barriers and the combination of all these EbA options (at the bottom). As stated above, the
aggregated analysis of all hydrological variables concludes that the combination of EbA options show the best
resuls. This combination of interventions results in substantial improvements for all key hydrological variables
in the catchment areas. Soil humidity increases from large losses under the climate change base scenario to
positive values under EbA combinations; this results in benefits for water availability both for agriculture and
forests that draw water from the top soil layers. The changes in water production (surface water) and percolation
(water recharge) show even greater benefits from the implementation of this combination of EbA measures.
These values are key for ensuring water availability throughout the year from a scenario of significant water
62 Read more on data production: https://climateinformation.org/data-production-and-tailoring/production-of-
climate-indicators/

--- Table 1 on Page 17 ---
(average from 5
selected
municipalities) | 2071-
2100 |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +4ºC |  |  | -14% |  |  | 4% |  |  | -27% |  |  | -42% | 
 |  | RCP 8.5 | RCP 8.5 |  | +4.8ºC | +4.8ºC |  | 19% | 19% |  | 18% | 18% |  | -4% | -4% |  | 71% | 71% | 
Panama
(average from 5
selected
municipalities) | 2041-
2070 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | 26% |  |  | -19% |  |  | N/A |  |  | N/A | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +3ºC |  |  | 44% |  |  | -13% |  |  | N/A |  |  | N/A | 
 | 2071-
2100 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | 38% |  |  | -3% |  |  | N/A |  |  | N/A | 
 |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +4ºC |  |  | 100% |  |  | -8% |  |  | N/A |  |  | N/A |  | 
The
Dominican
Republic
(average from 5
selected
municipalities) | 2041-
2070 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +1.8ºC |  |  | -10% |  |  | 6% |  |  | -13% |  |  | -21% | 
 |  |  | RCP 8.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -14% |  |  | 12% |  |  | -22% |  |  | -25% | 
 | 2071-
2100 |  | RCP 4.5 |  |  | +2ºC |  |  | -15% |  |  | 10% |  |  | -18% |  |  | -33% | 
 |  | RCP 8.5 | RCP 8.5 |  | +4ºC | +4ºC |  | -19% | -19% |  | 26% | 26% |  | -29% | -29% |  | -41% | -41% | 

--- Table 2 on Page 17 ---
2071-
2100

--- Table 3 on Page 17 ---
2071-
2100

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 16 OF 96
G
deficit under climate change conditions. Lastly, the implementation of this combination of EbA measures also
shows very positive impacts on soil erosion rates.
SCENARIOS Watershed level
Scenarios name COMMENTS
Adaptation measures Level SW PERC WYLD EROSION
NO Climate Change -1,38 -10,61 -14,05 1,55 CC (% change)
ForestConservation low ForestConservationlow 1,35 10,66 14,02 -3,68
1a ForestConservation middle ForestConservationmiddle 1,23 11,42 13,93 -13,84
Adaptation measure 1:
ForestConservation hight ForestConservationhight 1,08 12,23 13,80 -28,03
Conservation and
ForesRestoration low ForesRestorationlow 1,33 10,68 14,01 -4,01
restoration forest
1b ForesRestoration middle ForesRestorationmiddle 2,63 22,73 30,26 -11,02
ForesRestoration hight ForesRestorationhight 1,09 11,02 13,78 -16,96
Adaptation measure 2: SAF_Increase low SAF_Increaselow 1,37 10,75 14,04 -2,99
Change
Establishment of SAF_Increase middle SAF_Increasemiddle 1,32 10,69 14,00 -4,52
compared to
agroforestry systems SAF_Increase hight SAF_Increasehight 0,57 11,78 13,30 -44,37
Climate
Adaptation measure 3: Agriculture with irrigation low Agriculture with irrigationlow 1,37 10,62 14,05 -1,71
change
Implementation of Agriculture with irrigation middle Agriculture with irrigationmiddle 1,36 10,71 14,04 -2,51
scenario
efficient irrigation systems Agriculture with irrigation hight Agriculture with irrigationhight 1,34 10,88 14,02 -3,97
LivingBarriers low LivingBarrierslow 1,38 10,67 14,05 -2,21
Adaptation measure 4:
LivingBarriers middle LivingBarriersmiddle 1,38 10,70 14,05 -3,50
Vegetative barriers
LivingBarriers hight LivingBarriershight 1,39 11,66 14,05 -20,23
Mix low Mixlow 1,27 10,83 13,95 -7,54
Combined scenarios Mix middle Mixmiddle 1,02 11,27 13,72 -21,70
Mix hight Mixhight 0,61 12,00 13,35 -43,72
Figure 8. Changes in hydrological variables (water production, groundwater, percolation and erosion) analyzed at land use level
and at watershed level under climate change scenario (RCP 4.5 2050) without EbA interventions and with EbA interventions for the
Choluteca basin. For complete analysis of the three basins please refer to Annex 2 and Annex 31 aof the proposal.
24. The above results demonstrate the benefits and positive impacts that the proposed programme interventions
will have in the target areas, substantially reducing the expected negative impacts of climate change. . In
addition to the results from hydrological modelling undertaken for the proposed programme, other studies have
demonstrated links between the proposed interventions — EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies —
and improved climate resilience among vulnerable communities in the region.
25. Economic analysis of the benefits of land restoration in Latin American provides evidence to support that the
adoption of policy measures and removal of barriers to land restoration efforts by national and local
governments result in substantial benefits, including gains in agricultural production, alleviation of food
insecurity and carbon sequestration63. The economic benefits will contribute to the climate resilience of
communities in combination with the direct benefits of EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies on
land and ecosystems. The use of soil conservation methods and EbA interventions, such as vegetative barriers,
is recognised in the region as increasing climate adaptation by increasing soil water infiltration, retaining soil
moisture and reducing soil erosion64. Land restoration also decreases the demand for agricultural expansion
by enabling improvements in production on degraded lands through agroforestry, silvopastoral systems65, and
other types of EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies. The proposed landscape-scale adaptation
interventions implemented in target catchments will restore degraded lands and prevent subsequent forest
clearing in critical recharge zones and other ecosystems. This is expected to protect communities from risks of
flooding and will decrease the need for migration from rural areas.
26. The proposed EbA interventions and water- and resource-efficient technologies will aim to reduce the
vulnerability of targeted beneficiaries by increasing resilience to drought and extreme rainfall impacts on
agricultural production through improved hydrological flow and restoration of catchments. During the initial
stage of implementation, sound stakeholder consultations will be undertaken in each of the pilot sites to build
on the information developed during the proposal design and the EbA interventions will be validated from a
wide range of identified EbA interventions that are adjusted to the specific climate risks and socio-environmental
63 World Resources Institute. 2018. The Economic Case for Landscape Restoration in Latin America. Available at:
https://wriorg.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/The_Economic_Case_for_Landscape_Restoration_in_Latin_America.pdf?_ga=2.223405598.480839473.1559569688-
232533270.1535385279
64 Harvey et al., 2017. The use of Ecosystem-based adaptation practices by smallholder farmers in Central America. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment, 246:279-290. Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167880917301810
65 World Resources Institute. 2018. The Economic Case for Landscape Restoration in Latin America. Available at:
https://wriorg.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/The_Economic_Case_for_Landscape_Restoration_in_Latin_America.pdf?_ga=2.223405598.480839473.1559569688-
232533270.1535385279

--- Table 1 on Page 18 ---
SCENARIOS |  |  |  | Scenarios name | Watershed level |  |  |  | COMMENTS
Adaptation measures |  |  | Level |  | SW | PERC | WYLD | EROSION | 
NO |  |  |  | Climate Change | -1,38 | -10,61 | -14,05 | 1,55 | CC (% change)
 |  | ForestConservation | low | ForestConservationlow | 1,35 | 10,66 | 14,02 | -3,68 | 
 | 1a | ForestConservation | middle | ForestConservationmiddle | 1,23 | 11,42 | 13,93 | -13,84 | 
Adaptation measure 1: |  | ForestConservation | hight | ForestConservationhight | 1,08 | 12,23 | 13,80 | -28,03 | 
Conservation and |  | ForesRestoration | low | ForesRestorationlow | 1,33 | 10,68 | 14,01 | -4,01 | 
restoration forest | 1b | ForesRestoration | middle | ForesRestorationmiddle | 2,63 | 22,73 | 30,26 | -11,02 | 
 |  | ForesRestoration | hight | ForesRestorationhight | 1,09 | 11,02 | 13,78 | -16,96 | 
Adaptation measure 2: |  | SAF_Increase | low | SAF_Increaselow | 1,37 | 10,75 | 14,04 | -2,99 | 
Establishment of |  | SAF_Increase | middle | SAF_Increasemiddle | 1,32 | 10,69 | 14,00 | -4,52 | Change
agroforestry systems |  | SAF_Increase | hight | SAF_Increasehight | 0,57 | 11,78 | 13,30 | -44,37 | compared to
Adaptation measure 3: |  | Agriculture with irrigation | low | Agriculture with irrigationlow | 1,37 | 10,62 | 14,05 | -1,71 | Climate
Implementation of |  | Agriculture with irrigation | middle | Agriculture with irrigationmiddle | 1,36 | 10,71 | 14,04 | -2,51 | change
efficient irrigation systems |  | Agriculture with irrigation | hight | Agriculture with irrigationhight | 1,34 | 10,88 | 14,02 | -3,97 | scenario
 |  | LivingBarriers | low | LivingBarrierslow | 1,38 | 10,67 | 14,05 | -2,21 | 
Adaptation measure 4: |  | LivingBarriers | middle | LivingBarriersmiddle | 1,38 | 10,70 | 14,05 | -3,50 | 
Vegetative barriers |  | LivingBarriers | hight | LivingBarriershight | 1,39 | 11,66 | 14,05 | -20,23 | 
 |  | Mix | low | Mixlow | 1,27 | 10,83 | 13,95 | -7,54 | 
Combined scenarios |  | Mix | middle | Mixmiddle | 1,02 | 11,27 | 13,72 | -21,70 | 
 |  | Mix | hight | Mixhight | 0,61 | 12,00 | 13,35 | -43,72 | 

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 17 OF 96
G
context of the catchment. Further specific criteria that will be applied for the selection and validation of these
EbA interventions are described in paragraph 50. Improved ecosystem health through EbA interventions —
such as reforestation, vegetative barriers and agroforestry systems — will create enhanced groundwater
resources for use during droughts and decrease the risk of flooding and erosion during extreme rainfall events.
Reducing demand for scarce water resources through water-efficient technologies in farms and households will
further reduce the stress on ecosystems’ hydrological cycles and will improve ecosystems’ resilience to climate
change impacts. Further to this, the economic benefits and increased agricultural productivity gained from land
restoration in the region will help improve livelihood resilience and food security in communities.
Complementarity with related projects, programmes and initiatives
27. Considerable investments have been and are being made through public expenditure and donor-funded
initiatives to increase the resilience of vulnerable communities to climate change throughout the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones. Lessons learned and best practices from these investments have been incorporated into the
design of the proposed programme to replicate successful techniques and ensure that there is complementarity
between the programme and existing initiatives. The most relevant investments that will be complemented by
the proposed programme are presented below66.
28. CABEI is implementing the GCF-funded ‘Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change’
(CAMBio II) programme in the same seven countries the proposed programme will work in but in areas outside
of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. Specifically, CAMBio II is working to: i) provide loans to producers through
CABEI’s accredited intermediary financial institutions (IFIs) for the implementation of adaptation measures; ii)
build capacity of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and IFIs through grants to improve
technical and business skills; and iii) establish an incentive scheme to promote adaptation measures
implemented by MSMEs.
29. The proposed programme will be complementary to CAMBIo II in several regards. First, the two operate in
complementary geographic regions. While CAMBio II works in an expanded range across the region — focusing
on areas where there is demand from MSMEs — the proposed programme will only work within the Dry
Corridor. A detailed vulnerability assessment of the region at the municipal level has been undertaken, resulting
in the selection of the 36 most vulnerable municipalities67 in which this programme will be focusing. Second,
the two will target different groups. CAMBio II is explicitly focused on MSMEs, while the proposed programme
will work with individual producers and their associated groups, focusing specifically on the most vulnerable
smallholder farmers. Third, the two will operate through different financial mechanisms. CAMBio II is working
through financial intermediation with IFIs, channelling funds through credit.
In contrast, the proposed programme will operate through a trust structure for GCF funds, andCABEI, as direct
trustee for GCF, will then provide senior limited recourse loans to the IFIs, combined with an on-lending
structure via senior loans for CABEI co-financing, both to existing Intermediary Financial Institutions (IFIs) that
will blend the funds on their balance sheet to channel to Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) in the programme
areas. PFIs in that context are smaller institutions such as small banks, cooperatives, NGOs, or rural community
banks, that serve the last mile for the end beneficiaries. Fourth, the proposed programme will expand on the
range of activities offered — focusing on water security as a whole, rather than only agriculture. Fifth, by
providing a guarantee mechanism to be funded by GCF to exclusively cover non-GCF/non-CABEI co-financing
and leveraged funds, the programme will enable the scale-up and mainstreaming of successful EbA finance by
further leveraging additional private and possibly public funds for the on-lending structure, giving the GCF fund‘s
trust structure the catalytic role it is intended for. This expanded focus will include on-the-ground ecosystem-
based adaptation (EbA)68 and restoration.
30. In addition to the above, the technical assistance provided by the two programmes will be complementary.
CAMBio II is providing a variety of technical assistance to IFIs and MSMEs, where the beneficiaries receive
initial training on the programme operations and thereafter can request assistance on specific matters. The
proposed programme otherwise offers technical assistance — both practical and theoretical trainings — for
local government, farmers and rural communities, as well as IFI's and smaller financial institutions, that focus
on: i) the technical areas in climate change; ii) accessing and channeling funds through established financial
66 A comprehensive list of past and ongoing projects, programmes and initiatives, as well as details of their focus and alignment with the proposed
programme, is presented in Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
67 A list of these municipalities is provided in the first paragraph of Section B.3 Project/Programme Description.
68 Ecosystem-based adaptation refers to “the use of biodiversity and ecosystem services to help people adapt to the adverse effects of climate change”
(Convention on Biological Diversity, 2009)

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 18 OF 96
G
mechanisms; and iii) implementing EbA and other adaptation measures. Furthermore, the proposed
programme will expand on the outputs of CAMBio II, drawing on experiences during implementation to inform
higher-level outcomes. For example, CAMBio II offers incentives (Adapt-Award) for IFIs and MSMEs which use
loans to implement adaptation measures. However, these incentives will not scale well beyond programme
implementation. The proposed programme will improve on this approach by promoting the mainstreaming of
adaptation incentives into local and, ultimately, national policy through capacity building activities for decision-
makers and mainstreaming policy initiatives. Overall complementarity and sharing of best practices will be
ensured as both will be executed by CABEI, with lessons learned being directly exchanged between
management units within CABEI. However, it is important to highlight that, although complementary, these
initiatives have a fundamental difference in their overall goals. In the case of the Dry Corridor, the approach is
to ensure water security for communities at the landscape/basin level, while for CAMBIo II, the goal is to remove
funding barriers for MSMEs.
31. In addition to CAMBio II, the proposed programme will align with the Microfinance for EbA (MEbA) project that
is being implemented in eight countries across Latin America and Africa, including three of the targeted Central
American countries, namely Costa Rica, Dominican Republic and El Salvador. MEbA is promoting private
sector engagement in adaptation finance by facilitating microfinance products aimed at small-scale farmers to
invest in EbA options to improve their resilience to climate change. The proposed programme will draw on
lessons learned and best practices established through MEbA to guide the establishment of financial
mechanisms for the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
32. Several national projects are being implemented in Central America with a focus on water-efficient
technologies, EbA and land restoration to improve ecosystem services and livelihoods, increase food security,
and build climate resilience of vulnerable communities. Examples of these include' Upscaling climate resilience
measures in the Dry Corridor agro-ecosystems of El Salvador (RECLIMA)' and 'Building livelihood resilience to
climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala's highlands', both funded by GCF. These projects are
implementing several adaptation measures that will be replicated and scaled up regionally by the proposed
programme. These include: i) riparian forest restoration; ii) establishing agroforestry and silvopastoral systems;
iii) rainwater collection; and iv) water-efficient agricultural technologies such as drip irrigation. The proposed
programme will use best practices from these projects to scale up interventions across the region. In addition,
increased access to financial products and services under Component 2 of the proposed programme will ensure
that a larger number of individuals and enterprises are able to implement these kinds of interventions. The
proposed programme will also contribute directly to restoration commitments made by several countries under
Initiative 20x20. This initiative is a country-led effort69 whose primary objective is to restore 20 million hectares
of degraded land across Central America and the Caribbean by 2020. The proposed programme will contribute
directly to these goals by restoring ~19,200 hectares of forested area across the seven catchments targeted by
the programme.
33. Finally, a project funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear
Safety (BMU) has been implemented from 2012–2019 by the International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) in several countries in Central America, including Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico and Panama. This project — 'Transforming evidence into change: a holistic approach to governance
for EbA' (Go4EbA) — focused on improving existing governance frameworks for implementing EbA through
developing an evidence base for its implementation. One catchment per country was selected to demonstrate
EbA measures and ~400 people received capacity-building. Go4EbA also established a database including
information about over 100 EbA-related cases in the region, and a virtual platform known as 'EbA Solutions'70
to share knowledge and provide technical assistance. The platform includes information on: i) adaptation
projects by type of activity; ii) availability and management of water resources; and iii) ecosystem protection
and recovery. The proposed programme will draw lessons learned from Go4EbA with regards to best practices
when implementing a bottom-up approach focused on promoting water and food security in the region. It will
also upscale measures implemented under Go4EbA in several additional catchments within the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones.
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)
69 In the Dry Corridor, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama have committed to restoring 6.4 million hectares in total,
while the Dominican Republic has committed to restoring 0.09 million hectares . El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama: 1 million hectares per
country; Guatemala: 1.2 million hectares ; Costa Rica: 2.7 million hectares. Available at: http://www.wri.org/our-work/project/initiative-20x20.
70 www.solucionesabe.org

--- Table 1 on Page 20 ---
mechanisms; and iii) implementing EbA and other adaptation measures. Furthermore, the proposed
programme will expand on the outputs of CAMBio II, drawing on experiences during implementation to inform
higher-level outcomes. For example, CAMBio II offers incentives (Adapt-Award) for IFIs and MSMEs which use
loans to implement adaptation measures. However, these incentives will not scale well beyond programme
implementation. The proposed programme will improve on this approach by promoting the mainstreaming of
adaptation incentives into local and, ultimately, national policy through capacity building activities for decision-
makers and mainstreaming policy initiatives. Overall complementarity and sharing of best practices will be
ensured as both will be executed by CABEI, with lessons learned being directly exchanged between
management units within CABEI. However, it is important to highlight that, although complementary, these
initiatives have a fundamental difference in their overall goals. In the case of the Dry Corridor, the approach is
to ensure water security for communities at the landscape/basin level, while for CAMBIo II, the goal is to remove
funding barriers for MSMEs.
31. In addition to CAMBio II, the proposed programme will align with the Microfinance for EbA (MEbA) project that
is being implemented in eight countries across Latin America and Africa, including three of the targeted Central
American countries, namely Costa Rica, Dominican Republic and El Salvador. MEbA is promoting private
sector engagement in adaptation finance by facilitating microfinance products aimed at small-scale farmers to
invest in EbA options to improve their resilience to climate change. The proposed programme will draw on
lessons learned and best practices established through MEbA to guide the establishment of financial
mechanisms for the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
32. Several national projects are being implemented in Central America with a focus on water-efficient
technologies, EbA and land restoration to improve ecosystem services and livelihoods, increase food security,
and build climate resilience of vulnerable communities. Examples of these include' Upscaling climate resilience
measures in the Dry Corridor agro-ecosystems of El Salvador (RECLIMA)' and 'Building livelihood resilience to
climate change in the upper basins of Guatemala's highlands', both funded by GCF. These projects are
implementing several adaptation measures that will be replicated and scaled up regionally by the proposed
programme. These include: i) riparian forest restoration; ii) establishing agroforestry and silvopastoral systems;
iii) rainwater collection; and iv) water-efficient agricultural technologies such as drip irrigation. The proposed
programme will use best practices from these projects to scale up interventions across the region. In addition,
increased access to financial products and services under Component 2 of the proposed programme will ensure
that a larger number of individuals and enterprises are able to implement these kinds of interventions. The
proposed programme will also contribute directly to restoration commitments made by several countries under
Initiative 20x20. This initiative is a country-led effort69 whose primary objective is to restore 20 million hectares
of degraded land across Central America and the Caribbean by 2020. The proposed programme will contribute
directly to these goals by restoring ~19,200 hectares of forested area across the seven catchments targeted by
the programme.
33. Finally, a project funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear
Safety (BMU) has been implemented from 2012–2019 by the International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) in several countries in Central America, including Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico and Panama. This project — 'Transforming evidence into change: a holistic approach to governance
for EbA' (Go4EbA) — focused on improving existing governance frameworks for implementing EbA through
developing an evidence base for its implementation. One catchment per country was selected to demonstrate
EbA measures and ~400 people received capacity-building. Go4EbA also established a database including
information about over 100 EbA-related cases in the region, and a virtual platform known as 'EbA Solutions'70
to share knowledge and provide technical assistance. The platform includes information on: i) adaptation
projects by type of activity; ii) availability and management of water resources; and iii) ecosystem protection
and recovery. The proposed programme will draw lessons learned from Go4EbA with regards to best practices
when implementing a bottom-up approach focused on promoting water and food security in the region. It will
also upscale measures implemented under Go4EbA in several additional catchments within the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones. |  | 
 | B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) | 

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 19 OF 96
G
Description of the problem
34. Climate change is causing increasingly frequent and intense droughts, as well as a higher occurrence of
extreme rainfall events, in the Dry Corridor region of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican
Republic. These areas are densely populated and have high levels of poverty — concentrated in rural areas —
when compared with the rest of the region. In addition, most rural communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid
Zones are dependent on agriculture and plantation forestry for their livelihoods, both of which are extremely
sensitive to climate impacts — specifically those impacts that result in changes in water availability. These
communities also have limited knowledge of climate change adaptation measures, coupled with an inability to
access funds to finance adaptation. As a result, rural communities in this region are extremely vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change. This vulnerability is exacerbated by widespread environmental degradation and an
associated loss of ecosystem services such as water production. Future climate projections indicate that the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones will continue to become warmer and drier, with increasingly variable rainfall and
an associated increased risk of severe drought71. Past and ongoing adaptation efforts in the region have not
been implemented at a sufficient scale to prevent rural communities experiencing severe negative impacts of
climate change, which will likely only increase in the future.
Preferred adaptation solution
35. The preferred adaptation solution to the above-described problem is to improve the climate resilience of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones by: i) implementing integrated catchment management and
restoring catchments; ii) improving hydrological flow and infiltration of rainwater into groundwater reserves
through forest and ecosystem restoration; and iii) reducing demand for scarce water resources by implementing
water-efficient technologies at farm- and household-level. The selection/validation of the specific EbA
interventions will be based on scientific climate risk assessments and sound stakeholder consultations as
described in paragraphs 51 and 99. Specifically, under the preferred adaptation solution, commercial farmers
and entrepreneurs in rural communities would have access to the financial resources and technical skills
required for the widespread implementation of adaptation measures — including EbA, and water- and resource-
efficient techniques. This access to financial and technical resources would strengthen the adaptive capacity
of rural communities to withstand increasingly frequent and intense droughts, which result in water shortages,
and subsequent reductions in economic activity, productivity and food security. In addition, the mainstreaming
of adaptation considerations into policy and planning by government, and the generation of knowledge and
awareness of adaptation options should take place across the region. Mainstreaming in this way would enable
the uptake of large-scale EbA and other adaptation measures. The overall approach under the preferred
adaptation solution would ensure access to adaptation measures for all impacted communities in the Dry
Corridor and Arid Zones, building their climate resilience in the long-term.
Barriers to the preferred adaptation solution
36. The proposed programme will address the following eight barriers to the preferred adaptation solution in the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. These barriers are described in further detail in Section 11 of Annex 2: Feasibility
Study.
• Barrier 1: Limited knowledge and understanding of climate change impacts among decision-makers. Decision-
makers in Central America and the Dominican Republic often have knowledge gaps with regards to climate change
impacts, and how these impacts affect farmers. These gaps include knowledge on: i) water availability; ii) areas
susceptible to extreme weather events; iii) locations of smallholder farmers; iv) projected changes in temperature
and rainfall; v) expected impacts on crop yields; and vi) adaptation strategies. These knowledge gaps impede the
mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into the policies and plans of the different sectors. In this regard and
in particular for the selected pilot sites, the availability of historical observed meteorological data is very limited as
well as the availability of site-specific climate change projections. There are only 24 meteorological stations within
the limits of the Dry Corridor. Only for three of the countries, there were stations within the prioritized pilot sites and
just one of them (Honduras) had complete observed rainfall and temperature data for a period of over 30 years
with less than 15% of discontinuity.
• Barrier 2: Limited knowledge and understanding of EbA and other adaptation measures among decision-makers
and communities. Decision-makers and communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones frequently have limited
knowledge and understanding of EbA, and of adaptation measures such as water- and resource-efficient
technologies. They have limited access to information and limited understanding of the value of ecosystem services
71 Details are provided in Section B.1 and Section 6 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 20 OF 96
G
and the costs and benefits of ecosystem restoration, in particular because of the large scales at which many
ecosystem services are generated. As a result, they have limited capacity to implement these interventions and
reap their benefits.
• Barrier 3: Insufficient implementation of existing policies on climate change adaptation and limited integration of
EbA and other adaptation measures into sectoral policies. Climate change adaptation is a priority in the NDCs of
all seven participating countries. National policies also indirectly support EbA; for example, conservation policies,
and the need to restore, conserve and sustainably manage the Dry Corridor and Arid Zone forests, wetlands and
agroforestry systems is widely recognised. However, institutions at both national and local level have insufficient
knowledge and technical capacity to implement existing policies, preventing policies from achieving the necessary
impacts.
• Barrier 4: Limited technical capacity within governments and local communities to implement EbA and other
adaptation measures. Governments have gradually reduced public budgets for the provision of extension services
that could promote EbA. As a result, communities receive limited support, training and technical assistance to
implement climate-resilient practices at landscape-, community- and household-level.
• Barrier 5: Limited knowledge and technical capacity to adopt technologies and approaches for efficient water use.
Technologies that support efficient water use have been implemented successfully in the region, but these cases
have not been well documented. As a result, there is limited information on water management and improved
technologies, both for policy-makers at the local-level, and for water users. In the agricultural sector, specifically,
successful water-efficient technologies are known for large commercial farming (e.g. drip irrigation of sugarcane
and oil palms), but knowledge of water-efficient technologies is less widespread among smallholder farmers.
• Barrier 6: Limited access for financial institutions to specific refinancing options for the implementation of EbA,
water- and resource-efficient technologies in the private sector. Private sector investors, credit agencies and
financial institutions have limited evidence of the benefits of EbA and other adaptation measures and limited access
to specific EbA refinancing options. In addition, valuations by these institutions do not take into account important
long-term benefits of EbA. As a result, these institutions have limited opportunity to assess the commercial viability
of EbA approaches and natural resource-based businesses, and to develop related financial services and products.
• Barrier 7: Limited access to credit for adaptation interventions among vulnerable populations. Smallholder farmers
and rural households require credit to cover the initial costs of implementing EbA and water- and resource-efficient
technologies. However, the high risk of such credit to financing institutions limits the availability of credit to
vulnerable communities. This is because banks often lack guarantees from central banks/multi-national
development banks to reduce their risk in providing credit to individuals and small businesses with little collateral
and small farm sizes.
• Barrier 8: Absence or limited development of economic incentives for investment in sustainable natural resource
management and EbA. Although some water funds and schemes for payment for environmental services (PES)
exist in the participating countries, the majority of these funds and schemes operate at limited and local scales.
Barriers to the implementation of such economic incentives include lack of enabling strategic, legal and institutional
frameworks and lack of transparent monitoring arrangements.
Programme objective
37. The proposed programme's interventions have been designed to overcome the above-mentioned barriers and
contribute to the programme objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity of vulnerable people, including
smallholder and commercial farmers, as well as entrepreneurs in rural communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid
Zones. They will also contribute to the conservation and restoration of degraded, climate-vulnerable landscapes
through improved agricultural and agroforestry practices, as well as reforestation and improved forest
management practices. This will be achieved through the facilitation of a shift in the approach to catchment and
water demand management, seeing governments promoting large-scale implementation of EbA and other
adaptation measures, while simultaneously unlocking finance for the adoption of such sustainable practices
that will build resilience against extreme climate events such as severe drought and extreme rainfall. This shift
will take place through the implementation of four interconnected Outputs, described in detail in Section B.3. A
description of how the programme’s activities will overcome the identified barriers is provided below.
38. Barriers 1 and 2 will be overcome predominantly through activities under Output 3, including through the
dissemination of knowledge products on climate change impacts, EbA and other adaptation measures through

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 21 OF 96
G
a regional knowledge hub linked to the existing Environmental Observatory based at the Central American
Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD). In addition, policy- and decision-makers will be trained
on relevant aspects of climate change — including the disproportionate impact of climate change on women
and other vulnerable groups — and the role of EbA and other adaptation measures in mitigating these impacts.
To ensure the sustainability of programme interventions in overcoming these barriers, local community
organisations — including environmental and women's groups — will be trained to continue the development
and dissemination of climate information and knowledge products. Policy- and decision-makers will also be
trained on how to integrate climate change adaptation into local, national and regional policies and strategies;
and their experiences in doing so will be disseminated throughout the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones to promote
this process across different sectors throughout the region. Component 3 will also contribute to overcoming
barrier 1 through the collaboration with regional research institutions as one of the main areas of research will
be focused on strengthening the availability of downscaled climate projections for the Dry Corridor and the
analysis of impacts over hydrological variables.This training will overcome Barrier 3. The above activities will
combine to result in the dissemination of information on climate change adaptation and its financing across the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones, as well as the mainstreaming of this information into local and national policies.
This result will contribute to the outcome of strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction
processes in the seven target countries.
39. The technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities will be strengthened through
activities under Output 1, enabling them to implement EbA and other adaptation measures, and overcoming
Barriers 4 and 5. To achieve this, country-specific protocols will be developed for the: i) implementation of
sustainable EbA practices; ii) adoption of water-efficient technologies by households; and iii) adoption of
resource-efficient technologies that reduce fuelwood demand. These protocols will be developed by the local
experts in the Project Execution Units with support from the regional experts and the monitoring and evaluation
committees under the supervision of the Executing Entity (FAO) prior to the implementation of on-the-ground
interventions in each country,and will be validated through stakeholder engagements in each municipality.
Training in the use of these protocols will be provided to local government representatives using a training-of-
trainers approach. In addition, local communities will be trained on EbA and other adaptation interventions,
including visits to demonstration sites to facilitate farmer-to-farmer knowledge transfer. Through activities under
Output 2, on-the-ground EbA interventions and water- and resource-efficient technologies will be introduced
across seven catchments, the implementation of which will result in lessons learned and best practices to
contribute to the knowledge base regarding the adoption of these interventions. The evidence base generated
through the implementation and monitoring of these interventions will be shared with local decision-makers, the
private sector (including commercial farmers) and local communities through the regional knowledge hub linked
to the CCAD’s Environmental Observatory. This evidence base will facilitate the uptake by communities of
financial products and services to finance EbA and other adaptation measures as described further below. In
addition, the activities that have been designed to overcome Barriers 4 and 5 will result in: i) strengthened
technical capacity of beneficiaries to implement EbA and other adaptation measures; and ii) the implementation
of large-scale adaptation interventions in rural communities across seven target catchments. These results will
both contribute to the outcome of strengthened adaptative capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks
among vulnerable communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
40. Barriers 6 and 7 will be overcome mainly through activities under Output 4. These include the establishment
of financial products and services to finance EbA investments, including via a blended EbA finance structure
with two main facilities, namely a; i) a blended EbA lending facility for small- and large-scale EbA investments
at farm-, enterprise- and household-level via two different funding streams provided by CABEI to the IFIs; and
ii) a guarantee facility to provide additional security for participating intermediary financial institutions for on-
lending to partner financial institutions to engage in the riskier target beneficiary segment. The technical
capacity of financial institutions will be increased to enable the operationalisation and delivery of these new
financial products and services, whilst awareness will be raised among the private sector and vulnerable
communities on how to access these mechanisms for the implementation of adaptation measures. These
activities will result in financial products and services to finance EbA investments being offered by last mile
partner financial institutions to the communities that need them the most. To increase economic incentives for
investing in EbA and other sustainable land management practices, an evidence base will be constructed based
on the introduction of adequate and where possible digital monitoring, reporting and verification systems for all
activities financed. This will help to demonstrate the value and effectiveness of proposed adaptation activities
to policy-makers and financial institutions so that these considerations will be integrated into development
plans. A methodology will also be developed to value ecosystem services. It will be used to guide local
governments in making policy changes and implementing economic incentives — such as water funds — for

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 22 OF 96
G
sustainable land management practices. This will overcome Barrier 8. The activities described above will
combine to contribute towards the outcome of strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and development in the seven target countries.
41. Together, the above-described interventions will overcome the barriers to improving climate resilience of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. They will contribute to the achievement of three outcomes (as
detailed in the Theory of Change diagram below) and, ultimately, to the goal of increased climate resilience of
vulnerable communities across the region. The sustainability of these interventions will be ensured through a
detailed exit strategy centred around the principles of: i) long-term community ownership; ii) mainstreaming
initiatives into catchment management and planning frameworks; iii) incentivising private sector investments
into EbA; and iv) sustainable financial instruments.
Figure 9. Theory of Change diagram.
B.3. Project/programme description
42. Programme interventions will be implemented in all six countries of the Dry Corridor — Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama — as well as the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic. A
single catchment has been selected for each country based on a detailed climate change vulnerability
assessment, with five to six municipalities targeted within each catchment (see Section 12 of Annex 2:
Feasibility Study). The target municipalities for each country are:
• Guatemala — Canillá, Chicamán, San Andrés Sajcabaja, Uspantán and Zacualpa in the Río Salinas
watershed;
• Honduras — Apacilagua, Choluteca, Duyure, Marcovia, Morolica, and Orocuina in the Choluteca watershed;

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
sustainable land management practices. This will overcome Barrier 8. The activities described above will
combine to contribute towards the outcome of strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and development in the seven target countries.
41. Together, the above-described interventions will overcome the barriers to improving climate resilience of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. They will contribute to the achievement of three outcomes (as
detailed in the Theory of Change diagram below) and, ultimately, to the goal of increased climate resilience of
vulnerable communities across the region. The sustainability of these interventions will be ensured through a
detailed exit strategy centred around the principles of: i) long-term community ownership; ii) mainstreaming
initiatives into catchment management and planning frameworks; iii) incentivising private sector investments
into EbA; and iv) sustainable financial instruments.
Figure 9. Theory of Change diagram. |  | 
 | B.3. Project/programme description | 
42. Programme interventions will be implemented in all six countries of the Dry Corridor — Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama — as well as the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic. A
single catchment has been selected for each country based on a detailed climate change vulnerability
assessment, with five to six municipalities targeted within each catchment (see Section 12 of Annex 2:
Feasibility Study). The target municipalities for each country are:
• Guatemala — Canillá, Chicamán, San Andrés Sajcabaja, Uspantán and Zacualpa in the Río Salinas
watershed;
• Honduras — Apacilagua, Choluteca, Duyure, Marcovia, Morolica, and Orocuina in the Choluteca watershed; |  | 

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 23 OF 96
G
• El Salvador — Concepción Batres, El Carmen, El Tránsito, Jucuarán and San Miguel in the San Miguel
watershed;
• Nicaragua — El Jícaro, Palacagüina, Somoto, Telpaneca and Yalagüina in the Rio Coco watershed;
• Costa Rica — Bagaces, Carrillo, Liberia, Nicoya and Santa Cruz in the Tempisque watershed;
• Panama — Guarar, Macaracas, Pocrí, Pedasí and Tonosí in the Los Santos watershed; and
• Dominican Republic — El Pino, Los Almácigos, Monción, Partido and San Ignacio de Sabaneta in the
Guayubín and Mao watersheds.
The programme's regional approach will create an enabling environment for scalable and sustainable catchment
and water demand management, facilitating large-scale investment in, and implementation of, EbA and water-
efficient technologies. The total grant request of US$84.3 million will be used in the following ways: i) US$10.1
million will be used to strengthen the technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to
implement EbA and other adaptation measures through the activities comprised in output 1; ii) US$ 28.5 million
will be used to implement large-scale adaptation interventions — including EbA, water- and resource-efficient
technologies — in rural communities across the region throughout output 2; iii) US$28 million will form the grant
facility through which vulnerable communities can access on-grants to foster the creation of a business ecosystem
around EbA available technologies as per activity 1.2.; iv) US$6.3 million will be used to generate and share
information on climate change adaptation and finance across the region, and mainstream it into local and national
policies within the output 3; v) US$6.5 million will be used to set up the financial mechanisms and strengthen the
technical capacity of CABEI accredited and non-regulated financial institutions to access and channel funds through
them throughout output 4; vi) US$4.2 million will be used for overall management and monitoring of programme
activities (Independent evaluations and PMC costs); and vii) US$0.7 million is requested for contingency.
Component 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into
selected catchments
43. Under Component 1, three interrelated outputs will facilitate the widespread implementation of adaptation
measures across the region. This will include: i) providing technical assistance to local government, farmers
and rural communities to implement adaptation measures; ii) mainstreaming adaptation measures and
incentives into policy and planning as well as disseminating information on climate change and adaptation
across the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones; and iii) implementing on-the-ground EbA and water/resource-efficient
technologies. These outputs will complement Output 4 by providing the technical assistance needed by local
government, farmers and rural communities to implement EbA activities and water/resource-efficient
technologies financed by the mechanisms established under Output 4. In addition, increased knowledge
disseminated under Component 1 regarding EbA and water-efficient technologies and newly-available financial
mechanisms will facilitate access for those previously unable to fund these adaptation measures, as well as
creating an enabling environment for the establishment of economic incentives for investment in EbA.
Output 1. Strengthened technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to implement EbA and
other adaptation measures.
44. Output 1 will be fully executed by FAO who will be responsible for the establishment of the National Project
Execution Units in each country as well as hosting the Regional Project Management Unit in their Regional
Office in Panama. CABEI will sign a Subsidiary Agreement with FAO for the execution of this output.This output
will be executed directly through the national structure of FAO as well as through agreements with national
partners when necessary for the undertaking of capacity building activities, trainings and community
engagement as well as for the promotion of opportunities through the financial mechanism of the programme
and the monitoring of the impact of the investments.
45. Activities under Output 1 will contribute to GCF Outcome A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced
exposure to climate risks — by facilitating the adoption of improved land use practices, as well as natural
resource-based businesses (NRBs) and alternative climate-resilient livelihoods. A community-based approach
will be adopted to identify site-specific interventions in each of the 36 municipalities targeted by the programme
during the first year of the programme as described in paragraphs 51 and 99, which will be implemented under
Output 2. FAO as the Executing Entity for these activities will ensure that the site-specific intervention plans
meet all eligibility criteria and ultimately retain the final decision to approve implementation of all interventions
under this output. Technical assistance will be provided to local governments to adopt and implement these
intervention plans during the first year of the programme and with follow up activities along the programme.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 24 OF 96
G
46. Technical assistance will also be provided to farmers and rural communities in 36 municipalities, on the
implementation of on-the-ground EbA practices, including silvopasture, agroforestry and sustainable land
management72. The technical assistance under this component will also support the integration of EbA in policy
and regulatory frameworks at the local level focusing mainly on water management regulations and water
management community structures as well as local land use planning instruments. Target municipalities were
selected following a rigorous vulnerability assessment and extensive consultations with key stakeholders in
each country. Using IPCC guidelines, vulnerability was determined as a function of: i) the profile, magnitude
and rate of climate changes to which a system is exposed; ii) the sensitivity of the system to those changes;
and iii) the adaptive capacity of that system. Based on the result of the vulnerability assessment, a single
watershed was identified in the most vulnerable area for each country (except for Dominican Republic, where
two adjacent watersheds were selected), and then 5-6 municipalities were selected within the target
watersheds. Details of the vulnerability assessment and site selection process are provided in Section 12 of
Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
Country-specific implementation protocols will be developed for: i) the implementation of sustainable EbA
practices; ii) the adoption of water-efficient technologies; and iii) the adoption of resource-efficient technologies
47. that reduce fuelwood demand. These protocols will be developed by the local experts in the Project Execution
Units with support from the regional experts and the monitoring and evaluation committees under the
supervision of the Executing Entity (FAO) prior to the implementation of on-the-ground interventions in each
country,and will be validated through stakeholder engagements in each municipality. To operationalise these
protocols, a training-of-trainers programme will be introduced for representatives of local departments of
environment/water, community-based organisations, water committees, local cooperatives, environmental and
women's organisations within each country. Particular attention will be paid to the inclusion of women in this
training, especially considering their active role in water and fuelwood use. Site visits will be arranged to
demonstration sites that will be established in each of the target municipalities (Output 2), as well as showcasing
mature plots where EbA interventions are already providing demonstrable benefits regarding water security.
Commercial farmers, smallholder subsistence farmers, local communities and individual households will also
be provided with technical assistance to adopt water-efficient technologies, including drip irrigation and
rainwater harvesting, as well as for resource-efficient practices, including fuelwood drying and efficient charcoal
production which will reduce the pressure of fuelwood collection on remnant forests.
48. In addition to the technical assistance provided for on-the-ground implementation of EbA practices and
water/resource-efficient technologies, training will be provided to communities on the development of small,
locally appropriate livelihoods. This will include training for natural resource-based businesses (NRBs) that: i)
will support the implementation and maintenance of EbA interventions — such as tree nurseries and the
manufacturing, distribution or repair of water-efficient technologies; and ii) rely on non-destructive use of
ecosystem goods and services provided through EbA — such as businesses developed around the ecotourism
industry, or non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The establishment of NRBs not only contributes to the
upscaling of EbA interventions, but also enhances the resilience of vulnerable communities by providing
climate-resilient income-generating opportunities. The promotion of NRBs — in conjunction with increased
access to financing under Output 4 and increased knowledge and understanding of adaptation options under
Output 3 — will strengthen the adaptive capacity of smallholder farming communities under future climate
conditions. Programme activities that will be implemented under Output 1 are listed below.
• Activity 1.1. Develop site-specific intervention plans for the seven target catchments to integrate EbA measures
through a participatory process with municipal authorities, local communities and other stakeholders.
• Activity 1.2. Provide technical assistance to municipal authorities, farmers and rural communities for the
implementation of EbA practices as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies.
• Activity 1.3. Provide technical assistance to farmers and rural communities for the development of natural
resource-based businesses and alternative climate-resilient livelihoods.
Output 2. Demonstration adaptation interventions implemented in rural communities across seven target catchments
in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
72 Technical assistance will not be limited to farmers accessing the financial mechanisms from Output 1, but to any farmers in the targett
municipalities that are open to adopting improved practices but lack the technical knowledge to do so.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 25 OF 96
G
49. Activities under Output 2 will contribute to GCF Outcome A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced
exposure to climate risks — by providing the necessary resources for the on-the-ground implementation of EbA
interventions as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies in rural communities across the seven target
catchments. Support will be targeted at the most vulnerable communities in 36 municipalities73, that lack the
capacity to access financing and equipment to implement adaptation interventions without external assistance.
The hydrological modeling undertaken for the programme areas (described in Section B.1 of the proposal and
in further detail in Section 13 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study) has demonstrated that a combination of adaptation
interventions, such as forest conservation, reforestation, transition to agroforestry systems, introduction of
irrigation systems and vegetative barriers results in substantial improvements for all key hydrological variables
in the catchment areas. As a result, a combination of adaptation measures will be implemented in each of the
target catchments to maximise the benefits conveyed and the reduction of climate change impacts, specifically
on hydrological parameters. FAO will be the EE for the implementation of these measures under activities 2.1
and 2.2. The grant-supported interventions all also serve as demonstration sites that will provide practical
examples to surrounding communities on how to implement sustainable practices. CABEI will be the EE for the
implementation of the grant-facility under activity 2.3.
50. The programme will work with local organisations in each municipality to implement on-the-ground EbA
interventions that provide multiple ecosystem goods and services to vulnerable communities. The relevant
organisations will be identified during the development of site-specific intervention plans (Activity 1.1). Relevant
interventions have been identified for each municipality based on community consultations, sectoral expert
opinion obtained for the Feasibility Study and the results of the hydrological models for three of the pilot
catchments. The selected interventions remain as indicative and are subject to validation during the inception
phase and in consultation with the specific communities These indicative interventions, pre-identified with the
available and developed information during the formulation process include: i) establishing one tree nursery per
municipality focusing on native species and fuelwood trees (36 total); ii) establishing 4,160 ha of forest
protection zones across the seven catchment areas; iii) protecting 1,820 ha of natural forest in major recharge
areas and riparian zones, including assisted regeneration; iv) restoring 5,170 ha of natural forest areas across
seven catchments; v) restoring 820 ha of native pine forests in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua; vi)
establishing 1,293 km of agroforestry systems using diversified living fence arrangements in basic grains crops;
vii) establishing 612 ha of agroforestry systems for natural shade in coffee plantations; viii) establishing 1,280
km of silvopasture systems using diversified living fence arrangements; ix) establishing 1,280 ha of silvopasture
systems across the 36 target municipalities; x) establishing 5,305 ha of sustainable fuelwood and timber
plantations across the 36 target municipalities; xi) establishing 129 km of firebreaks for forests and plantations;
xii) constructing 118 km of living barriers for soil conservation around agricultural plots; and xiii) constructing
118 km of superficial drainage for soil conservation. In addition to these EbA practices, activities under Output
2 will also address the projected increase in water scarcity under future climate conditions by introducing water-
efficient technologies to reduce demand for scarce water resources in rural communities. This will include
installing: i) 109 rainwater harvesting systems at the community level targeting clinics and schools; ii) 156
community-level rainwater reservoirs (500 m3 each); and iii) 38 community-level Water pumping systems by
solar panels. Finally, resource-efficient technologies will be introduced in each of the target municipalities,
focussing on efficient charcoal production methods using half-orange kilns (43 systems). This will maximise the
energy output per unit of biomass, thereby reducing the pressure of fuelwood collection on natural ecosystems.
51. The validation of these indicative pre-selected interventions will be based on the development of the site-
specific plans (activity 1.1) that will include both a scientific analysis of specific climate projectcions through the
hydrological models, as well as sound stakeholder consultations that will allow to identify the most appropriate
interventions. The validation of these indicative interventions will therefore be based on the following criteria:
• - Relevance to site-specific climate risks
• - Positive impact potential over climate risks
• - Familiarity and acceptance by stakeholders
• - Positive impact potential over most vulnerable sectors of the community
• - Positive impact potential on gender balance
• - Technical feasibility of the intervention
• - Compliance with social en environmental safeguards
• - Potential co-benefits of the intervention
• - Minimal level of risks and constraints for implementation
• - Potential for self-sustainability
73 A description of the target municipalities and catchments is provided in Section 12 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 26 OF 96
G
• - Potential for sustained monitoring capacity
52. To foster grant support for identification, incubation or even acceleration of site-specific solutions and
distribution models, a US$28 million grant facility will be established to support site-specific EbA and water-
/resource-efficient technologies for the most vulnerable communities, who are unable to access loan finance.
A bottom-up approach will be used to identify eligible projects, following stringent eligibility checks for all grant
applications. The Regional Project Steering Committee (RPSC) — comprising representatives from FAO,
CCAD, CABEI, UNEP, national-level CCAD liaisons and the Regional Project Manager — will define the
eligibility criteria for each country at programme inception, with final sign off provided by CABEI as the the
Executing Entity. This process will include identifying specific companies and organisations that have a strong
commitment to delivering agreed results of EbA activities and water technologies. The grant eligibility criteria
and selection process is foreseen to focus on individuals or legal entities:
• with a proven track record in implementing or providing EbA solutions or water technologies;
• situated or attending the programme areas of operations in the defined catchment areas;
• with a clear vision or plan on how to scale EbA solution or water technology provision;
• able to provide clear and measurable result metrics that can be verified and audited; and
• that adhere to the established grant management principles.
53. Legal entities can refer to business companies, unions or cooperatives, associations, cooperatives, sector
organisations, public research and training centres and NGOs that directly cater to targeted end beneficiaries.
54. The qualifying stakeholders will be invited to apply for funding following the application process of the grant
manual. Grant finance will be available for the following purposes – in four innovation areas of business linkage
innovation, service and input innovation and sector organizations and institutions strengthening:
• New or additional working capital of existing or new projects;
• New or additional investment capital of existing or new projects;
• Seed capital for new projects; and
• New or additional technical assistance for new or existing projects.
55. National Project Execution Units (NPEU) will guide communities on how to develop proposals to access the
funds. The NPEUs will be directly hired by FAO as the Executing Entity for output 2 (for activities 2.1 and 2.2)
and will be based in the selected municipalities for the execution of the EbA demonstration sites. NPEUs will
identify projects that can be supported with the above-mentioned grant purposes to promote innovation in three
categories: 1) Business linkage innovation, focusing on strengthening commercial cooperation agreements
between different service providers, such as between PFIs (financing EbA solutions packages, rather than
stand-alone solutions), a set of EbA solution providers (e.g. drip irrigation system, water reservoir installation,
organic fertilizer) and agricultural extension service providers to drive capacity building on how to access the
EbA solutions and their finance, bundled in a comprehensive offer to end beneficiaries; 2) Service and input
innovation, focusing on identifying locally relevant EbA solutions that are not yet available in the market and
can be “imported” to be made available; and 3) the strengthening of sector organization and institutions, such
as multi-stakeholder water funds, producer associations or municipal and community coordination entities.
56. On-the-ground EbA-oriented grant support will benefit community-based institutions including
mancomunidades 74 , municipal associations, farmers cooperatives, solution providers or civil society
organisations (CSOs). Eligible projects will include community-level investments, the establishment of water
funds, seed funding for payment for ecosystem services (PES) and support for the adoption of selected EbA
practices and/or water- and resource-efficient technologies. The grant facility will channel investment to
selected projects in each target municipality. The selection of eligible projects will be managed within the
proposed governance structure in two competitive selection rounds per year during year 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the
programme by i) identifying suitable EbA projects at Project Execution Unit level, ii) apply first screening at
National Advisory Committees level, iii) pre-selecting proposed EbA projects from the countries at National
Advisory Committees level and iii) deciding upon EbA projects in the Regional Steering Committee and iv) final
approval by CABEI as the Executing Entity. Further details on the selection process are described in the
Operational Guidelines (Annex 23). In some less developed areas in terms of solutions available, successful
74 Mancomunidades are associations of municipalities with legal personality that provide a practical framework for resource management
across municipalities.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 27 OF 96
G
implementation will catalyse the uptake of EbA practices as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies
to be financed through a credit facility (see below), in other more developed areas, the grant facility will support
enhanced mainstreaming of EbA investment and finance. Training and support activities will also be provided
to communities in the target municipalities (Output 1) to enhance the technical capacity of communities to
access the Grant facility.
The following figure describes the proposed operation of the grant facility
Figure 10. Grant Facility.
57. In addition to directly strengthening the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities, on-the-ground
implementation of EbA and water-efficient technologies will contribute to the existing evidence base of
successful adaptation interventions in the region. Specific programme activities that will be implemented under
Output 2 are listed below.
• Activity 2.1. Implement landscape EbA interventions within rural communities across the seven target
catchments.
• Activity 2.2. Implement demonstration water- and resource-efficient technologies within rural communities
across the seven target catchments.
• Activity 2.3. Establish the grant facility to support bottom-up selection and promotion of local EbA activities
through non-reimbursable financing and start operations.
Output 3. Information on climate change adaptation and its financing disseminated across the region and mainstreamed
into local and national policies.
58. This component will be executed by CCAD as the regional entity that leads the formulation of the regional
strategy for Environmental Management and the regional strategy for Climate Change. The Regional
Environmental Observatory gathers information from all countries in the region and provides the opportunity to
build scientific information into the regional decision-making process. It is expected that this programme will
feed a significant amount of information into this platform that will also be strengthened through communities
of practice on EbA to foster science-based decision making at the regional level. CCAD has collaborated in the
past with regional technical organizations such as IUCN, FAO, UNDP and UNEP in the production of technical
studies for the region and it provides a key political platform for the dissemination of this information to influence
decision making at the national level. As such, their leadership in this output of the programme is essential to
ensure that results from the programme are being disseminated among countries and used to inform both key
regional strategies and national policies. UN Environment will also provide technical advice through this
component developing knowledge products including sustainable landscape management standards and

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 28 OF 96
G
procedures, opportunities for access to financing and women economic empowerment as well as technical
guidelines for the assessment of ecosystem services.
59. Activities under Output 3 will contribute to GCF Outcome A8.0 — Strengthened awareness of climate threats
and risk-reduction processes — by building an evidence base for the effectiveness of EbA and other adaptation
measures in reducing the impacts of climate change and by disseminating this information to local decision-
makers, the private sector (including commercial farmers) and local communities. The dissemination of
information will be managed through the establishment of a regional knowledge hub linked to the CCAD's
Environmental Observatory. The knowledge hub will serve two primary functions. First, it will act as a repository
for EbA information, including, but not limited to, all protocols developed by the programme as well as the best
practices and lessons learned collected through the programme's monitoring and evaluation processes,
previous and ongoing complementary projects. This will include guidance on how to access opportunities for
accessing finance provided through the programme, with specific focus on women's economic empowerment.
Second, the hub will provide users with specific knowledge products that will guide policy- and decision-makers
to effectively implement sustainable landscape management practices. The knowledge products will also
include technical assistance for creating business opportunities as well as technical guidelines for the
assessment of ecosystem services. This will support decision-making for climate change adaptation, as well
as drought and flood risk management. Training will also be provided to policy- and decision-makers at the
municipal level on how to use the knowledge hub and associated tools. Furthermore, community organisations
– including women's groups – and traditional leaders will be trained to act as champions in developing, revising
and disseminating information products to support the adoption of EbA and other resilient practices. This
approach will facilitate the sharing of ideas and sustainable practices between communities from the grass
roots level, using existing structures and traditional methods which will not only extend the reach of the
dissemination campaign, but also the uptake by local communities. Awareness will also be raised regarding
the financial mechanisms established under Output 4, thereby facilitating access to climate financing for local
governments, farmers and local communities. The information products made available through the knowledge
hub will be demand-driven and will draw on best practices and lessons learned from governments,
municipalities, community-based organisations, water managers and private sector stakeholders. By
centralising the knowledge hub, information will be effectively disseminated across the region and decision-
makers will be able to learn from the experiences of other countries within the region.
60. The hub will be led by a Regional Knowledge Coordinator, who will be hired by CCAD for this output. The
coordinator will be responsible for the strategic positioning of the hub as the region's foremost online platform
for evidence-based products to facilitate the mainstreaming of an ecosystem-based adaptation approach for
long term catchment and municipal level planning. Additionally, an administrative officer will support the
coordinator in all aspects related to the daily management of hub activities and the implementation of its annual
work plans. Part-time senior and junior researchers will be hired in every country to assist with the synthesis of
findings from catchments, programme advances, impact and experiences learned for dissemination across the
region. The researchers will develop regional knowledge products informed by the compilation and analysis of
data and information from the seven catchments where the programme is implemented. Additionally, the
researchers will work closely with the Project Execution Units to help with the preparation of evidence-based
communication products at country and regional levels.
61. Output 3 will also contribute to GCF Outcome A5.0 — Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for
climate-responsive planning and development — by building the technical capacity of national- and local-level
decision-makers to promote climate change adaptation in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. This will be
supported by the development or adjustment of a methodology for the valuation of ecosystem services to
develop accounts profiles of natural capital for integration into development plans in the Dry Corridor and Arid
Zones. The methodology will draw on best practices and lessons learned from ongoing initiatives, including the:
i) "incentivo forestal" in Guatemala; ii) payment for environmental services in Panama and Costa Rica; iii) Water
Fund of the city of Quito in Ecuador ; and iv) water funds established in cities in Guatemala, Costa Rica and
the Dominican Republic . Ultimately, the valuation of ecosystem services will be used to promote the
establishment of economic incentives for EbA investments — for example, water funds and payments for
environmental services. The capacity of local governments to make policy changes that include these kinds of
incentives will also be strengthened, including the use of protocols and criteria for the adoption of EbA and
implementation of economic incentives for sustainable land management. This output will also support the
integration of EbA into national sectoral policies by providing inputs into the currently under development
National Adaptation Plans (NAPs). At least 5 out of the 7 countries are currently developing their NAPs with a
sectoral or local focus and have identified water security, ecosystem restoration and resilient agriculture as
main priorities. The technical assistance provided through this output to policy makers will also focus on the

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 29 OF 96
G
integration of EbA into these policy frameworks at the national level. Additionally, the technical assistance
under this component will support the integration of EbA into the four relevant regional strategies convened by
the Central American Integration System (SICA) including the environmental, climate change, water resources
and agricultural regional strategies. Programme activities that will be implemented under Output 3 are listed
below.
62. Output 3 will also be a key component of the programme in the generation and strengthening of regional climate
information and climate impact analysis. The collaboration with regional researchers (sub-activity 3.3.1 under
Activity 3.3) will provide the opportunity to strengthen the availability of site-specific climate projections and
climate risk analysis, as well as the generation of evidence on the benefits of Nature based Solutions as an
effective strategy to build climate resilience. The participation of these research institutions will be key during
the first year of implementation generating the scientific inputs for the development of the site specific plans.
• Activity 3.1. Establish regional knowledge hub for the dissemination of information on EbA in the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones.
• Activity 3.2. Raise awareness of financial mechanisms for the implementation of CCA interventions.
• Activity 3.3. Enhance capacity of national and local-level policy-makers, in partnership with knowledge network
of universities, research centers and private sector, to integrate climate change adaptation and the valuation
of natural capital into local policies.
Component 2. Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies
across selected catchments
63. The execution arrangements for this component will be distributed among CABEI and FAO. CABEI will be
responsible for those activities related to the set up and management of the EbA financing mechanism including
the lending, guarantee and grant facilities and the set up of the Regional Project Steering Committee guidelines
in relation to the financial mechanism, (Activities 4.1 and 4.2). FAO will be responsible for the execution of the
awareness raising activities for the financial component of the programme as well as for the monitoring of the
investments undertaken at local level by the local financial institutions through the Project Execution Units (Activity
4.3). UN Environment will deliver technical support in this component through the development of training materials
for financial institutions, support in the development of MRV systems and annual support in the monitoring of
results from the investments undertaken by financial institutions (under activity 4.3). UNEP will be engaged by
FAO through a UN to UN agreement.
64. The second component under the proposed programme will establish and operationalise financial mechanisms to
facilitate investment in EbA practices, as well as the adoption of water- and resource-efficient technologies (Activity
4.2). This component will build on the experience of CABEI's regional CAMBio II project as well as the regional
MEbA project to increase access to climate financing for local organisations and communities — including non-
regulated financial institutions, commercial and subsistence farmers, as well as vulnerable households — through
an existing network of intermediary financial institutions (IFIs). Using the increasing body of knowledge on EbA
financing generated through CAMBio II and other similar initiatives, this component will focus on providing grants
and blended finance for EbA investments as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies. This will promote
an approach of bottom-up identification of adaptation interventions and de-risked top-down financing for adaptation.
The types of EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies eligible for financing through the established
financial mechanisms include (among others):
• agroforestry systems;
• silvopasture systems;
• agrosilvopastoral systems;
• windbreaks;
• firebreaks;
• mixed plant nurseries;
• agricultural terraces;
• soil conditioning;
• efficient biomass stoves;
• firewood drying and charcoal production;
• rainwater collection in small reservoirs;
• rooftop rainwater harvest systems;
• solar water pumping systems;
• drip irrigation;

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30 OF 96
G
• ceramic filters to purify water
• fog catchers; and
• infiltration pits for water retention;
Further details on these measures, including descriptions, and direct and co-benefits are presented in Annex 22.
Output 4. Financial products and services to finance EbA investments are offered by Partner Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI access to EbA on-lending funds and support mechanisms.
65. Activities under Output 4 will contribute to GCF Outcome A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced
exposure to climate risks — by establishing financial mechanisms to support the adoption of EbA practices as
well as water- and resource-efficient technologies. To that end two financing facilities will be established,
concessional lending for EbA solutions relevant to reduce climate risks in the Dry Corridor as well as credit
guarantee to further streamline and disseminate EbA lending across the entire Dry Corridor.
66. The EbA lending facility (EbA credit line) will be established and operationalised with the GCF senior loan
provision of US$60 million and CABEI US$42.8 million co-finance together being offered to PFIs as blended
finance mechanism at below-market conditions for small- and large-scale EbA investments at the farm-,
enterprise- and household-level. The objective of the EbA lending facility is to establish and operationalize
financial mechanisms to facilitate investment in EbA practices, as well as the adoption of water- and resource-
efficient technologies. The EbA Lending facility deployed under sub-activity 4.2.1 will have a revolving character
at the PFI level: while it will be established for a period of 10 years, loans to be disbursed to PFIs are expected
to have a tenor of 2 - 5 years maximum (as a function of the expected EbA finance portfolio to be created with
end beneficiaries, i.e. focusing more on working capital or investment capital, and in accordance with market
standards). Additionally, loan agreements with PFIs will foresee capital (and interest) payments over the tenor
of the PFI loans. Returning funds will be reinvested to available PFIs, ensuring a closing of laid out loans before
the facility’s closure.
67. The guarantee mechanism can be used to coveco-financing, to support the initial introduction of the lending
facility and provide further de-risking. This is needed to support the introduction of EbA finance to the most
vulnerable, an end beneficiary segment that is usually without access to any finance due to its elevated risk
profile. The remaining guarantee mechanisms will be used to leverage additional finance.
68. The following figure describes the lending and guarantee facilities deployed under sub-activty 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.
respectively.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31 OF 96
G
Figure 11. Lending and guarantee facilities’ Financing Scheme
69. By providing a blended financing mechanism composed of concessional finance from GCF in combination with
a market rate senior debt as co-financing from CABEI (and an associated guarantee facility – see above),
incentives are created for financial institutions on different levels to engage in EbA finance, for which there exist
no or only limited offerings as of today. Intermediary Financial Institutions in CABEI's established network will
manage the EbA lending facility to local partner financial institutions such as cooperatives, small banks, NGOs,
rural community banks, among others - Partner Financial Institutions. In paralel these IFI will receive GCF funds
and CABEI Co-financing funds via senior loans to on-lend to the same PFIs. PFIs in turn will on-lend to end
beneficiaries. Investment will be targeted towards community-level investment, rural MSMEs or other
institutions that can foster EbA, as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies, for end beneficiaries
across different sectors.
70. Partner Financial institutions will be able to access the EbA Lending facility at concessional below-market rates
for direct on-lending to final customers for EbA investments. Investment will be targeted to finance small- and
large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level to initiate and support a paradigm shift
in the regional approach to catchment and water demand management in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. As
such, the facility will aim to invest in initiatives that improve the climate resilience of rural communities in the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones by: i) implementing integrated catchment management and restoring catchments;
ii) improving hydrological flow and infiltration of rainwater into groundwater reserves through forest and
ecosystem restoration; and iii) reducing demand for scarce water resources by implementing water-efficient
technologies at the farm- and household-level.
71. Eligibility criteria for PFIs to access the EbA lending facility are outlined in Section 6.7.1 of Annex 23 and in
section B4, including legal and capacity requirements. Where PFIs are not compliant with the minimum
requirements set out in the eligibility criteria, the TA facility will be available to strengthen respective institutional
capacities. Technical Assistance in EbA finance methodologies will be a condition precedent to gain access to
the EbA Lending facility and Guarantee facility.

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32 OF 96
G
72. End beneficiaries, as well as EbA investment eligibility criteria will be defined by the Regional Project Steering
Committee at programme inception and finally approved by CABEI as the Executing Entity. Sub-credits75 will
be made available in the local currency to end-beneficiaries in the eligible geographic regions for both working
capital and investment purposes. The sub-credits will be provided under a sub-credit agreement (SCA) between
the local PFIs and the beneficiary using the PFI’s loan agreement forms and including the standard provision
to be developed in the credit manual. Further details on the eligibility criteria are provided in Annex 23. Elegibility
criteria will also be guided by vulnerability assessments and learnings from the lending mechanism itself as the
execution advances.
73. Additionally, a guarantee facility76 will be linked to the EbA lending facility to — in the case of documented
success EbA, i.e. increasing productivity and lowering production cost vis-à-vis non-programme scenarios —
secure PFI’s on-lending and mobilise additional lending from IFIs’ and PFIs own and additional public and
private investors’ resources by mitigating against credit risks associated with commercial EbA Finance to end
beneficiaries. CABEI will manage the guarantee facility as a window in its recently established Guarantee Fund
(managed in-house), guaranteeing PFIs’ sub-credit portfolio to the end borrowers (which in turn will be pledged
by the PFIs to the IFIs) Such loans are usually – especially for subsistence farmers – not fully covered by real
guarantees such as real estate or other moveable assets pledges, hence making such constructs prohibitively
expensive. As digital EbA lending facility MRV systems will be integrated, CABEI will be in position to automate
its extension of guarantee certificates over end beneficiary loans in line with current guarantee fund stipulations
– IFIs will indirectly have partial coverage by CABEI’s guarantee fund, which will lower collateral requirements
by PFIs and enhance access to the lending facility and leveraged finance for end beneficiaries.. The guarantee
facility will issue a capped partial credit risk guarantees to IFIs for their on lending to PFI portfolio. If successful,
the guarantee facility will hence be able to provide guarantee coverage to additional funds. The EbA Guarantee
will be established as a liquid facility managed directly by CABEI with a US$30.0 million guarantee funded by
GCF. A recent guarantee facility established by CABEI to attend Covid-19 impacts for eligible end borrowers
will provide the mechanism for the Guarantee facility in the proposed programme. Once operational and with
increased EbA Finance experience at hand in the programme areas, its coverage will be expanded, following
established risk management principles and depending on the guarantee’s performance (in terms of claims and
outreach). In the same way, in case of claims exceeding expected levels, the emission of additional guarantee
obligations will be limited. The guarantee is foreseen to cover 25–75% of end beneficiary sub-loan portfolios to
eligible PFIs and hence targeted to leverage additional EbA finance with a ratio of 1:4.33 in the range of
US$150.8 million (see 6-1, section 5 in Annex 3). To that end, the Guarantee facility will de-risk operations in
these new end beneficiary segments and therefor increase the acceptance of the Lending facility, as well as to
gather data that will be reviewed annually to establish the baseline of actual expected default of resulting sub-
loan portfolios. As function of this baseline analysis, the coverage of the Guarantee facility will be expanded up
to the above expected leverage.
74. IFIs will have the flexibility to use the guarantee facility and the EbA lending facility as stand-alone solutions or
in combination. Potential options for IFIs include:
1. EbA lending facility only for EbA investment to be financed where the IFI is comfortable taking the full credit risk
of PFIs and for which it needs liquidity from the Lending facility;
2. EbA guarantee facility only for EbA investment to be financed for which the IFI would be willing to pay for credit
enhancement but for which it does not need external liquidity. This mechanism is being targeted to leverage
additional finance from IFIs for on-lending to eligible PFIs directly; and
3. Blended guarantee/lending facility mechanisms for EbA investment to be financed for which the IFIs seek both
risk mitigation and funding support from the two facilities. In that way, IFI can be incentivised to finance parts of
eligible portfolios through the EbA lending facility and finance remaining balances from resources making use
of the de-risking EbA guarantee facility offer.
75. The financial facilities will be accompanied by a technical assistance (TA) facility (see below) that will develop
capacity within municipalities and PFIs to monitor and assess the implementation of EbA and water/resource-
efficient investment projects as well as to monitor and document the respective economic and ecosystem
benefits. Where possible, Information and Communication Technologies will be introduced to provide data
75 Sub-credits are defined as working capital and investment loans for the purpose of financing all or a portion of the expenditures incurred by
the beneficiary for goods and works under a sub-project.
76 The Guarantee Facility will be managed as a specific window under a recently established Guarantee fund
managed by CABEI in-house.

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33 OF 96
G
analytics and satellite data insights into the EbA lending portfolio and climate impacts on the portfolio. FAO will
be the Executing Entity for this TA Facility (under Activity 4.3) and will receive technical support from UNEP.
76. To facilitate access to and operation of the facilities, Activity 4.3 will provide TA to selected PFIs. Technical
assistance will be a mandatory condition for PFIs to access the EbA lending facility. This will ensure that
capacities, especially for adequate monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) systems, are in place to
manage the EbA finance. Such technical assistance will focus on developing capacity within municipalities and
PFIs to monitor and assess the implementation of EbA and water/resource-efficient investment projects as well
as to monitor and document the respective economic and ecosystem benefits. Where possible, Information and
Communication Technologies will be introduced to provide data analytics and satellite data insights into the
EbA lending portfolio and climate impacts on the portfolio.
77. The TA facility is geared to focus primarily on direct technical assistance and a comprehensive Training-of-
Trainers or online course mechanism to strengthen: i) the awareness of climate change, ecosystem degradation
and water scarcity; ii) the identification and promotion of solutions to overcome these threats; iii) the application
of methodologies, technologies and tools to foster EbA finance and manage climate and ecosystem risks via
modern information management solutions, iv) the provision of specific EbA oriented tailor-made financial
products and services to end beneficiaries, as well as of non-financial services such as information services or
training; and v) the monitoring, reporting and verification systems in place via technology transfer to support
learning on successful EbA and water/resource-efficient technologies. The TA will comprise capacity-building
for financial intermediaries on the concepts, financial methodology, and tools to provide products and services
oriented to EbA and water-efficient technologies. Expert pools will be established in each country to provide
country-specific technical assistance to PFIs based on a standardised methodology.
78. The deployment of the loan facility will follow a phased approach along the programme to ensure cohesive and
substantive impact of the financed activities as well as proper vulnerability assessments and identification of
priorities for other vulnerable regions within the Dry Corridor where the intervention could be scaled up. This
phased approach will also allow for more time to strengthen capacities of the financial institutions and to
promote the financial mechanism with communities and producers.
79. The three implementation phases of the loan facility are described below:
Launching the loan facility
The loan facility will be initially deployed through local PFIs to attend priorities and requests from producers and
communities within the 5 prioritized municipalities in the Tempisque basin. The specific eligibility criteria for the type
of interventions to be included in the loan facility will be detailed during the first year of the programme through
consultations with communities, experts and financial institutions – subject to final approval by CABEI. An MRV
system will also be structured to gather information about the deployment of the loan and guarantee facilities and
the impacts of the EbA interventions financed. Additionally, the technical team (RPMU in collaboration with PEUs
and technical experts engaged through output 3) will initiate a climate risk assessment and prioritization of other
municipalities within the Dry Corridor.
Replicating the loan facility
As a result of the initial phase, the technical team (as above) and PFIs will count on information about the
deployment rate of the loan facility and initial results from the impacts of the financed interventions. The larger
climate risk assessments will have also provided information about climate risks and adaptation potential for
additional municipalities within the Dry Corridor. In this second phase, loans will be disbursed within the 5 initially
prioritized municipalities and other surrounding municipalities that have been prioritized and characterized through
complete climate risk assessments.
Scale up of the loan facility
Finally, and after gathering more detailed information about the results of the deployment of the loan facility, the
beneficial impacts of EbA interventions and undertaking substantive capacity building both with community
members and PFIs in the 5 prioritized municipalities and other vulnerable ones within the Dry Corridor, the loan
facility will be expended geographically to cover for additional municipalities and always within the limits of the Dry
Corridor to ensure substantive action to build resilience.
80. Demand analysis for the loan facility in the Dry Corridor

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34 OF 96
G
The potential of the lending facility was modelled at the regional and national levels to understand the absorption
capacity on the ground, and is further described in annex 3 (financial model) and 30 (demand analysis) of this
proposal.
An initial review of existing and publicly available literature, from academic research to practitioner report and
projects’ references, shows not only a growing interest into the topic of adaptation and EbA Finance of the global
and Central American financial sector, but also a diversifying set of methodologies available for the capacity building
of financial institutions willing and interested to engage in the field.
Furthermore, data from publicly available databases is accessible to define solid assumptions on potential demand
for the implementation of EbA solutions and in consequence the demand for EbA Finance.
81. REDCAMIF (Microfinance Network of Central America and the Carribbean) is the most important network of
microfinance institutions in the region. The organization provides a centralized database with data on its
members’ performance.
The network is organized as a network of networks, organizing 7 countries’ national networks into a regional one,
representing 130 microfinance institutions that reach nearly 1.5 million clients via 1,211 branches. Of the
aggregated outstanding loan portfolios of over US$ 2.1 billion, almost 49% is deployed to rural clients.
While REDCAMIF is not representing the total of institutions active in all 7 countries, the network clearly provides
the most aggregated reference data sets regarding especially inclusive rural finance which is one of the focus of
this programme
In order to understand financial institutions’ installed capacity, two dimensions were reviewed as preparation for the
analysis:
1. The traction of inclusive agricultural finance in the seven countries (see also section 4.2.4 in annex 30):
2. The presence of financial institutions in the programme pilot areas in order to understand the level of
potential offerings to disseminate EbA finance in pilot areas, to generate the required scaling of EbA finance as
part of the programme.
82. According to latest statistics from the REDCAMIF’s MIFIndex for June 2020, the networks PFIs manage a total
inclusive agricultural portfolio of US$324 million across all 7 countries for 221,477 clients. This represents more
than 3 times the total size of the targeted lending facility’s volume of US$102.8 million. The microfinance
sector’s involvement in inclusive agricultural finance is a good proxy for its ability to serve EbA finance, which
will primarily be targeted at Small-scale farmers.
Usually, the microfinance sector refrains of serving these populations, due to key challenges, such as:
1. Rural and agricultural finance are more costly due to greater distances to cover for loan origination as
well as recovery.
2. Especially agricultural producers are considered more risky, as the low levels of technification of Small-
scale producers makes them more prone to adverse climate (change) impacts.
3. Little incentives are being offered from investors to incentivize greater activities and outreach in
agricultural microfinance, especially due to the lack of concessional finance.
Further, especially for EbA and other green finance, markets are not developed and documentation requirements
are regularly higher than for traditional finance, which increases cost due to
1. The need for more client awareness raising especially to not well known alternatives to traditional
agricultural practices,
2. More time to be spend with client assessment, due diligence and loan evaluation,
3. Increased personnel training and re-training activities as consequence of higher complexity of EBA and
climate finance interdynamics.
83. It can hence be expected that the proposed programme will address all of these barriers by raising awareness
and ultimately demand of target populations for EbA alternatives, providing digital process and data
management solutions for better loan management, build capcities to better identify and mitigate (physical)
climate-related financial risks and provide concessional finance to confront perceived risks.
84. As the distribution of financial flows from the Lending facility are expected to be distributed among countries
based on prioritization of the Regional Project Steering Committee, under the chair of CABEI, the following
considerations are based on the assumption of an equal distribution – and put the total amount to be disbursed

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35 OF 96
G
over the initial 4 years in relation to the existing agricultural microfinance portfolio. Hereby it is assumed that
additional concessional finance from the Lending facility will
1. Replace existing investments and finance through enhanced documentation of eligible EbA investment
as well as
2. Increase the appetite of partner financial institutions to engage with Small-scale farmers that are
deemed more risky.
85. The results of the analysis of microfinance portfolios at the national level are summarized below:
86. Costa Rica
In Costa Rica, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 16 million to 10,181 clients has been reported
– representing the highest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$38 million with 42%. All loans reported are
being managed following individual lending methodologies (as opposed to group lending or community bank
lending).
The existing US$ 16 million loan portfolio to 10,181 clients is almost equal to the total amount disbursed via the
proposed Lending facility of US$15 million (assuming equal distribution of loan across countries for discussion
purposes). According to the assumption in the financial modelling of the Lending facility, this portfolio shall be
reached after 4 years – or after year 5 of the programme.
In the case of Costa Rica it is though expected, that only a minor part of 19% of that facility (or US$ 2.8 million) will
actually be destined to Small-scale famer EbA finance, as commercial farming in the more developed agricultural
sector plays a more important role. This represents roughly 17% of the present portfolio.
87. Dominican Republic
In Dominican Republic, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 38 million to 22,151 clients has been
reported – representing the second lowest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$498 million with 8%. Almost
all loans reported are being managed following individual lending methodologies, with only 1% following group
lending methjodologies. Community bank lending is not being provided.
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 38 million to 22,151 clients represents 2.5 times the targeted EbA portfolio, which
in case of the Dominican Republic is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 39% - or with US$ 5.8
million roughly a 15% of the current outstanding portfolio.
88. El Salvador
In El Salvador, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 46 million to 60,507 clients has been reported
– representing the third lowest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$325 million with 12%. Individual lending
methodologies are used for 96% of the portfolio, with 2% following group lending and community bank lending
methodologies each for smaller loan amounts – probably in rural areas.
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 46 million to 60,507 clients represents 3 times the targeted EbA portfolio, which
in case of El Salvador is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 54% - or with US$ 8.1 million
roughly a 18% of the current outstanding portfolio.
89. Guatemala
In Guatemala, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 40 million to 21,214 clients has been reported
– representing the third highest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$312 million with 15%. Individual lending
methodologies are used for 96% of the portfolio, with 7% following group lending and community bank lending
methodologies each for smaller loan amounts – probably in rural areas.
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 40 million to 21,214 clients represents 2.7 times the targeted EbA portfolio, which
in case of Guatemala is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 52% - or with US$ 7.9 million
roughly a 20% of the current outstanding portfolio.
90. Honduras
In Honduras, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 108 million to 75,176 clients has been reported
– representing the third highest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$467 million with 23%. Individual lending
methodologies are used for 96% of the portfolio, with 3% and 1% following group lending and community bank
lending methodologies respectively for smaller loan amounts – probably in rural areas.

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36 OF 96
G
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 108 million to 75,176 clients represents 7.1 times the targeted EbA portfolio,
which in case of Honduras is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 47% - or with US$ 7.1 million
roughly a 7% of the current outstanding portfolio.
91. Nicaragua
In Nicaragua, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 47 million to 21,851 clients has been reported
– representing the second highest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$191 million with 25%. Individual
lending methodologies are used for 96% of the portfolio, with 0.5% and 6% following group lending and community
bank lending methodologies respectively for smaller loan amounts – probably in rural areas.
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 47 million to 21,851 clients represents 3.1 times the targeted EbA portfolio, which
in case of Nicaragua is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 68% - or with US$ 10.2 million
roughly a 22% of the current outstanding portfolio.
92. Panama
In Panama, at June 2020, a total agricultural loan portfolio of US$ 27 million to 10,397 clients has been reported –
representing the second lowest share of a total microfinance portfolio of US$305 million with 9%. All loans reported
are being managed following individual lending methodologies (as opposed to group lending or community bank
lending).
The existing loan portfolio of US$ 27 million to 10,397 clients represents 1.8 times the targeted EbA portfolio, which
in case of Panama is expected to be destined to Small-scale EbA finance by 86% - or with US$ 12.9 million roughly
a 48% of the current outstanding portfolio.
93. Comparing these numbers to the results of the financial model, the deployment of the lending facility at the
national level could be summarized and compared to the numbers above:
• In average each country could absorb (assuming equal distribution for purposes of discussion) around US$
14.7M in funding form the lending facility (US$ 60M from GCF and US$ 42.8M from CABEI)
• By rotating this capital at the PFI level, a total disbursement per country over the lifetime of the lending facility
of US$ 51.5M via close to 9,800 loans could be reached.
• This translates to an average disbursement of 980 loans per country, per year, or in average 82 loans per
month (due to dynamics of building up the total facility, as well as winding her down, the peak is expected with
roughly 1,780 loans in year 3, resulting in 148 loans per month).
• Per country an expected 4 Partner Financial Institutions will gain access to the lending facility, disbursing around
20 loans in average (in peak: 37) per month.
94. Assuming this equal distribution, with exception of Panama, the programme countries will take up concessional
EbA microfinance in the range of 7 – 22% of their current agricultural microfinance portfolios. Disbursed over a
period of 4 years, and accompanied with increased awareness raising and capacity building activities, it can be
expected that the markets in the region present a solid base for its absorption. Further analysis of demand at
the country and regional level is available in Annex 30.
95. Further details on the financial mechanisms to be established under this output are provided in Annex 23,
including: i) the EbA finance rationale; ii) the governance overview; iii) the funding structure, size and risk
management strategies; iv) the structure and approach for technical assistance; v) grant facility operation; vi)
lending facility operations; vii) guarantee facility structure and manual; viii) the facilities’ closure; and ix) the
overall exit strategy targeting additional leveraged finance as well as the proof of the underlying hypothesis
(Summary: “EbA finance as de-risking strategy, hence enabling greater investment into EbA by formerly
excluded most vulnerable populations”). A detailed description of the technologies that can be financed through
these mechanisms is provided in Annex 22. Programme activities that will be implemented under this output
are listed below, with technical details provided in Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
• Activity 4.1. Set-up and establish the financial structure for the lending and guarantee facilities.
• Activity 4.2. Financing mechanisms of the EbA lending facility and guarantee facility.
• Activity 4.3. Technical assistance (TA) facility to strengthen technical capacity of accredited and non-regulated
financial institutions to access and channel funds for small- and large-scale EbA investments.

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37 OF 96
G
96. The table below summarizes the detailed execution arrangements for the components of the programme
COMPONENT 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water-efficient technologies and natural resource-
based businesses into selected catchments
Output Executing Implementation partner
Activity
Entity
Output 1 Activity 1.1. Develop site- FAO Direct implementation
Strengthened technical specific intervention plans for the 7 target Government authorities
capacity of local catchments to integrate EbA measures through a (National/municipal)
government, farmers and participatory process with municipal authorities,
rural communities to local communities and other stakeholders. Specialized technical assistance
implement EbA and other services providers and/or national or
adaptation measures
Activity 1.2. Provide technical assistance
international delivery partners
to municipal authorities, farmers and rural
communities for the implementation
of EbA practices as well as water- and resource-
efficient technologies
Activity 1.3. Provide technical assistance to
farmers and rural communities for the
development of natural resource-based
businesses and alternative climate-resilient
livelihoods.
Output 2 Activity 2.1. Implement landscape FAO Direct implementation
Demonstration EbA interventions within rural communities Government authorities
adaptation interventions across the seven target catchments. (National/municipal)
implemented in rural
communities across Activity 2.2. Implement demonstration water- Specialized technical assistance
seven target catchments and resource-efficient technologies within rural services providers and/or national or
in the Dry Corridor and communities across the seven target international delivery partners
Arid Zones. catchments.
Activity 2.3. Establish the grant facility to support CABEI Selected partner through competitive
bottom-up selection and promotion of process
local EbA activities through non-reimbursable
financing and start operations.
Output 3 Activity 3.1. Establish regional knowledge hub for CCAD UNEP 3.1.2
Information on climate the dissemination of information on EbA in the
change adaptation and Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
its financing
disseminated across the Activity 3.2. Raise awareness of financial UNEP: 3.3.2, 3.3.3.;
region and mainstreamed mechanisms for the implementation of
into local and CCA interventions
national policies Activity 3.3. Enhance capacity of national and
local-level policy-makers, in partnership with
knowledge network of universities,
research centers and private sector, to integrate
climate change adaptation and the valuation of
natural capital into local policies.
COMPONENT 2. Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient
technologies across selected catchments
Output 4 Activity 4.1. Set-up and establish the financial CABEI
Financial products and structure for the lending and guarantee facilities.
services to
finance EbA investments Activity 4.2. Financing mechanism of CABEI Selected IFIs/PFIs
are offered by Partner the EbA lending facility and guarantee facility
Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI Activity 4.3. Technical assistance (TA) facility to FAO UNEP to provide technical support to
access to EbA on-lending strengthen technical capacity of accredited and strengthen technical capacity of IFIs
funds and support non-regulated financial institutions to access and and PFIs financial institutions to
mechanisms. channel funds for small- and large- access and channel funds for small-
scale EbA investments. and large-scale EbA investments.
97. Intervention strategy.
The programme will be implemented following a sequence that allows for continuous feedback of results and observed
impacts of the interventions into the enabling activities to strengthen capacity building, mainstreaming of EbA into

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
COMPONENT 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water-efficient technologies and natural resource- |  |  | 
based businesses into selected catchments |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
Output |  | Executing | Implementation partner
 | Activity |  | 
 |  | Entity | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
Output 1
Strengthened technical
capacity of local
government, farmers and
rural communities to
implement EbA and other
adaptation measures | Activity 1.1. Develop site-
specific intervention plans for the 7 target
catchments to integrate EbA measures through a
participatory process with municipal authorities,
local communities and other stakeholders. | FAO | Direct implementation
Government authorities
(National/municipal)
Specialized technical assistance
services providers and/or national or
international delivery partners
 | Activity 1.2. Provide technical assistance
to municipal authorities, farmers and rural
communities for the implementation
of EbA practices as well as water- and resource-
efficient technologies |  | 
 | Activity 1.3. Provide technical assistance to
farmers and rural communities for the
development of natural resource-based
businesses and alternative climate-resilient
livelihoods. |  | 
Output 2
Demonstration
adaptation interventions
implemented in rural
communities across
seven target catchments
in the Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones. | Activity 2.1. Implement landscape
EbA interventions within rural communities
across the seven target catchments. | FAO | Direct implementation
Government authorities
(National/municipal)
Specialized technical assistance
services providers and/or national or
international delivery partners
 | Activity 2.2. Implement demonstration water-
and resource-efficient technologies within rural
communities across the seven target
catchments. |  | 
 | Activity 2.3. Establish the grant facility to support
bottom-up selection and promotion of
local EbA activities through non-reimbursable
financing and start operations. | CABEI | Selected partner through competitive
process
Output 3
Information on climate
change adaptation and
its financing
disseminated across the
region and mainstreamed
into local and
national policies | Activity 3.1. Establish regional knowledge hub for
the dissemination of information on EbA in the
Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. | CCAD | UNEP 3.1.2
 | Activity 3.2. Raise awareness of financial
mechanisms for the implementation of
CCA interventions |  | UNEP: 3.3.2, 3.3.3.;
 | Activity 3.3. Enhance capacity of national and
local-level policy-makers, in partnership with
knowledge network of universities,
research centers and private sector, to integrate
climate change adaptation and the valuation of
natural capital into local policies. |  | 
COMPONENT 2. Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient |  |  | 
technologies across selected catchments |  |  | 
Output 4
Financial products and
services to
finance EbA investments
are offered by Partner
Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI
access to EbA on-lending
funds and support
mechanisms. | Activity 4.1. Set-up and establish the financial
structure for the lending and guarantee facilities. | CABEI | 
 | Activity 4.2. Financing mechanism of
the EbA lending facility and guarantee facility | CABEI | Selected IFIs/PFIs
 | Activity 4.3. Technical assistance (TA) facility to
strengthen technical capacity of accredited and
non-regulated financial institutions to access and
channel funds for small- and large-
scale EbA investments. | FAO | UNEP to provide technical support to
strengthen technical capacity of IFIs
and PFIs financial institutions to
access and channel funds for small-
and large-scale EbA investments.

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38 OF 96
G
relevant policies and into the regional communication platform. The described sequence below is divided into 5 main
phases, with a summarized description of main activities implemented in each of them.
Figure. Graphic representation of implementation strategy
98. 1/Set up and preparedness
During this first stage of the programme, the site-specific implementation plans based on vulnerability and
hydrological models will be strengthened and finalized in consultation with communities and key actors including
detailed climate risk assessments. These plans have been drafted for Costa Rica and Honduras (annex 31) and
will be strengthened and validated with communities during this initial phase of the programme and will be
developed for all other 5 coutries during the first year following the process described in Annex 31.
99. The specific EbA interventions funded by the grant component will be based on the development of these site-
specific plans that will include both a scientific analysis of specific climate projections through the hydrological
models, as well as sound stakeholder consultations that will allow to identify the most appropriate interventions.
The validation of these indicative interventions will therefore be based on the following criteria:
• - Relevance to site-specific climate risks
• - Positive impact potential over climate risks
• - Familiarity and acceptance by stakeholders
• - Positive impact potential over most vulnerable sectors of the community
• - Positive impact potential on gender balance
• - Technical feasibility of the intervention
• - Compliance with social en environmental safeguards
• - Potential co-benefits of the intervention
• - Minimal level of risks and constraints for implementation
• - Potential for self-sustainability
• - Potential for sustained monitoring capacity
This stage is critical for the engagement of actors and the Monitoring and Evaluation committees will be established
within the participating communities. Technical protocols will be designed for the implementation of the large-scale
EbA interventions that will serve as capacity building, demonstration and promotion sites.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39 OF 96
G
In the process for the finalization of the site-specific EbA implementation plans, a selection process will be
undertaken to select and engage the adequate financial institutions at the local level. Legal agreements will be
established including the definition of specific eligibility criteria and investment criteria of financial mechanisms and
trainings on adaptation finance will be undertaken. The lending and guarantee facilities will be set-up. A schematic
representation of this intervention phase is provided below:
Related
Year 1 Year 2
Stage 1/ Preparedness and set up
activities
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6
Definition of site-specific implementation plans based on vulnerability
1.1
and hydrological models
Climate risk livelihood assessments 1.3
Community engagement activities 1.1, 1.2, 1.3
Design of technical protocols for EbA measures implementation 1.2, 3.3
Establishment of M&E committees at community level 1.1
Set up of the regional knowledge hub 3.1
Definition of eligibility criteria and investment criteria of financial
4.1
mechanisms
Selection of PFIs and establishment of legal agreements with IFIs, PFIs 4.1
Set up of the lending and guarantee facilities 4.2
Initial trainings with IFIs and PFIs 4.3
100. 2/ Demonstration and demand generation
At this stage and after launching the programme and building on the engagement with local actors, pilot
interventions defined by communities and included in component 1 will be implemented.
Agreements will be established with research institutions to generate knowledge from programme interventions on
EbA solutions in the Dry Corridor and further climate risk assessments will be undertaken to identify potential
alternative livelihoods and opportunities for initial funding through the financial mechanism based on vulnerability
assessments, hydrological modelling and to reinforce site specific plans.
A grant facility will be set up to strengthen the EbA business ecosystem in the region including training of commercial
and subsistence farmers on EbA financial products available. The eligibility criteria for the grant facility will be based
on specific site priorities.
At this initial stage, the focus will be on promoting the blended EbA lending facility with potential network institutions
and non-network institutions. MRV systems will be established and formalized with IFIs and PFIs.
101. The loan and guarantee facilities will make their initial disbursements at this stage. A schematic representation
of this intervention phase is provided below
Related Y1 Year 2 Year 3
Stage 2/ Demonstration and demand generation
activities
Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12
Demonstration of EbA interventions and benefits through
pilot interventions pre-defined by communities from the 2.1, 2.2
grant component
Training of commercial and subsistence farmers on EbA
2.3, 4.3
financial products available
Identification of potential alternative livelihoods and
opportunities with the communities for initial funding 1.3, 2.3
through the Grant facility
Set up of the grant facility, definition of eligibility criteria
2.3
based on specific site priorities

--- Table 1 on Page 41 ---
Stage 1/ Preparedness and set up | Related
activities | Year 1 |  |  |  |  | Year 2 |  |  |  | 
 |  | Year 1 |  |  |  |  | Year 2 |  |  |  | 
 |  | Q1 | Q2 | Q3 | Q4 |  | Q5 |  |  | Q6 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 41 ---
Stage 2/ Demonstration and demand generation | Related
activities | Y1 |  |  | Year 2 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Year 3 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Q4 |  |  | Q5 |  |  | Q6 | Q7 | Q8 | Q9 | Q10 |  | Q11 |  |  | Q12 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 41 ---
Related
activities

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40 OF 96
G
Adjustment of training materials to be disseminated 1.2, 2.3,
through knowledge hub based on baseline built in year 1 3.1
Establish agreements with research institutions to generate
knowledge from programme interventions on EbA solutions 3.2, 3.3
in the Dry Corridor
Define methodology for the valuation of ecosystem
3.3
services in the Dry Corridor
Definition of MRV systems with IFIs and PFIs 4.3
Promote the blended EbA lending facility with potential
4.3
network institutions and non-network institutions
Deployment of initial EbA credit lines 4.2, 4.3
Continued Technical Assistance to IFIs and PFIs and ToT
4.4
program
102. 3/ Implementation
This stage will focus on full implementation of the grant financed activities making emphasis on awareness raising
and capacity building of vulnerable communities through demonstration of EbA interventions and benefits through
pilot interventions.
The grant facility will also be in full implementation at this stage and results from investments will serve as input for
research projects and shared through the knowledge Hub. These results will also be shared with national
governments at the regional level to inform National Adaptation Plans and Regional strategies.
The deployment of the loan facility will follow a phased approach along the programme to ensure cohesive and
substantive impact of the financed activities as well as proper vulnerability assessments and identification of
priorities for other vulnerable regions within the Dry Corridor where the intervention could be scaled up. This phased
approach will also allow for more time to strengthen capacities of the financial institutions and to promote the
financial mechanism with communities and producers.
The three implementation phases of the loan facility are described below:
A schematic representation of this intervention phase is provided below :
Related Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
Stage 3/ Demonstration and demand generation activities
Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16

--- Table 1 on Page 42 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 42 ---
Stage 3/ Demonstration and demand generation | Related
activities |  | Year 2 |  |  |  |  |  | Year 3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Year 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Q7 |  |  | Q8 |  |  | Q9 |  | Q10 | Q11 |  |  | Q12 |  |  | Q13 |  |  | Q14 |  |  | Q15 |  |  | Q16 | 

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41 OF 96
G
Awareness raising and capacity building of
vulnerable communities through demonstration 2.3, 3.2
of EbA interventions
Initial deployment of grant facility with target
communities focused on ideas generated by
2.3
communities from the complete list of EbA
potential interventions
Implementation of identified innovative EbA
interventions through the grant facility and 2.3, 4.3
lending facility
Implementation of identified alternative
livelihood opportunities through the grant facility 2.3, 4.3
and lending facility
Monitoring and capture of results from grant
2.3
facility
Research projects initiated and delivering initial
results to be disseminated through Knowledge 3.2, 3.3
Hub
Results shared with national governments at the
regional level to inform National Adaptation Plans 3.2, 3.3
and Regional strategies
Climate change adaptation valuations for
3.3.
ecosystem services undertaken
Capture of impacts through IFIs and PFIs MRV
4.3
systems and community M&E committees
Expansion of EbA credit lines based on demand
increase through trainings, technical assistance 4.3
and demonstration pilots
Continued promotion of the blended EbA lending
facility with potential network institutions and 1.3, 4.3
non-network institutions
Continued Technical Assistance to IFIs and PFIs
4.3
and ToT program
103. 4/ Knowledge generation – MRV
At this stage, the programme will have already produced a substantive amount of results that will serve as input to
develop knowledge products to be disseminated through the knowledge hub, including resilient landscape
management standards and procedures, opportunities for access to financing and women economic empowerment
as well as technical assistance, business opportunities, technical guidelines for the assessment of ecosystem
services and their contribution to human well-being. The produced results, tools and methodologies will be shared
through the Regional knowledge Hub with government institutions across the region.
104. The capture of impacts through IFIs and PFIs MRV systems and community M&E committees will contribute to
sharing results, tools and methodologies through Regional knowledge Hub with financial institutions across the
region and this will facilitate the expansion of EbA credit lines based on demand increase through trainings,
technical assistance and demonstration pilots to other regions in the Dry Corridor. A schematic representation of
this intervention phase is provided below
Related Year 5 Year 6
Stage 4/ Knowledge generation MRV
activities Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24
Develop knowledge products to be disseminated 3.2, 3.3
through the knowledge hub (1)
Sharing of results, tools and methodologies through 3.3
Regional knowledge Hub with government institutions
across the region
Methodology and results from ecosystem services for 3.3
adaptation shared across the region and used to inform
national and regional adaptation strategies

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 43 ---
Stage 4/ Knowledge generation MRV |  | Related | Year 5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Year 6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | activities | Q16 |  |  | Q17 |  | Q18 |  |  | Q19 |  |  | Q20 |  |  | Q21 |  |  | Q22 |  |  | Q23 |  |  | Q24 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42 OF 96
G
Guidelines on EbA for local communities developed and 1.2
shared across the region including protocols for EbA
interventions
Continued monitoring and capture of results from grant 2.3
facility
Capture of impacts and results from lending facility 4.3
implementation
Evidence of demand and local ability to manage loans 4.3
generated and shared
Continue deployment of lending facility with target 4.3
communities
Expansion of EbA credit lines outside of targeted 4.3
municipalities, based on demand increase through
trainings, technical assistance and demonstration pilots
Capture of impacts through IFIs and PFIs MRV systems 4.3
and community M&E committees
105. 5/ Replication upscaling and sustainability
The last stage of the programme will be key to ensure proper consolidation of technical capacities and sustainability
of the implemented activities. The results gathered from research and through the Regional knowledge hub will be
shared with government institutions and used to inform national and local policies and decision-making processes.
Main actors from local and national governments will receive training on how to use that information and integrate
EbA into policy frameworks.
106. Results, tools and methodologies developed by the Regional knowledge Hub will also be shared with financial
institutions across the region, thus consolidating their capacity on EbA financial products. The private sector will be
further engaged and sensitized to potential benefits of EbA interventions through technical assistance to
demonstrate benefit to implement EbA for businesses with economic inputs from valuation of ecosystem services.
This will contribute to leverage funding from financial institutions for the expansion of EbA financial products after
the programme’s completion. A schematic representation of this intervention phase is provided below.
Related Year 6 Year 7
Stage 5/ Replication upscaling and sustainability
activities Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 Q25 Q26 Q27 Q28
Results from research used to inform national and local
3.2, 3.3
policies and decision making processes
Continued expansion of EbA credit lines outside of
1.3, 3.3
targeted municipalities
Local and national governments trained on EbA
1.2, 3.3
integration into policy frameworks
Private sector's engaged and sensitized to potential
benefits of EbA interventions technical assistance to
demonstrate benefit to implement EbA for businesses 4.3
with economic inputs from valuation of ecosystem
services
Consolidation of technical capacities in financial
3.3
institutions on EbA financial products
Sharing of results, tools and methodologies through
Regional knowledge Hub with government institutions 4.3
across the region
Leverage funding from financial institutions for the
3.2, 3.3
expansion of EbA financial products
107. Site-specific EbA plan development process
The elaboration of this site-specific intervention plan will follow a four-step approach in the seven participating
countries, as described in the schematic representation below. All participating countries have completed the initial
steps, and the remaining steps will be concluded during the first year of programme implementation (activity 1.1).

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 44 ---
Stage 5/ Replication upscaling and sustainability |  | Related |  |  | Year 6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Year 7 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | activities |  |  | Q21 |  |  | Q22 |  |  | Q23 |  |  | Q24 |  |  | Q25 |  |  | Q26 |  |  | Q27 |  |  | Q28 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43 OF 96
G
Figure. Steps for the elaboration of site-specific intervention plan
The following figure shows the linkages of the programme components to the site specific EbA plan that will be
developed during the first phase of the proposal:
108. Draft sample EbA site-specific plans have been developed for Honduras and Costa Rica and will be
validated with key actors in the initial satges of implementation. The other 5 countries will follow the described
process below for the completion of their specific plans. This process and the sample plans for Costa Rica and
Honduras are further described in Annex 31.
109. Step 1. Selection of the most vulnerable catchments within the Dry Corridor (already done for the 7
countries)
Step 1.1 National identification of up to four prioritized catchment areas within the Dry Corridor: The selection of up
to four catchments areas of interest per country at the Dry Corridor and the arid zones of the Dominican Republic
was done through workshops held with government representatives.
Step 1.2 Regional climate change vulnerability assessment: For each of the prioritized catchment areas,
vulnerability assessments were developed. Variables used for exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity included
access to credit and irrigation, agricultural employment, among others.

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44 OF 96
G
Step 1.3 Workshops and consultations for final catchment selection: Governments selected 5-6 bordering
municipalities within one of the prioritized catchment areas, based on their vulnerability to climate change and other
criteria.
110. Step 2 Local consultations to characterize climate risks and EbA opportunities (already done for the 7
countries. To be reinforced during the first year of programme implementation)
Step 2.1 Assessment on territory and identification of key actors: A characterization of the territory and key actors
was done. Variables assessed included: demographics, indigenous communities, main regulatory and legal
framework, livelihoods, and financial mechanisms available.
Step 2.2 Analysis of main ecosystems, climate risks and perceived climate impacts: The consultation methodology
included a land use classification by participants, in which they analyzed main ecosystem’s benefits/use, climate
risks, perceived impacts, among other, in a sex-disaggregated manner.
Step 2.3 Participatory identification of adaptation options: Consultation participants proposed adaptation measures
based on the potential impact on the identified climate risks, ecosystems, livelihoods, and specific needs.
Step 2.4 Perceived barriers and mitigation strategies during consultations: Participants identified main barriers they
perceived could jeopardize the implementation of the proposed adaptation measures and the programme in
general.
Step 2.5 Alignment with demand analysis from microfinance institutions: Financial institutions in the area were
interviewed about their existing portfolios and demand. Climate risks identified during the consultation were
compared and aligned with those identified by these institutions.
111. Step 3 Climate impact modelling (done for Costa Rica, Honduras and Dominican Republic. To be
developed for the remaining countries during the first year of programme implementation and validated for the
three initial countries)
Step 3.1 Selection of a sub-basin for the modelling purpose: The Soil Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) is used for
the hydrological modelling of climate change potential impacts and impacts of EbA interventions. Water catchment
areas are characterized through land use cover, digital elevation model and soil characterization. Based on
topography, the basin is divided into sub-basins, and further divided into Hydrologic Response Units (HRU) based
on unique combinations of slope, soil, and land cover. SWAT input data are precipitation, temperature, digital model
elevation (DEM), soil cover, land use, and drainage network.
Step 3.2 Identification of the main climate risks: The scenarios considered for modelling climate change impacts
include a baseline, RCP 4.5 2050, RCP 4.5 2100, RCP 8.5 2050, and RCP 8.5 2100. The hydrological variables to
estimate climate change impacts include soil water, percolation, water yield and erosion.
Step 3.3 Impact modelling for main EbA interventions: A modelling scenario is generated to analyse the potential
impact of EbA interventions individually or in combination under the RCP 4.5 climate change scenario. Selected
interventions included those prioritized through the local consultations and a matrix was generated for the evaluation
of impacts for different levels of intervention intensity.
Step 3.4 Conclusions of the climate impact modelling: Results from the hydrological model were discussed through
the analysis of changes in the hydrological variables for the Climate change RCP 4.5 scenarios with and without
EbA interventions.
112. Step 4 Site intervention strategy (Pre-drafted for Honduras and Costa Rica. To be developed in
consultation with key actors for all remaining countries during the first year of programme implementation)
The site intervention strategy will include the following components:
Definition of the problem statement: Based on the results from the community consultations and the climate impact
modelling, the problem statement can be defined identifying the main climate risks and barriers for adaptation to
climate change.
Intervention objective: The specific objective of the programme is defined with a clear identification of the expected
results in terms of EbA interventions, enabling conditions and objective population.

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45 OF 96
G
Intervention structure: The intervention logic describes the components that will shape the programme, their
contribution and their interconnection towards the main objective.
Grant-financed EbA interventions to address prioritised climate risks in the Tempisque basin (Output 1.2): A number
of EbA interventions will be financed through a grant mechanism as demonstration pilots for the target territory.
This section describes what EbA interventions have been prioritized for the specific climate impacts.
Grant facility established to promote an EbA business ecosystem (Output 1.3): The establishment of a Grant facility
will then finance a series of EbA intervention, supporting business and distribution models through a competitive
bottom-up approach. A number of criteria is raised to identify potential projects and beneficiaries at the community
level, and this facility is also expected to leverage demand for EbA loans.
Loan and guarantee facility to accelerate access to finance for other relevant EbA interventions for the Tempisque
basin (Output 2.2): An EbA Lending Facility will be set at below-market conditions to enable financing for small-
and large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level. A number of criteria for the selection of
PFIs and of possible beneficiaries and EbA interventions to be financed is also predefined.
Building capacities of key actors (Output 1 and 3): To ensure sustainability and as a complementary activity of the
Grant and Lending facility, trainings will be organized at the local and national level, based on identified needs with
targeted stakeholders.
Mainstreaming EbA into key policy and planning frameworks (output 1 and 3): Technical assistance will be provided
to strengthen the capacity of policy makers and decision makers and identify entry points of the integration of EbA
in policy and regulatory frameworks at the local, national and regional level.
Monitoring and evaluation framework: The implementation strategy of an M&E framework and a proposed set of
indicators are included in the intervention plan to support the communities in the established of an M&E framework
during the first year of the programme.
113. * Validation of Site-specific EbA plans
A final step for validation of the site plans has been added for the pre-defined site plans in Costa Rica and Honduras
where the initial year of implementation will be focused on strengthening the hydrological model and validating and
confirming the specific sites for the grant interventions and the refinement of the elegibilty criteria for the grant and
loan component in consultations with communities, experts and the financial institutions.
B.4. Implementation arrangements
114. The proposed programme will be implemented over a period of seven years, from 2021–2028. The
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the programme,
and will be responsible for overseeing the implementation, financial management, evaluation, reporting and
closure of the programme. GCF and CABEI will enter into a single FAA in the form of a trust agreement.
Accredited Entity
115. As the AE, CABEI will oversee programme implementation, using its experience having successfully
implemented similar programme activities involving financial intermediation across the region. Over the past 56
years, CABEI's support to the region has resulted in project approvals amounting to more than US$30.9 billion
and disbursements of more than US$26.2 billion. CABEI will be responsible for financial management and will
be accountable for the use of GCF resources under the programme. It will maintain programme accounts,
facilitate staff recruitment and procurement processes and will monitor resource mobilisation of baseline as well
as co-finance. Financial transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally-certified
auditors. In addition, as the AE, CABEI will: i) ensure that the programme is executed in accordance with GCF
standards; ii) supervise, oversee and manage the implementation of programme interventions; iii) report on
programme progress; and iv) ensure that programme activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries'
national priorities. To ensure adequate oversight of the programme, CABEI will use its robust fiduciary, technical
oversight and quality assurance systems such as its Evaluation Office, its Project Formulation Department
(FOPROY) and its Financing for the Majorities Unit (FINAM) to closely support the Executing Entity (EE) and
the Regional Project Management Unit (RPMU). Programme implementation by CABEI will also take place in
close coordination with a Regional Project Steering Committee (RPSC).

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
Intervention structure: The intervention logic describes the components that will shape the programme, their
contribution and their interconnection towards the main objective.
Grant-financed EbA interventions to address prioritised climate risks in the Tempisque basin (Output 1.2): A number
of EbA interventions will be financed through a grant mechanism as demonstration pilots for the target territory.
This section describes what EbA interventions have been prioritized for the specific climate impacts.
Grant facility established to promote an EbA business ecosystem (Output 1.3): The establishment of a Grant facility
will then finance a series of EbA intervention, supporting business and distribution models through a competitive
bottom-up approach. A number of criteria is raised to identify potential projects and beneficiaries at the community
level, and this facility is also expected to leverage demand for EbA loans.
Loan and guarantee facility to accelerate access to finance for other relevant EbA interventions for the Tempisque
basin (Output 2.2): An EbA Lending Facility will be set at below-market conditions to enable financing for small-
and large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level. A number of criteria for the selection of
PFIs and of possible beneficiaries and EbA interventions to be financed is also predefined.
Building capacities of key actors (Output 1 and 3): To ensure sustainability and as a complementary activity of the
Grant and Lending facility, trainings will be organized at the local and national level, based on identified needs with
targeted stakeholders.
Mainstreaming EbA into key policy and planning frameworks (output 1 and 3): Technical assistance will be provided
to strengthen the capacity of policy makers and decision makers and identify entry points of the integration of EbA
in policy and regulatory frameworks at the local, national and regional level.
Monitoring and evaluation framework: The implementation strategy of an M&E framework and a proposed set of
indicators are included in the intervention plan to support the communities in the established of an M&E framework
during the first year of the programme.
113. * Validation of Site-specific EbA plans
A final step for validation of the site plans has been added for the pre-defined site plans in Costa Rica and Honduras
where the initial year of implementation will be focused on strengthening the hydrological model and validating and
confirming the specific sites for the grant interventions and the refinement of the elegibilty criteria for the grant and
loan component in consultations with communities, experts and the financial institutions. |  | 
 | B.4. Implementation arrangements | 
114. The proposed programme will be implemented over a period of seven years, from 2021–2028. The
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for the programme,
and will be responsible for overseeing the implementation, financial management, evaluation, reporting and
closure of the programme. GCF and CABEI will enter into a single FAA in the form of a trust agreement.
Accredited Entity
115. As the AE, CABEI will oversee programme implementation, using its experience having successfully
implemented similar programme activities involving financial intermediation across the region. Over the past 56
years, CABEI's support to the region has resulted in project approvals amounting to more than US$30.9 billion
and disbursements of more than US$26.2 billion. CABEI will be responsible for financial management and will
be accountable for the use of GCF resources under the programme. It will maintain programme accounts,
facilitate staff recruitment and procurement processes and will monitor resource mobilisation of baseline as well
as co-finance. Financial transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally-certified
auditors. In addition, as the AE, CABEI will: i) ensure that the programme is executed in accordance with GCF
standards; ii) supervise, oversee and manage the implementation of programme interventions; iii) report on
programme progress; and iv) ensure that programme activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries'
national priorities. To ensure adequate oversight of the programme, CABEI will use its robust fiduciary, technical
oversight and quality assurance systems such as its Evaluation Office, its Project Formulation Department
(FOPROY) and its Financing for the Majorities Unit (FINAM) to closely support the Executing Entity (EE) and
the Regional Project Management Unit (RPMU). Programme implementation by CABEI will also take place in
close coordination with a Regional Project Steering Committee (RPSC). |  | 

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46 OF 96
G
Executing Entity
116. The Food and agriculture organization of the United Nations in collaboration with the Central American
Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD) will serve as one of the Executing Entities for the
programme through a Subsidiary agreement signed with CABEI. FAO will oversee the execution of the
programme at the regional level, hosting the RPMU. At the national level, FAO will guide the day-to-day
operations of the programme through National Project Execution Units (PEUs) based in each target catchment,
as well as through national executing partners. FAO, through the PEUs, will also provide the technical execution
and manage relations with stakeholders and institutions in the respective participating countries. CCAD will
also sign a Subsidiary agreement with CABEI for the execution of output 3 ensuring the regional aggregation
and dissemination of information to all countries in the region to strengthen the scientific information of the
decision making processes at the regional and national levels.
117. The CCAD is the environmental division of the Central American Integration Secretariat (SICA) and
has independent legal personality exercised by the Pro Tempore Presidency; the highest authority in the CCAD
is the Council of Ministers, which is composed of representatives of the environmental authorities of each
Member State. For administrative purposes, all contracts and operational agreements signed by CCAD are
run through the Financial Administrative Directorate (DAF) of the General Secretariat of SICA (SG-SICA). SG-
SICA provides accounting, purchasing and contracting services, and CCAD follows SG-SICA’s regulations on
procurement and HR management. The CCAD’s mandate in the region includes: i) strengthening of national
authorities and regulations; ii) harmonisation of policies and legislation; iii) distribution of information; iv)
determining priority action areas; and v) promoting a participatory, democratic and decentralised environmental
management. The CCAD is well-placed to execute this output of the programme as a result of its strong
institutional presence and its direct links to each participating country. A detailed capacity assessment
undertaken for the CCAD has confirmed their capacity to act as the EE for this output of the programme and
can be found in annex 29. The CCAD is the coordinating body for Central America in terms of environmental
management and climate change strategy and they have extensive experience executing projects with a wide
range of donors, including the GEF, the European Union, the World Bank and the Interamerican Development.
They also have the capacity to engage with governments at the highest level as they are the convening
organisation for the environmental ministries in the region, including all countries participating in the
programme.
118. The EEs will be accountable to CABEI as the AE for the effective execution of programme interventions.
FAO, through the RPMU, will be responsible for ensuring technical and operational cohesiveness at the regional
level and will report to the RPSC on the progress of the programme at both national and regional levels. All
operating policies and procedures will follow CABEI's standards of operation. The EEs will work in close
coordination with the RPSC and RPMU (described below).
Track record of Executing Entities
119. The FAO is an international organisation with the goals of eradicating food insecurity and malnutrition;
eliminating poverty; and promoting sustainable management and utilisation of natural resources. The FAO supports
countries in both mitigating and adapting to climate change through a range of programmes and projects based on
research and best practices, as part of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. With national
offices in seven countries of the regional programme and SICA region, the FAO maintains a close relationship with
the Ministries of Agriculture and the Ministries of the Environment for implementation related to the Programming
Frameworks set with countries. Technical assistance is provided to Executive Secretaries of both councils of
ministries for regional implementation arrangements. Since October 2016, the FAO has been accredited by the
GCF as an International Organisation for the category of medium projects (up to US$250 million). It currently has a
portfolio of US$793.4 million at a global level, of which approximately US$110.1 million is being executed by the
FAO´s Office for Mesoamerica. In addition, the FAO has made important efforts with countries to facilitate access
to environmental financing with the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Projects are implemented both nationally
and locally, with experience with local governments, farmers’ and women’s organisations, and using a multicultural
approach.
120. The FAO promotes climate-resilient agriculture as a way to increase productivity, build the resilience
of food systems and, wherever possible, reduce GHG emissions. Regionally-relevant examples of this work
include:
• GCF FP145 REsilient LIVElihoods (RELIVE) of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Mayan landscapes and
the Dry Corridor of Guatemala, aimed to bolster the resilience of the most vulnerable farmers and indigenous
groups (US$66.7 million);
• GCF FP089 Upscaling climate resilience measures in the dry corridor agroecosystems of El Salvador
(RECLIMA). This programme seeks to restore and reforest degraded ecosystems to protect water sources and

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47 OF 96
G
stimulate aquifer recharge through adaptive agroecosystem management, simultaneously improving the
resilience of small-scale farmers to climate change impacts (US$127.7 million); and
• the FAO project ‘Climate Smart Agroforestry Systems for the Dry Corridor of Central America’ which supports
farmers in Guatemala and Honduras to increase the uptake of climate resilient agroforestry systems through
the farmer field school approach.
121. Other experiences the FAO has working in the region include:
• the ‘Resilient landscape management project’ (US$4.3 million) and ‘Strengthening the resilience of multiple-
use protected areas to deliver multiple global environmental benefits’ (US$5.8 million) in Nicaragua;
• the ‘Promoting climate-smart livestock management’ project in the Dominican Republic (US$1.5 million);
• the ‘Protecting biodiversity and recovering degraded ecosystems’ project (US$1.8 million) in Honduras;
• the ‘Rural Development with local governments’ project (US$1.5 million) and the ‘Adaptation of vulnerability
communities to climate change’ project (US$5 million) in Guatemala; and
• the ‘Enable the concerted management of FUENTE AL MAR in the Paz river basin’ project (US$1.6 million) and
the ‘Systematization of agricultural good practices for adaptation and climate change’ project (US$400 million)
in Guatemala and El Salvador.
The FAO also supports the implementation of the Forest and Farm Facility, which strengthens and empowers Forest
and Farm Producers Organizations (FFPOs), including women, youth and indigenous peoples as primary change
agents for climate-resilient landscapes and improved livelihoods (Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama in Phase I).
122. The CCAD was established with the mission of developing a regional regime for environmental cooperation
and integration that contributes to improving the quality of life of the populations of its Member States. The CCAD
was appointed by the Tulum Declaration and ratified in Tulum +8 as the leader of regional efforts for the
conservation and management of the Mesoamerican Region (MAR) as a shared transboundary ecoregion. The
CCAD hosts the Regional Environmental Observatory (REO), a regional digital repository of environmentally-
relevant information. Its actions have responded to the Environmental Plans of the Central American Region
(PARCA).
123. The CCAD served as the executing agency for the ‘Integrated Ridge-to-Reef Management of the
Mesoamerican Reef’ project in Belize, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico (US$9 million). It also served as an
executing partner for:
• the ‘Increasing Capacity for the Reduction of Flood and Drought Disaster Risks and Promotion of Resilience in
Central America’ project carried out in Belize, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and
Panama (US$2 million); and
• the ‘Regional Program for the Reduction of Environmental Depletion and Vulnerability’ (PREVDA) in Belize,
Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and the Dominican Republic (US$20
million).
The CCAD also provided: i) technical support to the GEF project ‘Strengthening of environmental integration for the
establishment of the Environmental Plan for the Central American Region’ (PARCA II) (US$4 million) to strengthen
the capacities of indigenous communities to protect and manage their natural and cultural resources; and ii) financial
cooperation for the ‘Consolidation of the Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve’ (CTBR) project (US$12
million) for strengthening of the national system of protected areas in Nicaragua and Honduras.
Technical Advisor
124. UN Environment will play a technical advisory role for the programme through their participation in
technical activities where they have a comparative advantage mainly in output 4 contributing with the
experience gained through the microfinance for EbA initiatives implemented throughout the region, providing
trainings to participating financial institutions, supportig them with the developemetnt of MRV systems and
guiding the design of technical trainings. To this end, UNEP will be engaged by FAO through a UN to UN
agreement for the implementation of programmatic activities agreed upon and in line with the content of the
funding proposal. As EE, FAO will be accountable for the use of funds to the AE, and UNEP will be accountable
to FAO.
125. UNEP will also contribute technically to the programme through some of the technical activities under
output 3, by providing technical advice to CCAD for the development of technical knowledge products on
financial mechanisms for EbA, methodologies for ecosystem services valuation and technical guidelines for
EbA implementation, as well as by supporting the integration of EbA into relevant local and national policies
and regional strategies. As EE for the output 3, CCAD will sign a Project Cooperation Agreement with UNEP,
where UNEP will be the service provider for a set of defined goals and activities in accordance to the approved
programme’s proposal. UNEP will be accountable to CCAD for the use of funds and implementation of agreed
upon activities.

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48 OF 96
G
Regional Project Steering Committee
126. The RPSC will comprise representatives from inter alia: i) FAO and CCAD as the EEs; ii) CABEI as the
AE and EE; iii) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) – in a technical advisory role; iv) national-level
CCAD liaisons; and v) the Regional Project Manager. The RPSC will primarily be responsible for providing
technical, oversight and advisory support at the regional level. This will include: i) overseeing programme
implementation; ii) review and validation annual regional workplans and programme reports; iii) review and
validation of the programme's fulfilment of environmental and financial objectives; and iv) approval of changes
to the programme's targets, activities or timelines. In addition, the RPSC will be informed about the final
selection of Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) that will be done by CABEI following their internal regulations
and criteria. The RPSC will also make a recommendation on the final selection of recipients of grants through
the Grant facility (these selection processes are described further below). The RPSC will be centrally placed to
ensure consistent programme progress across all seven countries. Biannual RPSC meetings will be held77 to
take management-related and technical decisions, discuss the programme's main performance indicators and
provide strategic guidance. The RPSC will also be responsible for overseeing the RPMU. In accordance with
the AMA the Executing Entities will retain discretion over the use of proceeds and Programme implementation.
EEs will have the final decision or a veto right over any recommendation or action taken by the RPSC.
Regional Project Management Unit
127. The RPMU will be based at FAO’s regional headquarters in Panama and will be responsible for day-
to-day programme administration and execution, and the regional technical coordination of programme
activities. It will ensure that programme execution proceeds through clear work plans, terms of reference and
carefully designed administrative arrangements that meet CABEI and GCF requirements. A full-time staff
member will be recruited to fulfil the role of Project Manager (PM), who will head the RPMU and will be
responsible for the daily on-the-ground implementation and management of the programme. The PM will be
responsible for ensuring the programme achieves the targets set out in the Results Framework (Section E) to
the required standards of CABEI and the GCF and within the specified time and budget allocations. To achieve
these targets, the PM will: i) report directly to the RPSC on programme management-related matters; ii) manage
the programme in accordance with the specified workplans and allocated budget; iii) ensure that all programme
interventions are implemented according to CABEI and GCF guidelines; iii) work closely with PEUs and national
institutions and authorities to ensure that the programme is managed effectively and that the needs of all
beneficiary groups are considered; and iv) oversee the efficient and effective information and knowledge
transfer to relevant programme partners. The PM will be required to fulfil these roles for the duration of the
programme.
128. In addition to the PM, the RPMU will be comprised of the following individuals related to the regional
management of the programme:
• Financial and Procurement Officer;
• Administrative Officer; and
• Accountant.
129. Regional technical specialists on the RPMU will include a: i) Chief Technical Adviser; ii) Forestry Expert;
and iii) Water, EbA and Resource Efficiency Expert. There will also be a Regional Environmental and Social
Safeguards Officer, a Regional Gender Officer, a Regional Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist; and a
Regional Communications Specialist represented on the RPMU. A Regional Knowledge Hub Coordinator will
be based in the CCAD Headquarters in El Salvador to ensure full integration of the programme results into the
Regional Environmental Observatory.
National Advisory Committees
130. An NAC will be established in each of the seven participating countries. Each NAC will be comprised
of a: i) NAC National Coordinator; ; ii) national climate change office/department representative; iii) Ministry of
Environment representative; iv) Ministry of Agriculture representative; v) Ministry of Planning representative;
and vi) representative from Local Government. The RPMU will strongly advise governments to nominate local
representatives for the slots allocated for ministries in the NAC. The responsibilities of the NACs will include
national programme guidance, planning and oversight, as well as supervision of national financial execution.
The NACs will work closely with CABEI and the RPMU to coordinate activities under Output 4 of the programme.
They will also participate in fostering national access to the three financial facilities established by the
77 with ad hoc meetings held whenever necessary

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49 OF 96
G
programme. NACs will receive project proposals to the EbA Grant Facility during bi-annual project selection
rounds and will coordinate with national ministries to ensure alignment with national policies, adaptation plans
and, where applicable, respective regulations and laws. They will also, in coordination with the National Project
Execution Units (PEUs), prioritise a selected number of projects in order to act as a first filter, before passing
such proposals to the RPMU.
National Project Execution Units
131. National Project Execution Units (PEUs) will be established in the target catchments of each of the
participating countries. Each unit will be comprised of: i) a National Project Execution Unit Coordinator (technical
lead); ii) two EbA, water and resource technical advisors; iii) a Financial Officer to provide guidance on the three
financial facilities; iv) an Administrative Officer; v) a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist; vi) a
Communications Specialist; and vii) two researchers (one junior and one senior) to build country-specific
evidence bases of the adaptation activities for the regional knowledge hub. PEUs will be responsible for daily
execution of the programme in the respective target catchments, as well as communication and capacity-
building activities with participating local governments, financial institutions, civil society organisations, farmers
and communities. They will provide monitoring, reporting and evaluation services, as well as technical
assistance and execution services. The EbA, water and resource experts will provide technical assistance to
local governments, farmers and communities on implementing EbA, water- and resource-efficient interventions
under the programme. The financial advisors will provide technical assistance to local financial institutions to
support EbA, to learn how to use the financial mechanisms established under the programme, and for the
valuation of natural assets. The PEUs will also be responsible for the identification of eligible projects for grant
financing through the Grant facility. They will engage with local stakeholders at community, association,
cooperative and municipal levels to formulate finance applications to be submitted to the NACs, which will
subsequently make national selections and pass their recommendations to the RPMU. The M&E Specialists
will define and implement the monitoring plan for the programme, and will collect the data required at national
levels to track and measure the targets and indicators defined in the programme's results framework
Intermediary Financial Institutions.
132. CABEI network IFIs will be the main counterparts to channel GCF funds and CABEI Co-financing from
the Lending Facility towards end beneficiaries. The IFIs will receive the funding for the Lending Facility from
CABEIvia two funding streams: via on-lending (full recourse) for co-financing from CABEI, and via limited
recourse loan for GCF funds: both funding stream will be blended at IFI level and then on-lend to Partner
Financial Institutions (PFIS) that will further on-lend to end beneficiaries. The IFIs are also the key partner for
further leveraging of EbA finance via the intended Guarantee facility (see paragraphs 53 and 54).
Partner Financial Institutions
133. PFIs in each country will be identified through a process following CABEI´s and Intermediary Financial
Institutions internal rules and regulations, and through eligibility criteria that CABEI will approve via a no-
objection. As its sole Executing Entity, CABEI will have final decision on the selection of each IFI, PFIs and end
borrower to be financed under the Lending Facility. The final selection will be communicated to the RPSC. If
there were a case in which there is no CABEI-accredited institution within the target catchment area, accredited
institutions will be provided with technical assistance to offer an institutional loan to another non-accredited
financial institution that can then directly lend to the end beneficiary. The PFIs will work closely with the PEUs
to ensure interventions financed directly by the programme, and using the mechanisms established by the
programme, are well-aligned with programme objectives. The functioning of the financial facilities and all
institutions involved is further described below. Using the internal structures of CABEI, PFI´s will be monitored
through audits, analyses of relevance, sustainability, and cost-effectiveness of all credit lines, thereby ensuring
they are framed within the specific objectives of the programme.
PFIs will be selected on the basis of the following criteria (to refined and confirmed by CABEI during inception of the
programme). The criteria will apply throughout the period in which the PFIs participate in the programme.
 PFIs must be duly licensed in the respective countries and have at least three years of operation.
 The PFIs must be and remain in compliance with applicable laws and regulations issued by the local
authorities as certified by independent external auditors on an annual basis and by quarterly returns provided
by PFIs to the local regulatory authorities
 In case the initial eligibility of the PFIs falls to such a date that their year-end audits have been already
completed and do not cover this requirement, then the PFIs would be required to submit a management letter
in an acceptable format confirming their compliance with applicable laws and regulations issued by the
authorities.

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50 OF 96
G
 PFI’s board of directors and managers must be considered “fit and proper” by IFIs. It must have qualified and
experienced management, adequate organization and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile.
 The PFI must have well defined policies and written procedures for management of all types of financial risks
(i.e. credit, operational, liquidity and market risks).
 Operational self-sufficiency: The operational self-sufficiency of the PFI must be over 100% for the preceding
financial year.
 The PFI must have adequate liquidity (based on the acceptable prudential ratios dictated by the national
financial regulatory body of each country).
 The PFI must have positive profitability and acceptable risk profile (based on the acceptable prudential ratios
dictated by the national financial regulatory body of each country).
 The PFI must classify its assets and off-balance-sheet credit risk exposures (at least four times per year) and
make adequate provisions.
 The PFI must have adequate portfolio quality, with PAR>=90 of at most 5% of total gross loans.
 The PFI must have adequate internal audits and controls for its specific risk profile.
 The PFI must have adequate management information systems, allowing it to separately and individually
track all loans made with the EbA facility funds.
 The PFI must agree to engage in financing commercial farms, households, agroindustry and other
enterprises.
 The PFI must agree to undergo intensive mandatory technical assistance
Where PFIs are not complying with the above defined minimum requirements, these can adhere to the TA facility to
establish respective institutional capacities.
134. The objective of financial facilities is to enable financing — through both loans and grants — of proven
EbA solutions and resource- and water-efficient technologies for vulnerable communities in the Dry Corridor
and Arid Zones. Eligibility criteria for different activities of the three financial facilities are defined in the
respective sections.
135. Further information regarding the operation of the financial facilities is presented in Annex 23:
Operational Guidelines.
136. The figures below illustrate the above-described institutional arrangements for programme
implementation (Figure 13) and the flow of funds (Figure 14) in diagram format.
Figure 13. Programme management structure for the proposed programme.

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51 OF 96
G
As observed:
• CABEI will act as trustee for GCF funds for the overall Programme
• For the Lending facility CABEI will 1) channel GCF funds and provided limited recourse loans to the selected
IFIs, each 1 per country and 2) on-lend its co-financing funds to these same IFIs. the IFIs will each select up
to 4 PFIs to on-lend the blended funds (GCF and CABEI co-financing funds) in a two-staged approach: i) a
first eligibility check based on a simplified format; and ii) a final selection and lending volume decision based
on a fully-fledged due diligence process, including an initial gap analysis of PFI capacity for EbA lending. End
beneficiaries can apply for EbA loans directly with the respective PFIs.
• The RPSC will be informed periodically about programme progress also through the selected PFIs in line with
CABEI´s regulations, as well as for EbA, water- and resource-efficient projects that can be financed under the
financial facilities. The RPSC will also be provided with information on monitoring, reporting and verification
(MRV) requirements to be complied with by PFIs and other programme entities in line with CABEI´s internal
regulations.
• National PEUs will work with local stakeholders to identify eligible projects to be financed by grants through the
grant facility. They will compile programme proposals and filter out those that do not fulfil minimum
requirements; the remainder will be passed to the NACs.
• NACs will undertake selection of eligible projects in each country according to national priorities and will pass
their selection to the RPMU.
• The RPMU will undertake a selection of all projects proposed by each NAC and will pass their selection to the
RPSC.
• The RPSC will make a preliminary selection of eligible projects at the regional level and will issue the list of
grant recipients and final approval will be taken by CABEI.
• For loan applications, beneficiaries can apply for loans directly through PFIs. .
Figure 14. Flow of funds for the proposed programme
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request
137. The seven participating countries are extremely vulnerable to climate change impacts and have
experienced severe agricultural and economic losses because of progressively more frequent and intense

--- Table 1 on Page 53 ---
As observed:
• CABEI will act as trustee for GCF funds for the overall Programme
• For the Lending facility CABEI will 1) channel GCF funds and provided limited recourse loans to the selected
IFIs, each 1 per country and 2) on-lend its co-financing funds to these same IFIs. the IFIs will each select up
to 4 PFIs to on-lend the blended funds (GCF and CABEI co-financing funds) in a two-staged approach: i) a
first eligibility check based on a simplified format; and ii) a final selection and lending volume decision based
on a fully-fledged due diligence process, including an initial gap analysis of PFI capacity for EbA lending. End
beneficiaries can apply for EbA loans directly with the respective PFIs.
• The RPSC will be informed periodically about programme progress also through the selected PFIs in line with
CABEI´s regulations, as well as for EbA, water- and resource-efficient projects that can be financed under the
financial facilities. The RPSC will also be provided with information on monitoring, reporting and verification
(MRV) requirements to be complied with by PFIs and other programme entities in line with CABEI´s internal
regulations.
• National PEUs will work with local stakeholders to identify eligible projects to be financed by grants through the
grant facility. They will compile programme proposals and filter out those that do not fulfil minimum
requirements; the remainder will be passed to the NACs.
• NACs will undertake selection of eligible projects in each country according to national priorities and will pass
their selection to the RPMU.
• The RPMU will undertake a selection of all projects proposed by each NAC and will pass their selection to the
RPSC.
• The RPSC will make a preliminary selection of eligible projects at the regional level and will issue the list of
grant recipients and final approval will be taken by CABEI.
• For loan applications, beneficiaries can apply for loans directly through PFIs. .
Figure 14. Flow of funds for the proposed programme |  | 
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request | 
137. The seven participating countries are extremely vulnerable to climate change impacts and have
experienced severe agricultural and economic losses because of progressively more frequent and intense |  | 

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52 OF 96
G
droughts and floods in recent years (Table 1). In 2014, 2.5 million people were affected by food insecurity
across Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador as result of the loss of 75% of maize and bean crops78, the
impact of which was exacerbated by further droughts in 2015. In 2016, 1.6 million people across the Dry
Corridor region were food insecure and 3.5 million required humanitarian assistance as a result of the loss of
50–90% of crops79. In 2018, a heatwave across Central America caused crop losses across 282,000 hectares,
affecting a total of 2.2 million people80. A summary of the extreme climate events and associated impacts
experienced by the seven participating countries over the last two decades is provided in Table 1 below.
Droughts and other extreme climate events linked with these decreasing agricultural yields over the last decade
have been more intense and have occurred more frequently than in previous decades. They are also likely to
increase in frequency and intensity under future climate conditions.
Table 1. Total number of people affected and damages in US$ millions for natural disasters occurring between 2000 and 201981.
Country Disaster Number Total people affected Total damage (US$ million)
Drought 2
Costa Rica Flood 19 478,209 106
Storm 4 117,574 205
Drought 4 1,486,610 186
El Salvador Flood 11 314,431 1,000
Storm 11 198,145 1,315
Drought 5 5,680,081 158
Extreme temperature 4 12,634
Guatemala
Flood 22 1,034,660 61.9
Storm 12 987,775 1,639
Drought 8 1,517,335
Honduras Flood 21 940,227 129
Storm 11 234,636 217
Drought 4 948,000
Nicaragua Flood 16 417,456 0.05
Storm 14 324,912 3
Drought 3 272
Panama Flood 25 143,672 20.8
Storm 2 24,000
Dominican Flood 17 2,984,330 97
Republic Storm 23 336,429 58
138. The COVID-19 pandemic is imposing additional negative impacts on healthcare systems and
economies globally, further reducing the capacity of already-vulnerable Dry Corridor and Arid Zone
populations to respond to extreme climate events. With existing limited technical and financial capacities,
these populations will require even greater relief interventions as their COVID-19 recovery efforts
increase existing debt, while climate threats continue to build.
139. To overcome observed and predicted climate threats in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones it is necessary
to strengthen the technical and institutional capacity for EbA and to introduce novel financial mechanisms to
fund adaptation. Currently, governments of the seven participating countries have insufficient resources,
knowledge and technical capacity to promote innovative natural resource-based adaptation interventions. The
resources required to effect a paradigm shift in the region's approach to natural resource management exceed
those that can be supplied through public sector financing. The economic situations of the participating
countries in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region are outlined in Table 2 below.
Table 2. Economic indicators for Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and the Dominican Republic.
Respective values are shaded green–red to indicate best–poorest economic performance among these countries.
78 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2014. Drought in
Central America Situation Report No. 01 (as of December 10, 2014).
79 Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), 2016. Dry Corridor, Central America, Situation Report — June 2016.
80 FAO, 2018. Central America, Drought causes crop losses in “Dry Corridor” in Central America. GIEWS update 27 August 2018.
81 Data sourced from EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database - Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, D. Guha-Sapir - www.emdat.be,
Brussels, Belgium. Accessed 15 October 2019

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
Country | Disaster | Number | Total people affected | Total damage (US$ million)
Costa Rica | Drought | 2 |  | 
 | Flood | 19 | 478,209 | 106
 | Storm | 4 | 117,574 | 205
El Salvador | Drought | 4 | 1,486,610 | 186
 | Flood | 11 | 314,431 | 1,000
 | Storm | 11 | 198,145 | 1,315
Guatemala | Drought | 5 | 5,680,081 | 158
 | Extreme temperature | 4 | 12,634 | 
 | Flood | 22 | 1,034,660 | 61.9
 | Storm | 12 | 987,775 | 1,639
Honduras | Drought | 8 | 1,517,335 | 
 | Flood | 21 | 940,227 | 129
 | Storm | 11 | 234,636 | 217
Nicaragua | Drought | 4 | 948,000 | 
 | Flood | 16 | 417,456 | 0.05
 | Storm | 14 | 324,912 | 3
Panama | Drought | 3 |  | 272
 | Flood | 25 | 143,672 | 20.8
 | Storm | 2 | 24,000 | 
Dominican
Republic | Flood | 17 | 2,984,330 | 97
 | Storm | 23 | 336,429 | 58

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53 OF 96
G
Country GDP per GDP growth Public debt to Poverty (% Human Inequality
capita82 in rate mean (%) GDP (ratio)85 population living Development index
US$ (global (2013–2017)84 under US$ 3.20 Index (global (Gini)89,90
rank)83 per day)86 rank)87,88
Guatemala 8,173 (119) 3.6 30.1 24.2 0.65 (127) 53.0
Honduras 5,499 (134) 3.6 51.9 30.0 0.62 (133) 50.0
El Salvador 8,934 (112) 2.3 68.1 10.3 0.67 (121) 40.0
Nicaragua 5,823 (130) 4.8 46.0 12.8 0.66 (124) 47.1
Costa Rica 17,149 (76) 3.4 66.2 3.8 0.79 (63) 48.7
Panama 24,262 (58) 5.6 38.8 7.0 0.79 (66) 50.4
Dominican
Republic 16,956 (78) 6.1 47.1 6.2 0.74 (94) 45.3
140. Although countries in the region are classified from lower-middle to high income based on GDP per
capita, their national budgets are constrained, with poverty eradication and sustainable development having
been prioritised for funding over CCA. For example, less than 3% of the national budget has been committed
for mitigation, adaptation and risk management related to climate change in Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua
and Honduras in recent years.
141. Across the LAC region, there is a high dependency on non-reimbursable international support to meet
CCA goals. Where the availability of international finance has been limited, countries have had to increase
international debt or claim loans in order to respond to climate change impacts. There is a considerable
challenge to be met in that the finance available for CCA is far below what is required to meet adaptation needs.
For example, a UNDP IFF study91 in 2011 estimated an increase in the annual cost of adaptation in Costa Rica
for the biodiversity sector alone from US$60 million in 2015 to US$76 million by 203092. Similarly, in the
Dominican Republic, annual adaptation costs for the tourism sector are predicted to increase from US$16
million in 2015 to US$57 million by 2030. Aggregate estimates for the LAC region place the cost of adaptation
to a 2.5°C rise in temperature at 1.5–5.0% of the region's GDP. The total annual cost for adaptation across all
sectors in the LAC region is predicted to increase under both wet and dry climate scenarios up to 2050 (Figure
12). Safeguarding water supplies, implementing flood protection measures and effective management of
coastal zones will comprise the bulk of this cost93.
82 purchasing power parity
83 IMF, 2017. World Economic Outlook Database. Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=28. 2019.
84 World Bank, 2019. GDP growth (annual %). Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG.
85 CIA Factbook. 2017 estimations. Available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2186rank.html source.
86 World Bank, 2019. World Development Indicators 2017.
87 The Human Development Index (HDI) is a composite statistic of life expectancy, education, and income per capita indicators.
88 UNDP, 2018. Human Development Report 2018, pp. 22–25. Available at:
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018_human_development_statistical_update.pdf.
89 The Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality of income or wealth. Higher numbers indicate greater inequality.
90 Nicaragua and Guatemala: estimations from CIA Factbook. 2014. Available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/2172rank.html. Data for other countries from World Bank, 2016. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI
91 UNDP 2011. Adaptation to climate change in Costa Rica: An assessment of necessary investment and financial flows. Project: Capacity Development
for Policy Makers to Address Climate Change. Available online at: http://www.undpcc.org/en/financial-analysis/results.
92 focusing on conservation of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, conservation of inland aquatic ecosystems, prevention of forest fires, and awareness
raising
93 Sir Iliff, William. 2010. The costs to developing countries or adapting to climate change: new methods and estimates - the global report of the
economics of adaptation to climate change study (English).

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
Country | GDP per
capita82 in
US$ (global
rank)83 | GDP growth
rate mean (%)
(2013–2017)84 | Public debt to
GDP (ratio)85 | Poverty (%
population living
under US$ 3.20
per day)86 | Human
Development
Index (global
rank)87,88 | Inequality
index
(Gini)89,90
Guatemala | 8,173 (119) | 3.6 | 30.1 | 24.2 | 0.65 (127) | 53.0
Honduras | 5,499 (134) | 3.6 | 51.9 | 30.0 | 0.62 (133) | 50.0
El Salvador | 8,934 (112) | 2.3 | 68.1 | 10.3 | 0.67 (121) | 40.0
Nicaragua | 5,823 (130) | 4.8 | 46.0 | 12.8 | 0.66 (124) | 47.1
Costa Rica | 17,149 (76) | 3.4 | 66.2 | 3.8 | 0.79 (63) | 48.7
Panama | 24,262 (58) | 5.6 | 38.8 | 7.0 | 0.79 (66) | 50.4
Dominican
Republic | 16,956 (78) | 6.1 | 47.1 | 6.2 | 0.74 (94) | 45.3

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 54 OF 96
G
Figure 15. Total annual cost of adaptation 94across all sectors in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region under a wet
(NCAR)95 and dry (CSIRO)96 scenario. Points indicate total annual costs in US$ billion based on 2005 values. Bars indicate total
annual costs as a percentage of LAC regional GDP.
142. Given this constrained fiscal space, there are limited opportunities to implement climate change
adaptation interventions in the region without additional assistance. The seven target countries have already
extended their largest possible contributions to finance adaptation and further support is needed to fully address
the climate problem. While scope has been identified for partial loan financing at the regional level, the extent
of public debt in the individual countries, as well as their sovereign credit ratings (most graded as speculative
with significant risk), constrain their borrowing capacities with regards to global recommended borrowing limits.
As a result, the countries are unable to take on more sovereign debt to finance adaptation directly, instead
relying on alternative financial mechanisms. In addition, and at a local scale, the most vulnerable farmers are
often considered to be too high a risk for loans because of their small farm sizes and limited collateral which is
unfavourably viewed by banks using conservative practices. This limits these individuals' access to financial
resources needed for climate change adaptation.
143. To overcome these constraints, the proposed programme is requesting loan finance to establish a
credit line for EbA in the region, with additional guarantees to de-risk investments and support uptake of EbA
financing by small holder and commercial farmers. In addition to the loan components, GCF grant financing is
requested to establish and administer the credit line and to provide technical assistance for the implementation
of EbA. Grant finance is also required to establish a trust fund by CABEI that will support bottom-up
implementation of EbA in the most vulnerable communities as well as to support direct implementation of
climate change adaptation interventions in the most vulnerable communities that are not in a position to access
loan finance.
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability
144. The sustainability and replicability of the proposed programme interventions will be ensured through
six elements in the programme design, namely: i) operations and maintenance; ii) building long-term community
ownership; iii) integrating EbA into catchment management and planning; iv) incentivising private sector
investments into EbA; v) developing financial instruments for EbA; and vi) monitoring and evaluation. The
details of each of these elements are described below.
145. Post-programme operations and maintenance. Relevant operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
for programme interventions during and post programme implementation are detailed in Annex 21: Operations
Manual. Programme stakeholders are committed to undertaking O&M not only during the programme, but also
after programme completion. For example, the regional knowledge hub that will be established under the
programme will be maintained through the integration and linking of its content with the existing Regional
Environmental Observatory (OAR) managed by the CCAD. Because the knowledge hub will be web-based and
linked to the OAR, it will not require physical maintenance post programme closure. However, the technical
94 Sir Iliff, William. 2010. The costs to developing countries or adapting to climate change: new methods and estimates - the global report of the
economics of adaptation to climate change study (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/360351468127796135/The-costs-to-developing-countries-or-adapting-to-climate-change-new-methods-and-
estimates-the-global-report-of-the-economics-of-adaptation-to-climate-change-study
95 National Centre for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), wettest scenario
96 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), driest scenario

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
Figure 15. Total annual cost of adaptation 94across all sectors in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region under a wet
(NCAR)95 and dry (CSIRO)96 scenario. Points indicate total annual costs in US$ billion based on 2005 values. Bars indicate total
annual costs as a percentage of LAC regional GDP.
142. Given this constrained fiscal space, there are limited opportunities to implement climate change
adaptation interventions in the region without additional assistance. The seven target countries have already
extended their largest possible contributions to finance adaptation and further support is needed to fully address
the climate problem. While scope has been identified for partial loan financing at the regional level, the extent
of public debt in the individual countries, as well as their sovereign credit ratings (most graded as speculative
with significant risk), constrain their borrowing capacities with regards to global recommended borrowing limits.
As a result, the countries are unable to take on more sovereign debt to finance adaptation directly, instead
relying on alternative financial mechanisms. In addition, and at a local scale, the most vulnerable farmers are
often considered to be too high a risk for loans because of their small farm sizes and limited collateral which is
unfavourably viewed by banks using conservative practices. This limits these individuals' access to financial
resources needed for climate change adaptation.
143. To overcome these constraints, the proposed programme is requesting loan finance to establish a
credit line for EbA in the region, with additional guarantees to de-risk investments and support uptake of EbA
financing by small holder and commercial farmers. In addition to the loan components, GCF grant financing is
requested to establish and administer the credit line and to provide technical assistance for the implementation
of EbA. Grant finance is also required to establish a trust fund by CABEI that will support bottom-up
implementation of EbA in the most vulnerable communities as well as to support direct implementation of
climate change adaptation interventions in the most vulnerable communities that are not in a position to access
loan finance. |  | 
 | B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability | 
144. The sustainability and replicability of the proposed programme interventions will be ensured through
six elements in the programme design, namely: i) operations and maintenance; ii) building long-term community
ownership; iii) integrating EbA into catchment management and planning; iv) incentivising private sector
investments into EbA; v) developing financial instruments for EbA; and vi) monitoring and evaluation. The
details of each of these elements are described below.
145. Post-programme operations and maintenance. Relevant operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
for programme interventions during and post programme implementation are detailed in Annex 21: Operations
Manual. Programme stakeholders are committed to undertaking O&M not only during the programme, but also
after programme completion. For example, the regional knowledge hub that will be established under the
programme will be maintained through the integration and linking of its content with the existing Regional
Environmental Observatory (OAR) managed by the CCAD. Because the knowledge hub will be web-based and
linked to the OAR, it will not require physical maintenance post programme closure. However, the technical |  | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 55 OF 96
G
specialists engaged to maintain the OAR will ensure the sustainability of the hub and the updating of its
information beyond the programme implementation period. In addition, the knowledge hub will benefit from
other centralised information generation projects at the OAR, such as GIZ and NASA programmes, ensuring
ongoing consolidated outputs. Other aspects of the programme requiring O&M include financial products and
services, EbA interventions, and water- and resource-efficient technologies. These are described in detail in
the O&M plan (Annex 21).
146. Building long-term community ownership. By engaging closely with target communities —
particularly environmental and women's organisations — throughout the programme design and
implementation process, the programme will instil a sense of ownership in these communities, which will
contribute to gender equality and the long-term sustainability of programme interventions after programme
closure. Sub-activities 1.2.6 and 3.1.4 specifically target local cooperatives and women's organisations,
respectively, by: i) establishing a training of trainers' programme for the implementation of EbA and water-
efficient technologies; and ii) strengthening the technical capacity of community organisations, including
women's groups, in revising and disseminating information products to support the adoption of EbA and other
climate-resilient practices. Community involvement in programme interventions is also particularly important in
Sub-activity 1.1.1 — establishing a community-level monitoring and evaluation committee in each municipality
— as well as in Sub-activity 1.3.3 — establishing livelihood training projects in each municipality for farmers
and rural communities on locally-appropriate natural resource-based businesses and climate-resilient
livelihoods. Communities will further be closely involved in the co-development of all site-specific intervention
plans to integrate EbA measures into the seven target catchments (Activity 1.1).
147. Integrating EbA into catchment management and planning. Training, monitoring, evaluation and
the curation of lessons learned and best practices from programme activities will provide national- and local-
level decision-makers with relevant knowledge and information to adopt climate-resilient policies and incentives
in the long-term. Output 3 is specifically designed to ensure the information generated through programme
activities is disseminated across the region to increase the capacity of institutions to implement EbA
interventions, building a strong knowledge-sharing platform. Activity 3.3 will particularly enhance capacity of
local-level policy makers to integrate climate change adaptation and the valuation of natural capital into local
policies, which will enhance the sustainability of proposed interventions beyond the programme's lifespan.
148. Integrating EbA into local and national policies and regional strategies. The programme will
support the integration of EbA into local policies focusing mainly on land use management plans, water
management plans and water management organizations mainly through technical assistance and trainings
under components 1 and 3. The programme will also provide inputs directly to the NAP processes currently
under development for most countries in the region and focusing on the sectoral policies for agriculture, water
security and ecosystems and forestry which have been prioritized by countries in their NAP processes. At the
regional level, the results from the programme gathered in the Regional Observatory will serve as a direct input
for the update and strengthening of the regional strategies for Environment, Climate Change, Water Resources
and Agriculture all under the SICA mandate.
149. Incentivising private sector investments into EbA. The programme will leverage private sector
investments into EbA through capacity-building and awareness-raising interventions targeting the private
sector. Activities under Output 3 will build the private sector's awareness of the potential benefits of EbA, while
Output 1 and 4 will provide financial products and technical assistance for businesses to implement EbA. For
example, training commercial farmers on sustainable EbA practices (Sub-activity 1.2.2) will demonstrate the
benefits of EbA for ecosystem-based businesses and facilitate private sector investments in these practices as
well as in restoration/conservation of ecosystems on which these businesses rely in the long-term. The financial
instruments established under Output 4 will further support these farmers to access finance for such
investments. By creating a framework for the valuation of ecosystem services, the programme will further
facilitate the quantification of long-term economic benefits of large-scale EbA interventions and contribute to
the long-term incentive of investing into EbA in the region.
150. Developing financial instruments for EbA. The provision of financial mechanisms under Output 4
of the programme for the implementation of EbA and water-efficient technologies, and the comprehensive
monitoring of the benefits of these systems, will ultimately result in end beneficiaries who are implementing
EbA and other adaptation measures displaying a lower risk profile than individuals who are not. The programme

--- Table 1 on Page 57 ---
 | inancial products and technical assistance for businesses to implement EbA. For |  | 
example, training commercial farmers on sustainable EbA practices ( |  | Sub-a | ctivity 1.2.2) will demonstrate the
benefits of EbA for ecosystem-based businesses and facilitate private sector investments in |  |  | 

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 56 OF 96
G
will showcase commercial EbA finance as an attractive alternative, especially for impact investors, and will
catalyse the influx of private commercial finance into this market post programme closure. As a result, the
operations of the financial facilities established under the programme will be strengthened and expanded across
the Dry Corridor. Indeed, the programme’s target areas represent only ~6% of the region’s potential sensitised
demand for EbA finance; there is therefore great potential for further expansion. Further details regarding the
financial operations post programme closure are presented in Annex 12: Operational Guidelines.
151. Monitoring and evaluation. Lessons learned from programme activities will be collated by an M&E
Specialist in the Regional Project Management Unit and made available to development planners through a
regional knowledge hub. In addition, the programme will establish a community-level monitoring and evaluation
committee in each municipality and build the capacity of these committees to monitor the biophysical, social
and economic conditions in their local catchment. This capacity building will be complemented by assessments
of the level of climate vulnerability, risks and opportunities (Sub-activity 1.1.1). Lessons learned from the M&E
will be made available to community-level monitoring and evaluation committees to improve the sustainability
of the interventions while the committees' local knowledge will, in turn, inform the M&E. In addition, monitoring,
reporting and verification (MRV) systems established under Activity 4.3will enable PFIs to monitor and assess
the implementation of EbA and resource- and water-efficient investment projects, as well as to monitor and
document their respective economic and ecosystem benefits, thereby encouraging and facilitating further
uptake across the region.
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF Total amount Currency
funding (i + ii + iii + iv + v +
174.3 million USD ($)
vi + vii)
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans US$60 million 10 years 3 0.75 %
(ii) Subordinated loans 0 Enter %
Enter % equity
(iii) Equity 0 return
(iv) Guarantees US$30 million 10 years
(v) Reimbursable grants 0
(vi) Grants US$84.3 million
(vii Results-based
0
) payments
(b) Co-financing Total amount Currency
information 94.1 million USD ($)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
Senior million 05 3.50% senior
CABEI 42.8
Loans USD ($) 2 fixed l97
million Enter years Enter% Options
Guatemala In kind 9.3
USD ($) Enter years
million Enter years Enter% Options
Honduras In kind 7
USD ($) Enter years
million Enter years Enter% Options
El Salvador In kind 7.1
USD ($) Enter years
million Enter years Enter% Options
Nicaragua In kind 10.3
USD ($) Enter years
97
Till end of 2021 LIBOR will be the reference rate. Based on the quarterly review by CABEI's Assets and Liabilities Comitee (ALCO) this
will be adjusted towards the end of 2021. Potentially it will then change to SOFR.

--- Table 1 on Page 58 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | funding (i + ii + iii + iv + v + |  |  |  |  | 174.3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial instrument |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | (i) |  |  | Senior loans |  | US$60 million |  |  |  |  | 10 years |  |  |  | 3 |  |  |  |  | 0.75 % |  |  | 
(ii) |  |  | Subordinated loans |  |  | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  |  | 
(iii) |  |  | Equity |  |  | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % equity
return |  |  | 
 | (iv) |  |  | Guarantees |  | US$30 million |  |  |  |  | 10 years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(v) |  |  | Reimbursable grants |  |  | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) |  |  | Grants |  |  | US$84.3 million |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii |  |  | Results-based |  | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ) |  |  | payments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co-financing |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information |  |  |  |  | 94.1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of institution |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  |  |  | Seniority | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
CABEI |  |  |  |  |  | Senior
Loans |  |  | 42.8 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | 05
2 |  |  | 3.50%
fixed l97 |  |  |  | senior | 
Guatemala |  |  |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 9.3 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
Honduras |  |  |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 7 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
El Salvador |  |  |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 7.1 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
Nicaragua |  |  |  |  |  | In kind |  |  | 10.3 |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 57 OF 96
G
million Enter years Enter% Options
Costa Rica In kind 8.4
USD ($) Enter years
million Enter years Enter% Options
Panama In kind 4
USD ($) Enter years
million
Dominican Republic In kind 5.2
USD ($)
Amount Currency
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 268.4 million USD ($)
(d) Other financing
arrangements and The programme will also leverage in kind and cash local contribution to match with
contributions (max. 250 GCF grant contribution. The specific amount will be calculated once the criteria set
words, approximately 0.5 on grant facility are defined.
page)
C.2. Financing by component
Output Activity Indicative cost GCF financing Co-financing
million USD ($)
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD ($) Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
Component 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into
selected catchments
Output 1. 1.1 $ 6.1 M In-kind Countries’
$ 9.1 M Grants $ 3 M
Strengthened co-financing
technical capacity of
1.2 $ 1.4 M In-kind Countries’
local government, $ 2.7 M Grants $ 1.3 M
co-financing
farmers and rural
communities to 1.3 $ 2.6 M In-kind Countries’
implement EbA and co-financing
$ 3.3 M Grants $ 0.8 M
other adaptation
measures.
Output 2. 2.1 Countries’
$ 59.6 M $ 23.4 M Grants $ 36.2 M In-kind
Demonstration co-financing
adaptation
2.2 Countries’
interventions $ 6.7 M $ 2.8 M Grants $ 3.9 M In-kind
co-financing
implemented in rural
communities across 2.3 $ 30.3 M
seven target
Enter
catchments in the Dry $ 30.3 M Grants
amount
Corridor and Arid
Zones.
Output 3. Information 3.1 $ 3.6 M Countries’
$4.5 M Grants $ 0.9 M In-kind
on climate change co-financing
adaptation and its
3.2 $ 0.7 M Countries’
financing $2.4 M Grants $ 1.7 M In-kind
co-financing
disseminated across
the region and 3.3 $ 2 M
mainstreamed into Countries’
$ 3.2 M Grants $ 1.2 M In-kind
local and national co-financing
policies.
Component 2. Financing and implementation for EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across
selected catchments
Output 4. Financial 4.1 $ 1.1 M $ 1.1 M Grants
products and services
4.2 $ 60 M Senior CABEI
to finance EbA
(sub- Senior Loans
investments are $ 102.8 M $ 42.8M
activity loans
offered by Partner
4.2.1)

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
Costa Rica |  | In kind | 8.4 | million
USD ($) | Enter years
Enter years | Enter% | Options | 
Panama |  | In kind | 4 | million
USD ($) | Enter years
Enter years | Enter% | Options | 
Dominican Republic |  | In kind | 5.2 | million
USD ($) |  |  |  | 
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  | Amount |  |  | Currency |  |  | 
 |  | 268.4 |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  | 
 | (d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page) | The programme will also leverage in kind and cash local contribution to match with
GCF grant contribution. The specific amount will be calculated once the criteria set
on grant facility are defined. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output Activity Indicative cost GCF financing Co-financing
million USD ($)
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million USD ($) Instrument million USD Instrument Institutions
($)
Component 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into
selected catchments
Output 1. 1.1 $ 6.1 M In-kind Countries’
$ 9.1 M Grants $ 3 M
Strengthened co-financing
technical capacity of
1.2 $ 1.4 M In-kind Countries’
local government, $ 2.7 M Grants $ 1.3 M
co-financing
farmers and rural
communities to 1.3 $ 2.6 M In-kind Countries’
implement EbA and co-financing
$ 3.3 M Grants $ 0.8 M
other adaptation
measures.
Output 2. 2.1 Countries’
$ 59.6 M $ 23.4 M Grants $ 36.2 M In-kind
Demonstration co-financing
adaptation
2.2 Countries’
interventions $ 6.7 M $ 2.8 M Grants $ 3.9 M In-kind
co-financing
implemented in rural
communities across 2.3 $ 30.3 M
seven target
Enter
catchments in the Dry $ 30.3 M Grants
amount
Corridor and Arid
Zones.
Output 3. Information 3.1 $ 3.6 M Countries’
$4.5 M Grants $ 0.9 M In-kind
on climate change co-financing
adaptation and its
3.2 $ 0.7 M Countries’
financing $2.4 M Grants $ 1.7 M In-kind
co-financing
disseminated across
the region and 3.3 $ 2 M
mainstreamed into Countries’
$ 3.2 M Grants $ 1.2 M In-kind
local and national co-financing
policies.
Component 2. Financing and implementation for EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across
selected catchments
Output 4. Financial 4.1 $ 1.1 M $ 1.1 M Grants
products and services
4.2 $ 60 M Senior CABEI
to finance EbA
(sub- Senior Loans
investments are $ 102.8 M $ 42.8M
activity loans
offered by Partner
4.2.1) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 59 ---
Output |  | Activity | Indicative cost
million USD ($) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Amount
million USD ($) | Amount | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  | Instrumen |  |  | million USD |  |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ($) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component 1. Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | selected catchments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.
Strengthened
technical capacity of
local government,
farmers and rural
communities to
implement EbA and
other adaptation
measures. |  | 1.1 | $ 9.1 M | $ 6.1 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 3 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 1.2 | $ 2.7 M | $ 1.4 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 1.3 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 1.3 | $ 3.3 M | $ 2.6 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 0.8 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
Output 2.
Demonstration
adaptation
interventions
implemented in rural
communities across
seven target
catchments in the Dry
Corridor and Arid
Zones. |  | 2.1 | $ 59.6 M | $ 23.4 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 36.2 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 2.2 | $ 6.7 M | $ 2.8 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 3.9 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 2.3 | $ 30.3 M | $ 30.3 M |  | Grants |  |  | Enter
amount |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 3. Information
on climate change
adaptation and its
financing
disseminated across
the region and
mainstreamed into
local and national
policies. |  | 3.1 | $4.5 M | $ 3.6 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 0.9 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 3.2 | $2.4 M | $ 0.7 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 1.7 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 |  | 3.3 | $ 3.2 M | $ 2 M |  | Grants |  |  | $ 1.2 M |  |  | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing |  | 
 | Component 2. Financing and implementation for EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | selected catchments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 4. Financial
products and services
to finance EbA
investments are
offered by Partner |  | 4.1 | $ 1.1 M | $ 1.1 M |  | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 4.2
(sub-
activity
4.2.1) | $ 102.8 M | $ 60 M |  | Senior
loans |  |  | $ 42.8M |  |  | Senior
Loans | CABEI |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 59 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 58 OF 96
G
Financial Institutions 4.2 $ 30 M
(PFI), including PFI (sub-
$ 30 M Guarantees
access to EbA on- activity
lending funds and 4.2.2.)
support mechanisms.
4.3 $ 5.4 M $ 5.4 M Grants
M&E Costs (Million USD) $ 0.4 M $ 0.4 M Grants
Project Management Costs Countries’
$ 6.2 M $ 3.8 M Grants $ 2.4 M In-kind
(Million USD) co-financing
Contingency $ 0.7 M $ 0.7 M Grants
Indicative total GCF grant cost
$ 84.3M
(Million USD)
Indicative total cost (Million
$ 268.4 M $ 174.3 $ 94.1 M
USD)
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☒ No
☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes ☒ No ☒
152. Capacity building will be provided through several programme activities. Activity 4.3 will provide technical
assistance (TA) to strengthen technical capacity of CABEI network as well as non-regulated financial institutions
(partner financial institutions) to access and channel funds for small- and large-scale EbA investments. Under
this activity, selected partner financial institutions will receive capacity building services for the adequate
promotion and managing of EbA finance to end beneficiaries, such as data management for the measurement,
monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of climate risks and adaptation strategy impacts or effects, the
implementation of EbA-oriented awareness raising and marketing campaigns with end beneficiaries and the
development of financial and non-financial products and services geared towards EbA investments. Where
applicable, the programme will support the integration of external data management solutions to enhance EbA-
oriented MRV systems with existing IT infrastructure such as core banking systems. Activity 1.2 will train
commercial farmers on sustainable EbA practices, including silvopasture, agroforestry and sustainable land
management (SLM) (US$73,500 under sub-activity 1.2.2) as well as local communities on EbA and water-
efficient technologies, including visits to demonstration sites to facilitate farmer to farmer knowledge exchange
(US$147,000 under sub-activity 1.2.7). Local communities will also be trained on locally appropriate natural
resource-based businesses and climate-resilient livelihoods (Sub-activity 1.3.3; US$276,500).
153. Policy- and decision-makers at the municipal level will be trained on climate change impacts, including the
impacts of gender inequality, and the role of EbA in mitigating climate change impacts to support political and
technical decision-making for climate resilience in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones (Sub-activity 3.1.1;
US$147,000). This will be supported by building the capacity of these institutions to use the protocols and
criteria for the adoption of EbA and implementation of economic incentives for SLM (Sub-activity 3.3.3;
US$275,250). Finally, the technical capacity of community organisations, including women's groups, and local
champions will be strengthened for developing, revising and disseminating information products to support the
adoption of EbA and other resilient practices (Sub-activity 3.1.4: US$147,000).
154. Technology transfer will be conducted through Activity 3.1, where a regional knowledge management hub
will be established (US$247,500). Output 2 will also include on-the-ground implementation of EbA activities as
well as water- and resource efficient technologies (US$ $26,106,263).
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
D.1. Impact potential
155. The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement of GCF's fund-level adaptation objective
of increased climate-resilient sustainable development by facilitating wide-scale investment in EbA and water-
efficient technologies across the Dry Corridor of Central America and Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic. In
achieving this objective, the programme will contribute to several indicative assessment factors in the GCF
Performance Measurement Framework to ensure that GCF funds achieve the desired impact in the region. This
will include contributions to fund-level impacts A1.0 — increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI
access to EbA on-
lending funds and
support mechanisms. | 4.2
(sub-
activity
4.2.2.) | $ 30 M | $ 30 M | Guarantees |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 4.3 | $ 5.4 M | $ 5.4 M | Grants |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | M&E Costs (Million USD) |  | $ 0.4 M | $ 0.4 M | Grants |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Project Management Costs
(Million USD) |  | $ 6.2 M | $ 3.8 M | Grants |  |  | $ 2.4 M | In-kind | Countries’
co-financing | 
 | Contingency |  | $ 0.7 M | $ 0.7 M | Grants |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Indicative total GCF grant cost
(Million USD) |  | $ 84.3M |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Indicative total cost (Million
USD) |  | $ 268.4 M | $ 174.3 |  |  |  | $ 94.1 M |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No ☒ |  |  |  | 
152. Capacity building will be provided through several programme activities. Activity 4.3 will provide technical
assistance (TA) to strengthen technical capacity of CABEI network as well as non-regulated financial institutions
(partner financial institutions) to access and channel funds for small- and large-scale EbA investments. Under
this activity, selected partner financial institutions will receive capacity building services for the adequate
promotion and managing of EbA finance to end beneficiaries, such as data management for the measurement,
monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of climate risks and adaptation strategy impacts or effects, the
implementation of EbA-oriented awareness raising and marketing campaigns with end beneficiaries and the
development of financial and non-financial products and services geared towards EbA investments. Where
applicable, the programme will support the integration of external data management solutions to enhance EbA-
oriented MRV systems with existing IT infrastructure such as core banking systems. Activity 1.2 will train
commercial farmers on sustainable EbA practices, including silvopasture, agroforestry and sustainable land
management (SLM) (US$73,500 under sub-activity 1.2.2) as well as local communities on EbA and water-
efficient technologies, including visits to demonstration sites to facilitate farmer to farmer knowledge exchange
(US$147,000 under sub-activity 1.2.7). Local communities will also be trained on locally appropriate natural
resource-based businesses and climate-resilient livelihoods (Sub-activity 1.3.3; US$276,500).
153. Policy- and decision-makers at the municipal level will be trained on climate change impacts, including the
impacts of gender inequality, and the role of EbA in mitigating climate change impacts to support political and
technical decision-making for climate resilience in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones (Sub-activity 3.1.1;
US$147,000). This will be supported by building the capacity of these institutions to use the protocols and
criteria for the adoption of EbA and implementation of economic incentives for SLM (Sub-activity 3.3.3;
US$275,250). Finally, the technical capacity of community organisations, including women's groups, and local
champions will be strengthened for developing, revising and disseminating information products to support the
adoption of EbA and other resilient practices (Sub-activity 3.1.4: US$147,000).
154. Technology transfer will be conducted through Activity 3.1, where a regional knowledge management hub
will be established (US$247,500). Output 2 will also include on-the-ground implementation of EbA activities as
well as water- and resource efficient technologies (US$ $26,106,263). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.1. Impact potential |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 155. The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement of GCF's fund-level adaptation objective |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of increased climate-resilient sustainable development by facilitating wide-scale investment in EbA and water- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | efficient technologies across the Dry Corridor of Central America and Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic. In |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | achieving this objective, the programme will contribute to several indicative assessment factors in the GCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Performance Measurement Framework to ensure that GCF funds achieve the desired impact in the region. This |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | will include contributions to fund-level impacts A1.0 — increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 59 OF 96
G
most vulnerable people, communities and regions and A4.0 — increased resilience of ecosystems and
ecosystem services.
156. In addition to the fund-level impacts, the programme will contribute to three fund-level outcomes. The
specific contribution to each outcome is presented below. Additional details of how the programme interventions
interconnect to achieve these fund-level impacts and outcomes are presented in Section B.2. — Theory of
Change.
157. A5.0 — Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and
development. The programme will build the institutional capacity of local governments in the seven countries
to mainstream EbA and other climate-resilient practices into local development plans and policies. This will
include facilitating the establishment and operationalisation of financial incentives to promote investment in
climate change adaptation.
158. A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. The adoption of EbA
and water-efficient technologies across the target sites will reduce the impacts of climate change on vulnerable
communities, particularly regarding water scarcity. For example, the combination of improved land-use
practices and the adoption of natural resource-based businesses and alternative climate-resilient livelihoods —
with technical and financial support provided through the programme — will improve the adaptive capacity of
smallholder farming communities under future climate conditions, reducing the impacts of shifting rainfall
patterns and more regular droughts. The hydrological modelling undertaken for the basins in Honduras, Costa
Rica and the Dominican Republic allow for an estimation of the impact potential of this programme obtained
from the implementation of combined EbA interventions at the catchment level. The results of this analysis are
detailed in Annex 2, but in general terms, the analysis concludes that a combination of interventions results in
substantial improvements for all key hydrological variables in the catchment areas. Soil humidity increases from
large losses under the climate change base scenario to positive values under EbA combinations; this results
in benefits for water availability both for agriculture and forests that draw water from the top soil layers. The
changes in water production (surface water) and percolation (water recharge) show even greater benefits from
the implementation of this combination of EbA measures. These values are key for ensuring water availability
throughout the year from a scenario of significant water deficit under climate change conditions. Lastly, the
implementation of this combination of EbA measures also shows very positive impacts on soil erosion rates.
159. A8.0 — Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes. The proposed
programme includes a strong focus on knowledge and awareness as key concepts for building the resilience
of vulnerable communities. In particular, the programme will build an evidence base for the effectiveness of
EbA and disseminate this information to local decision-makers, private sector investors (including commercial
farmers) and local communities.
Adaptation Impact
160. The proposed programme's contribution to climate-resilient sustainable development will directly
benefit ~1,084,441 people (30% women) across seven catchment areas — one in each of the participating
countries through the proposed interventions. Approximately 134,694 of these people will also directly benefit
from the provision of financial mechanisms under Output 4 (lending and guarantee facilities). The programme
will also indirectly benefit 1,364,044 people across the region by facilitating increased access to finance for
natural resource-based businesses, mainstreaming EbA and other adaptation practices into national policies
and building the capacity of governments to implement EbA. The financial mechanisms established under this
programme will make ~US$189.2 million available for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies in the
region, introducing the potential for the restoration of ~142,500 hectares of degraded agricultural land through
the implementation of sustainable land use practices. In addition to the technical support and establishment of
financial mechanisms, the programme will actively: i) restore ~7,800 hectares of forested areas; ii) protect
~4,100 hectares of forest; iii) establish 36 tree nurseries; iv) establish ~1,900 hectares of agroforestry systems;
v) establish ~100 km of firebreaks, living barriers and superficial drainage solutions, respectively; and vi)
develop ~5,300 hectares of sustainable fuelwood sources. Finally, at least 100 community buildings will be
equipped with rainwater harvesting systems, 156 community-level rainwater reservoirs will be installed, 43 half-
orange kilns will be made communally available, and 38 community-level solar-powered water pumping stations
will be installed.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | most vulnerable people, communities and regions and A4.0 — increased resilience of ecosystems and | l
f
l
f
l
t
f
t
;
 | ecosystem services. | 
 |  | 
 | 156. In addition to the fund-level impacts, the programme will contribute to three fund-level outcomes. The | 
 | specific contribution to each outcome is presented below. Additional details of how the programme interventions | 
 | interconnect to achieve these fund-level impacts and outcomes are presented in Section B.2. — Theory of | 
 | Change. | 
 |  | 
 | 157. A5.0 — Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and | 
 | development. The programme will build the institutional capacity of local governments in the seven countries | 
 | to mainstream EbA and other climate-resilient practices into local development plans and policies. This wil | 
 | include facilitating the establishment and operationalisation of financial incentives to promote investment in | 
 | climate change adaptation. | 
 |  | 
 | 158. A7.0 — Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. The adoption of EbA | 
 | and water-efficient technologies across the target sites will reduce the impacts of climate change on vulnerable | 
 | communities, particularly regarding water scarcity. For example, the combination of improved land-use | 
 | practices and the adoption of natural resource-based businesses and alternative climate-resilient livelihoods — | 
 | with technical and financial support provided through the programme — will improve the adaptive capacity o | 
 | smallholder farming communities under future climate conditions, reducing the impacts of shifting rainfal | 
 | patterns and more regular droughts. The hydrological modelling undertaken for the basins in Honduras, Costa | 
 | Rica and the Dominican Republic allow for an estimation of the impact potential of this programme obtained | 
 | from the implementation of combined EbA interventions at the catchment level. The results of this analysis are | 
 | detailed in Annex 2, but in general terms, the analysis concludes that a combination of interventions results in | 
 | substantial improvements for all key hydrological variables in the catchment areas. Soil humidity increases from | 
 | large losses under the climate change base scenario to positive values under EbA combinations; this results | 
 | in benefits for water availability both for agriculture and forests that draw water from the top soil layers. The | 
 | changes in water production (surface water) and percolation (water recharge) show even greater benefits from | 
 | the implementation of this combination of EbA measures. These values are key for ensuring water availability | 
 | throughout the year from a scenario of significant water deficit under climate change conditions. Lastly, the | 
 | implementation of this combination of EbA measures also shows very positive impacts on soil erosion rates. | 
 |  | 
 | 159. A8.0 — Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes. The proposed | 
 | programme includes a strong focus on knowledge and awareness as key concepts for building the resilience | 
 | of vulnerable communities. In particular, the programme will build an evidence base for the effectiveness o | 
 | EbA and disseminate this information to local decision-makers, private sector investors (including commercia | 
 | farmers) and local communities. | 
 |  | 
 | Adaptation Impact | 
 | 160. The proposed programme's contribution to climate-resilient sustainable development will directly | 
 | benefit ~1,084,441 people (30% women) across seven catchment areas — one in each of the participating | 
 | countries through the proposed interventions. Approximately 134,694 of these people will also directly benefi | 
 | from the provision of financial mechanisms under Output 4 (lending and guarantee facilities). The programme | 
 | will also indirectly benefit 1,364,044 people across the region by facilitating increased access to finance for | 
 | natural resource-based businesses, mainstreaming EbA and other adaptation practices into national policies | 
 | and building the capacity of governments to implement EbA. The financial mechanisms established under this | 
 | programme will make ~US$189.2 million available for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies in the | 
 | region, introducing the potential for the restoration of ~142,500 hectares of degraded agricultural land through | 
 | the implementation of sustainable land use practices. In addition to the technical support and establishment o | 
 | financial mechanisms, the programme will actively: i) restore ~7,800 hectares of forested areas; ii) protec | 
 | ~4,100 hectares of forest; iii) establish 36 tree nurseries; iv) establish ~1,900 hectares of agroforestry systems | 
 | v) establish ~100 km of firebreaks, living barriers and superficial drainage solutions, respectively; and vi) | 
 | develop ~5,300 hectares of sustainable fuelwood sources. Finally, at least 100 community buildings will be | 
 | equipped with rainwater harvesting systems, 156 community-level rainwater reservoirs will be installed, 43 half- | 
 | orange kilns will be made communally available, and 38 community-level solar-powered water pumping stations | 
 | will be installed. | 

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 60 OF 96
G
D.2. Paradigm shift potential
161. The proposed programme will catalyse a paradigm shift in the regional approach to catchment and
water demand management in the Dry Corridor of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican
Republic. This shift will see governments promoting large-scale EbA, and the private sector (including
commercial farmers and entrepreneurs in rural communities) having access to the financial resources and
technical skills required to implement impactful adaptation interventions. The transformative effects of the
programme will be achieved through several innovative approaches.
162. The proposed EbA approach is inherently scalable, not only within the targeted catchments, but also
across the entire Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. The programme has been specifically designed to create an
enabling environment that capitalises on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support:
financial; policy; and technical. The details of these three areas of support are provided below.
Creation of an enabling environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies
163. The proposed programme will diversify financial systems in the region to create an enabling
environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies. This will be based on the establishment of
several financial instruments with varying entry-points to make climate finance more accessible to vulnerable
communities. In particular, the programme will establish: i) a trust fund by CABEI to support bottom-up
promotion of local EbA activities through non-reimbursable financing; ii) an EbA lending facility to channel funds
for small- and large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level; and iii) a guarantee facility
to further de-risk lending to the target beneficiary groups for PFIs. The enabling environment for investment will
be further enhanced by building the technical and institutional capacity of PFIs and nonregulated financial
institutions to finance and re-finance EbA and water-efficient technologies through all three of the proposed
financial instruments.
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
164. The enhanced local evidence-base for EbA that will be created through the knowledge hub and the
monitoring and evaluation of programme activities will support national and local-level decision-makers to
implement policies and incentives for EbA, in particular through improved valuation of natural capital. Decision-
makers within local government institutions will be trained to assess and update existing regulatory frameworks
and policies to facilitate the mainstreaming of EbA — including making provision for incentives programmes
targeting the adoption of EbA practices. Furthermore, training and technical capacity-building activities are
included in all programme components. By providing technical support to local governments for the adoption
and implementation of climate-resilient land management practices, the programme will help mainstream
climate adaptation into local-level development planning. This will include the development of catchment-level
land use plans, which will guide the adoption of EbA and sustainable land management practices beyond the
scope of the programme's on-the-ground interventions.
Technical support for the enhancement of regional knowledge and learning
165. The proposed programme includes several strategies for knowledge-sharing and learning. This support
will include the establishment of a regional knowledge hub through which tailored knowledge products will be
created and disseminated. This, combined with the strengthened policy frameworks described above, will
catalyse a shift in how decision-makers approach land-use and development planning. In addition, the social,
economic and environmental impacts of programme interventions, including the cost-effectiveness of EbA, will
be measured through ongoing monitoring and evaluation. These findings will be disseminated to policymakers
and decision-makers to catalyse further uptake of EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies, as well
as the enabling financing mechanisms and economic incentives. The programme will also build awareness of
the benefits of EbA and the associated financing mechanisms with private investors, as well as local and
national governments.
Upscaling of adaptation
166. The programme will catalyse the autonomous upscaling of EbA interventions and water-efficient
technologies by combining policy instruments (e.g. economic incentives such as payments for environmental
services) with accessible financial mechanisms (e.g. commercial loans, microfinance and guarantee funds).
These mechanisms will transform the financial landscape in the region to enable vulnerable groups to access
climate finance. Furthermore, the programme will promote the development of climate-resilient, natural

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential | 
 |  | :
l
l
l
t
l
l
l
f
l
.
l
 | 161. The proposed programme will catalyse a paradigm shift in the regional approach to catchment and | 
 | water demand management in the Dry Corridor of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican | 
 | Republic. This shift will see governments promoting large-scale EbA, and the private sector (including | 
 | commercial farmers and entrepreneurs in rural communities) having access to the financial resources and | 
 | technical skills required to implement impactful adaptation interventions. The transformative effects of the | 
 | programme will be achieved through several innovative approaches. | 
 |  | 
 | 162. The proposed EbA approach is inherently scalable, not only within the targeted catchments, but also | 
 | across the entire Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. The programme has been specifically designed to create an | 
 | enabling environment that capitalises on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support | 
 | financial; policy; and technical. The details of these three areas of support are provided below. | 
 |  | 
 | Creation of an enabling environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies | 
 | 163. The proposed programme will diversify financial systems in the region to create an enabling | 
 | environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies. This will be based on the establishment of | 
 | several financial instruments with varying entry-points to make climate finance more accessible to vulnerable | 
 | communities. In particular, the programme will establish: i) a trust fund by CABEI to support bottom-up | 
 | promotion of local EbA activities through non-reimbursable financing; ii) an EbA lending facility to channel funds | 
 | for small- and large-scale EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level; and iii) a guarantee facility | 
 | to further de-risk lending to the target beneficiary groups for PFIs. The enabling environment for investment wil | 
 | be further enhanced by building the technical and institutional capacity of PFIs and nonregulated financia | 
 | institutions to finance and re-finance EbA and water-efficient technologies through all three of the proposed | 
 | financial instruments. | 
 |  | 
 | Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies | 
 | 164. The enhanced local evidence-base for EbA that will be created through the knowledge hub and the | 
 | monitoring and evaluation of programme activities will support national and local-level decision-makers to | 
 | implement policies and incentives for EbA, in particular through improved valuation of natural capital. Decision- | 
 | makers within local government institutions will be trained to assess and update existing regulatory frameworks | 
 | and policies to facilitate the mainstreaming of EbA — including making provision for incentives programmes | 
 | targeting the adoption of EbA practices. Furthermore, training and technical capacity-building activities are | 
 | included in all programme components. By providing technical support to local governments for the adoption | 
 | and implementation of climate-resilient land management practices, the programme will help mainstream | 
 | climate adaptation into local-level development planning. This will include the development of catchment-leve | 
 | land use plans, which will guide the adoption of EbA and sustainable land management practices beyond the | 
 | scope of the programme's on-the-ground interventions. | 
 |  | 
 | Technical support for the enhancement of regional knowledge and learning | 
 | 165. The proposed programme includes several strategies for knowledge-sharing and learning. This suppor | 
 | will include the establishment of a regional knowledge hub through which tailored knowledge products will be | 
 | created and disseminated. This, combined with the strengthened policy frameworks described above, wil | 
 | catalyse a shift in how decision-makers approach land-use and development planning. In addition, the social, | 
 | economic and environmental impacts of programme interventions, including the cost-effectiveness of EbA, wil | 
 | be measured through ongoing monitoring and evaluation. These findings will be disseminated to policymakers | 
 | and decision-makers to catalyse further uptake of EbA and water- and resource-efficient technologies, as wel | 
 | as the enabling financing mechanisms and economic incentives. The programme will also build awareness o | 
 | the benefits of EbA and the associated financing mechanisms with private investors, as well as local and | 
 | national governments. | 
 |  | 
 | Upscaling of adaptation | 
 | 166. The programme will catalyse the autonomous upscaling of EbA interventions and water-efficient | 
 | technologies by combining policy instruments (e.g. economic incentives such as payments for environmenta | 
 | services) with accessible financial mechanisms (e.g. commercial loans, microfinance and guarantee funds) | 
 | These mechanisms will transform the financial landscape in the region to enable vulnerable groups to access | 
 | climate finance. Furthermore, the programme will promote the development of climate-resilient, natura | 

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 61 OF 96
G
resource-based businesses and alternative livelihoods at the community level. These businesses and
alternative livelihoods will be directly linked to EbA activities and the water-efficient technologies promoted by
the programme ensuring long-term sustainability. Through comprehensive monitoring, reporting and verification
of the benefits realised from the investment in EbA and other adaptation measures, the programme will
showcase EbA finance as an attractive alternative for investors, resulting in the expansion of these operations
outside the programme’s target areas. Indeed, the target programme areas represent only ~6% of the potential
demand for EbA finance in the whole of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. In addition, the regional replication
potential of the programme’s interventions is supported by the fact that similar interventions have been identified
as appropriate adaptation solutions in countries across the region. For example, an analysis of the Latin
America and Caribbean Region98 determined that, while it is difficult to prescribe specific national actions based
on regional analysis, a general strategy for adaptation, agricultural development and poverty reduction should
be based on: i) sustainable management of resources, including dissemination of proven technologies for
farmers; ii) improved access to resources, including policies that offer incentives for sustainable land
management; and iii) increased competitiveness of smaller farms, including lowering barriers to entry for small
businesses. Similarly, a number of initiatives across the region have implemented interventions similar to those
proposed in this programme, such as: i) restoring and reforesting degraded ecosystems to protect water
resources and stimulate aquifer recharge99; ii) introducing innovative agroforestry practices, and improving
irrigation and resource technologies100; iii) establishing a risk-sharing facility to support climate-smart agriculture
investments101; and iv) strengthening capacity in financial institutions to develop EbA loans and other
services102. The combined impact of the programme’s interventions will be to catalyse EbA beyond the
programme's target catchments — incorporating elements of sustainability, scalability, replicability, knowledge-
sharing, the creation of an enabling environment for private sector investors, and policy improvements in the
programme design.
D.3. Sustainable development
167. The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement of nine of the 17 UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The main contributions of the programme will be to: SDG 6 – Clean water and
sanitation; SDG 11 – Sustainable cities and communities; SDG 13 – Climate action; and SDG 15 – Life on land.
In addition, the programme will contribute to: SDG 1 – Poverty reduction; SDG 7 – Affordable and clean energy;
SDG 8 – Decent work and economic growth; SDG 9 – Industry, innovation and infrastructure; and SDG 10 –
Reduced inequalities. The expected positive environmental, economic, social and gender impacts of the
programme are outlined below, as well as the contribution of programme activities to the region’s recovery from
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Environmental co-benefits
168. The conservation and restoration of ~119,200 hectares of degraded and climate-vulnerable
ecosystems — through reforestation, forest management, agroforestry systems and sustainable fuelwood
practices — as well as the use of water- and resource-efficient technologies will result in several environmental
co-benefits. These co-benefits are listed below.
• EbA interventions, including the conservation and/or restoration of forests and agroforestry systems, will act as
natural buffers, controlling and mitigating the impact of floods, droughts, extreme temperatures and wildfires on
ecosystems in selected sites.
• Conserved and restored ecosystems will provide habitats for a range of terrestrial species, thereby improving
biodiversity on programme sites.
• EbA interventions under the programme will enhance soil fertility through accumulation of organic matter in
revegetated areas, as well as enhancing carbon storage capacity and reducing soil erosion at programme sites.
Conserved and revegetated areas will further enhance water infiltration and soil moisture retention, improving
98 Dixon, J., Gulliver, A. and Gibbon, D. 2001. Sistemas de Producción Agropecuaria y Pobreza: Cómo Mejorar los Medios de Subsistencia
de los Pequeños Agricultores en un Mundo Cambiante. Hall, M. (editor). FAO and the World Bank. Available online at:
http://www.fao.org/3/a-y1860s.pdf
99 Project: Upscaling climate resilience measures in the Dry Corridor agroecosystems of El Salvador (RECLIMA) (Food and Agriculture
Organisation of the United Nations (FAO); ~USD 128 million; ongoing)
100 Project: Agricultural and energy risk management in El Salvador: an internal strategy to cope with drought and food insecurity
(Asociación Coordinadora Indígena y Campesina de Agroforestería Comunitaria Centroamericana (ACICAFOC), World Bank; USD 1.8
million; completed)
101 Low-Emission Climate Resilient Agriculture Risk Sharing Facility for MSMEs (GCF, IDB; USD 158 million; ongoing)
102 Microfinance for Ecosystem-Based Adaptation (MEbA) (UNEP, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development — Colombia, Ministry of
Environment (MINAM) — Peru, Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MADS) — Colombia; ~USD 5 million; completed)

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
 | resource-based businesses and alternative livelihoods at the community level. These businesses and | l
l
l
 | alternative livelihoods will be directly linked to EbA activities and the water-efficient technologies promoted by | 
 | the programme ensuring long-term sustainability. Through comprehensive monitoring, reporting and verification | 
 | of the benefits realised from the investment in EbA and other adaptation measures, the programme wil | 
 | showcase EbA finance as an attractive alternative for investors, resulting in the expansion of these operations | 
 | outside the programme’s target areas. Indeed, the target programme areas represent only ~6% of the potentia | 
 | demand for EbA finance in the whole of the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. In addition, the regional replication | 
 | potential of the programme’s interventions is supported by the fact that similar interventions have been identified | 
 | as appropriate adaptation solutions in countries across the region. For example, an analysis of the Latin | 
 | America and Caribbean Region98 determined that, while it is difficult to prescribe specific national actions based | 
 | on regional analysis, a general strategy for adaptation, agricultural development and poverty reduction should | 
 | be based on: i) sustainable management of resources, including dissemination of proven technologies for | 
 | farmers; ii) improved access to resources, including policies that offer incentives for sustainable land | 
 | management; and iii) increased competitiveness of smaller farms, including lowering barriers to entry for smal | 
 | businesses. Similarly, a number of initiatives across the region have implemented interventions similar to those | 
 | proposed in this programme, such as: i) restoring and reforesting degraded ecosystems to protect water | 
 | resources and stimulate aquifer recharge99; ii) introducing innovative agroforestry practices, and improving | 
 | irrigation and resource technologies100; iii) establishing a risk-sharing facility to support climate-smart agriculture | 
 | investments101; and iv) strengthening capacity in financial institutions to develop EbA loans and other | 
 | services102. The combined impact of the programme’s interventions will be to catalyse EbA beyond the | 
 | programme's target catchments — incorporating elements of sustainability, scalability, replicability, knowledge- | 
 | sharing, the creation of an enabling environment for private sector investors, and policy improvements in the | 
 | programme design. | 
 | D.3. Sustainable development | 
 |  | .
l
 | 167. The proposed programme will contribute to the achievement of nine of the 17 UN Sustainable | 
 | Development Goals (SDGs). The main contributions of the programme will be to: SDG 6 – Clean water and | 
 | sanitation; SDG 11 – Sustainable cities and communities; SDG 13 – Climate action; and SDG 15 – Life on land | 
 | In addition, the programme will contribute to: SDG 1 – Poverty reduction; SDG 7 – Affordable and clean energy; | 
 | SDG 8 – Decent work and economic growth; SDG 9 – Industry, innovation and infrastructure; and SDG 10 – | 
 | Reduced inequalities. The expected positive environmental, economic, social and gender impacts of the | 
 | programme are outlined below, as well as the contribution of programme activities to the region’s recovery from | 
 | the COVID-19 pandemic. | 
 |  | 
 | Environmental co-benefits | 
 | 168. The conservation and restoration of ~119,200 hectares of degraded and climate-vulnerable | 
 | ecosystems — through reforestation, forest management, agroforestry systems and sustainable fuelwood | 
 | practices — as well as the use of water- and resource-efficient technologies will result in several environmenta | 
 | co-benefits. These co-benefits are listed below. | 
 | • EbA interventions, including the conservation and/or restoration of forests and agroforestry systems, will act as | 
 | natural buffers, controlling and mitigating the impact of floods, droughts, extreme temperatures and wildfires on | 
 | ecosystems in selected sites. | 
 | • Conserved and restored ecosystems will provide habitats for a range of terrestrial species, thereby improving | 
 | biodiversity on programme sites. | 
 | • EbA interventions under the programme will enhance soil fertility through accumulation of organic matter in | 
 | revegetated areas, as well as enhancing carbon storage capacity and reducing soil erosion at programme sites. | 
 | Conserved and revegetated areas will further enhance water infiltration and soil moisture retention, improving | 

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 62 OF 96
G
water quality and flow regimes in selected sites. The use of water-efficient technologies under the programme
will also contribute to improved water quality and availability by decreasing consumption.
Social co-benefits
169. The proposed programme is expected to yield substantial social co-benefits, mostly contributing to
social development by improving water and food security of vulnerable communities in the region. These co-
benefits are listed below.
• Through the adoption of water-efficient technologies such as rainwater harvesting systems, households will
have increased access to clean water for domestic use as well as for food production. This will also improve
the targeted communities' health by reducing the risk of water-borne diseases.
• Increased productivity of agricultural systems as a result of improved water supply will lead to enhanced food
security and nutritional health. The targeted communities' food security will also be improved in terms of
quantity, quality and diversity of food products through the adoption of agroforestry methods.
• The use of agroforestry species according to their suitability under future climate conditions and the promotion
of sustainable fuelwood practices will enhance the sustainability of local livelihoods, contributing to cultural
preservation in the region.
• The programme will reduce inequality and poverty through increased financial inclusion and improved economic
opportunities — especially for women. This will be achieved through interventions such as loans and risk
transfer facilities for EbA and water-efficient technologies, as well as with the promotion of natural resource-
based businesses and climate-resilient alternative livelihoods. Through its participatory and gender-sensitive
approach, the programme will specifically empower women and contribute to social cohesion.
Economic co-benefits
170. Improved access to water and the promotion of EbA will have several economic co-benefits for
vulnerable communities in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Dominican Republic's Arid Zones. These
are listed below.
• The implementation of water-efficient technologies — such as drip irrigation and rainwater harvesting — in rural
communities will improve agricultural practices, increasing agricultural productivity and associated income.
• Short-term work opportunities will be created for the implementation of ecosystem restoration and protection
activities under Output 2. Long-term employment opportunities will also be generated by the need for ongoing
operations and maintenance of ecological infrastructure established by the programme.
• The programme will provide opportunities to develop sustainable natural resource-based businesses and
alternative livelihoods in ecotourism and in the collection of non-timber forest products, taking climate change
scenarios and market demand for these products and services into account.
• Increased access to credit will further reduce financial barriers to implementing adaptation measures for the
targeted rural communities.
• The implementation of restoration activities and establishment of agroforestry systems under the programme
will yield a net present value (NPV) of ~US$15.8 million worth of benefits which would accrue to rural
communities over a 50-year period103.
Gender-sensitive development impact
171. Women in Central America tend to hold traditional, unpaid gender roles associated with domestic
responsibilities like motherhood, child- and elder-care as well as household management. These roles generally
also include water management and collection. During times of water scarcity or following natural disasters, the
burden of finding, collecting and storing water increases, with women bearing most of this additional
responsibility. The programme has been designed to ensure that interventions are implemented in a gender-
sensitive manner. The in-depth understanding of water-related challenges for women in the region (described
further in Section G.2) makes inclusion of gender considerations in programme design and implementation
critical for the long-term sustainability of programme interventions. By building on this understanding of water-
related challenges among women using gender-sensitive learning methods for adaptation, the proposed
programme will not only empower women within their communities and promote gender equality, but will also
ensure the effectiveness of programme interventions.
Contribution to recovery post COVID-19
103 based on an average regionwide NPV of ~US$1,140/ha under reasonably assumed conditions. Source: World Resources Institute. 2016. The
Economic Case for Landscape Restoration in Latin America. Available online at: https://files.wri.org/s3fs-public/
The_Economic_Case_for_Landscape_Restoration_in_Latin_America.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
 | water quality and flow regimes in selected sites. The use of water-efficient technologies under the programme | l
 | will also contribute to improved water quality and availability by decreasing consumption. | 
 |  | 
 | Social co-benefits | 
 | 169. The proposed programme is expected to yield substantial social co-benefits, mostly contributing to | 
 | social development by improving water and food security of vulnerable communities in the region. These co- | 
 | benefits are listed below. | 
 | • Through the adoption of water-efficient technologies such as rainwater harvesting systems, households will | 
 | have increased access to clean water for domestic use as well as for food production. This will also improve | 
 | the targeted communities' health by reducing the risk of water-borne diseases. | 
 | • Increased productivity of agricultural systems as a result of improved water supply will lead to enhanced food | 
 | security and nutritional health. The targeted communities' food security will also be improved in terms of | 
 | quantity, quality and diversity of food products through the adoption of agroforestry methods. | 
 | • The use of agroforestry species according to their suitability under future climate conditions and the promotion | 
 | of sustainable fuelwood practices will enhance the sustainability of local livelihoods, contributing to cultural | 
 | preservation in the region. | 
 | • The programme will reduce inequality and poverty through increased financial inclusion and improved economic | 
 | opportunities — especially for women. This will be achieved through interventions such as loans and risk | 
 | transfer facilities for EbA and water-efficient technologies, as well as with the promotion of natural resource- | 
 | based businesses and climate-resilient alternative livelihoods. Through its participatory and gender-sensitive | 
 | approach, the programme will specifically empower women and contribute to social cohesion. | 
 |  | 
 | Economic co-benefits | 
 | 170. Improved access to water and the promotion of EbA will have several economic co-benefits for | 
 | vulnerable communities in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Dominican Republic's Arid Zones. These | 
 | are listed below. | 
 | • The implementation of water-efficient technologies — such as drip irrigation and rainwater harvesting — in rural | 
 | communities will improve agricultural practices, increasing agricultural productivity and associated income. | 
 | • Short-term work opportunities will be created for the implementation of ecosystem restoration and protection | 
 | activities under Output 2. Long-term employment opportunities will also be generated by the need for ongoing | 
 | operations and maintenance of ecological infrastructure established by the programme. | 
 | • The programme will provide opportunities to develop sustainable natural resource-based businesses and | 
 | alternative livelihoods in ecotourism and in the collection of non-timber forest products, taking climate change | 
 | scenarios and market demand for these products and services into account. | 
 | • Increased access to credit will further reduce financial barriers to implementing adaptation measures for the | 
 | targeted rural communities. | 
 | • The implementation of restoration activities and establishment of agroforestry systems under the programme | 
 | will yield a net present value (NPV) of ~US$15.8 million worth of benefits which would accrue to rural | 
 | communities over a 50-year period103. | 
 |  | 
 | Gender-sensitive development impact | 
 | 171. Women in Central America tend to hold traditional, unpaid gender roles associated with domestic | 
 | responsibilities like motherhood, child- and elder-care as well as household management. These roles generally | 
 | also include water management and collection. During times of water scarcity or following natural disasters, the | 
 | burden of finding, collecting and storing water increases, with women bearing most of this additiona | 
 | responsibility. The programme has been designed to ensure that interventions are implemented in a gender- | 
 | sensitive manner. The in-depth understanding of water-related challenges for women in the region (described | 
 | further in Section G.2) makes inclusion of gender considerations in programme design and implementation | 
 | critical for the long-term sustainability of programme interventions. By building on this understanding of water- | 
 | related challenges among women using gender-sensitive learning methods for adaptation, the proposed | 
 | programme will not only empower women within their communities and promote gender equality, but will also | 
 | ensure the effectiveness of programme interventions. | 
 |  | 
 | Contribution to recovery post COVID-19 | 

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 63 OF 96
G
172. The COVID-19 pandemic is having severe negative impacts on healthcares systems and
economies globally, including further reducing the capacity of already-vulnerable Dry Corridor and Arid
Zone populations to respond to extreme climate events. With existing limited technical and financial
capacities, these populations will require even greater relief interventions as their COVID-19 recovery
efforts increase existing debt, while climate threats continue to build. There are a number of solutions in
priority sectors104 that can be integrated into countries’ recovery plans, depending on their respective
socio-economic and political circumstances. One of these high impact opportunity areas is to make
ecosystems, food and rural livelihoods resilient. The fragmentation and loss of natural habitats facilitates
the spread of infectious diseases, and the conservation of ecosystems to improve their connectivity can
dramatically reduce this risk. In addition, parallel threats posed to ecosystem health and food security by
climate change require cost-effective national interventions, while securing the availability of food will
directly impact the population’s ability to cope with future disease outbreaks. EbA is vital in this recovery
process as EbA measures are cost-effective and facilitate the sustainable provision of ecosystem services
that support the economic development of local populations while reducing loss from natural disasters,
improving people’s ability to cope with climate change and disease. The promotion and facilitation of EbA
by this programme will allow participating countries to undergo economic development that is not only
climate resilient, but also provides benefits that improve the ability to cope with disease, lessening the
potential impact of future outbreaks. The programme will also reduce these countries’ economic burdens
of post-COVID-19 recovery by providing external funding that will aid in the recovery of critical sectors,
including food production and water security, as well as tourism — the latter being related to landscape
restoration.
D.4. Needs of recipient
Vulnerability
173. The Dry Corridor region of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic are extremely
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change (see Sections B.1 and B.5)105. A large proportion of people in these
densely populated regions live in poverty, relying on subsistence agriculture and plantation forestry for their
livelihoods. Rising temperatures, shifting rainfall patterns and the increased intensity of droughts are predicted
to have several impacts on these vulnerable rural populations (see Section B.1), including: i) decreased
harvests of important crops; ii) shifting suitability of land area for important crops; iii) increased frequency of
wildfires; iv) increased frequency of pest outbreaks; and v) increased flooding after extreme rainfall events.
These impacts will result in, inter alia, increased poverty, food insecurity and migration from rural areas106.
Women in rural communities will be disproportionately affected as they are responsible for, inter alia, water
collection, food security and unpaid family care. Through the proposed programme, the vulnerability of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor will be reduced. This will be achieved through improved catchment and water
management, as well as increasing rural communities' access to financial resources to fund adaptation
interventions. The programme will engage women's organisations to ensure that women have access to
training, financial mechanisms and knowledge projects that will increase their resilience to climate change.
104 Identified in ‘Post-COVID-19 Recovery: how to articulate integrated responses to the health, economic and climate crises in Latin America and the
Caribbean’ developed by UNEP (2020)
105 Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, the Dominican Republic and El Salvador are among the fifteen most vulnerable countries in the world to climate
events. Kreft et al., 2016. Global Climate Risk Index 2017. Who suffers most from extreme weather events? Weather-related loss events in 2015 and
1996 to 2015. Bonn: Germanwatch e.V. Available online at: https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/publication/16411.pdf
106 Hannah et al., 2017. Regional modeling of climate change impacts on smallholder agriculture and ecosystems in Central America. Climatic Change
141: 29-45.

--- Table 1 on Page 65 ---
 | 172. The COVID-19 pandemic is having severe negative impacts on healthcares systems and | l
l
 | economies globally, including further reducing the capacity of already-vulnerable Dry Corridor and Arid | 
 | Zone populations to respond to extreme climate events. With existing limited technical and financia | 
 | capacities, these populations will require even greater relief interventions as their COVID-19 recovery | 
 | efforts increase existing debt, while climate threats continue to build. There are a number of solutions in | 
 | priority sectors104 that can be integrated into countries’ recovery plans, depending on their respective | 
 | socio-economic and political circumstances. One of these high impact opportunity areas is to make | 
 | ecosystems, food and rural livelihoods resilient. The fragmentation and loss of natural habitats facilitates | 
 | the spread of infectious diseases, and the conservation of ecosystems to improve their connectivity can | 
 | dramatically reduce this risk. In addition, parallel threats posed to ecosystem health and food security by | 
 | climate change require cost-effective national interventions, while securing the availability of food wil | 
 | directly impact the population’s ability to cope with future disease outbreaks. EbA is vital in this recovery | 
 | process as EbA measures are cost-effective and facilitate the sustainable provision of ecosystem services | 
 | that support the economic development of local populations while reducing loss from natural disasters, | 
 | improving people’s ability to cope with climate change and disease. The promotion and facilitation of EbA | 
 | by this programme will allow participating countries to undergo economic development that is not only | 
 | climate resilient, but also provides benefits that improve the ability to cope with disease, lessening the | 
 | potential impact of future outbreaks. The programme will also reduce these countries’ economic burdens | 
 | of post-COVID-19 recovery by providing external funding that will aid in the recovery of critical sectors, | 
 | including food production and water security, as well as tourism — the latter being related to landscape | 
 | restoration. | 
 | D.4. Needs of recipient | 
 | Vulnerability | .
l
 | 173. The Dry Corridor region of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic are extremely | 
 | vulnerable to the impacts of climate change (see Sections B.1 and B.5)105. A large proportion of people in these | 
 | densely populated regions live in poverty, relying on subsistence agriculture and plantation forestry for their | 
 | livelihoods. Rising temperatures, shifting rainfall patterns and the increased intensity of droughts are predicted | 
 | to have several impacts on these vulnerable rural populations (see Section B.1), including: i) decreased | 
 | harvests of important crops; ii) shifting suitability of land area for important crops; iii) increased frequency of | 
 | wildfires; iv) increased frequency of pest outbreaks; and v) increased flooding after extreme rainfall events. | 
 | These impacts will result in, inter alia, increased poverty, food insecurity and migration from rural areas106 | 
 | Women in rural communities will be disproportionately affected as they are responsible for, inter alia, water | 
 | collection, food security and unpaid family care. Through the proposed programme, the vulnerability of rura | 
 | communities in the Dry Corridor will be reduced. This will be achieved through improved catchment and water | 
 | management, as well as increasing rural communities' access to financial resources to fund adaptation | 
 | interventions. The programme will engage women's organisations to ensure that women have access to | 
 | training, financial mechanisms and knowledge projects that will increase their resilience to climate change. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 64 OF 96
G
Figure 16. Map showing relative climate change vulnerability of the seven countries.
Economic and social development
174. In the last decade, the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region — under which the seven beneficiary
countries fall — has achieved an average annual economic growth rate of 3.2%. This growth rate contributed
to an overall reduction in poverty and expansion of the middle class107. Currently, the seven beneficiary
countries are classified as low middle to high income, with medium to high Human Development Index (HDI)
scores (Table 2, Section B.5). Nonetheless, ~40% of households in the LAC region remain vulnerable and
economically insecure, with a notable wealth gap existing between urban and rural populations. This economic
insecurity is compounded by climate change impacts, including extreme rainfall and droughts. Economically
insecure households — including vulnerable rural communities — are often slow to recover effectively from
climate impacts108. Rural communities have little or no access to adaptation finance, which limits their adaptive
capacity. By improving access to financial resources for adaptation interventions, the adaptive capacity of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor will be increased. With increased financial and technical capacity, communities
will be able to withstand the negative impacts of severe droughts.
Absence of alternative sources of financing
175. The national budgets of Dry Corridor countries are limited, and poverty eradication and sustainable
development have been prioritised for funding over CCA. There is a high dependency on non-reimbursable
international support to meet CCA goals across the LAC region where the finance available for CCA is far below
what is required to meet adaptation needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economies of
these countries will leave even fewer funds available for CCA in the participating countries. In the absence of
donor support, the countries have limited financial resources to: i) implement large-scale EbA interventions at
the landscape level; ii) implement small-scale water- and resource-efficient technologies at community- or
107 Báez et al., 2017. Shaking up economic progress: Aggregate shocks in the Latin America and the Caribbean. International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank. Available online at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/28892/121664-WP-Final-Report-
Aggregate-Shocks-and-Economic-Progress-English-web.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
108 Báez et al., 2017.

--- Table 1 on Page 66 ---
 |  | l
f
f
t
 | Figure 16. Map showing relative climate change vulnerability of the seven countries. | 
 |  | 
 | Economic and social development | 
 | 174. In the last decade, the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region — under which the seven beneficiary | 
 | countries fall — has achieved an average annual economic growth rate of 3.2%. This growth rate contributed | 
 | to an overall reduction in poverty and expansion of the middle class107. Currently, the seven beneficiary | 
 | countries are classified as low middle to high income, with medium to high Human Development Index (HDI) | 
 | scores (Table 2, Section B.5). Nonetheless, ~40% of households in the LAC region remain vulnerable and | 
 | economically insecure, with a notable wealth gap existing between urban and rural populations. This economic | 
 | insecurity is compounded by climate change impacts, including extreme rainfall and droughts. Economically | 
 | insecure households — including vulnerable rural communities — are often slow to recover effectively from | 
 | climate impacts108. Rural communities have little or no access to adaptation finance, which limits their adaptive | 
 | capacity. By improving access to financial resources for adaptation interventions, the adaptive capacity of rura | 
 | communities in the Dry Corridor will be increased. With increased financial and technical capacity, communities | 
 | will be able to withstand the negative impacts of severe droughts. | 
 |  | 
 | Absence of alternative sources of financing | 
 | 175. The national budgets of Dry Corridor countries are limited, and poverty eradication and sustainable | 
 | development have been prioritised for funding over CCA. There is a high dependency on non-reimbursable | 
 | international support to meet CCA goals across the LAC region where the finance available for CCA is far below | 
 | what is required to meet adaptation needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economies o | 
 | these countries will leave even fewer funds available for CCA in the participating countries. In the absence o | 
 | donor support, the countries have limited financial resources to: i) implement large-scale EbA interventions a | 
 | the landscape level; ii) implement small-scale water- and resource-efficient technologies at community- or | 

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 65 OF 96
G
household-level; iii) establish effective financial mechanisms that develop climate-resilient, natural resource-
based livelihoods; and iv) strengthen policies, institutions and knowledge-sharing for the implementation of EbA
and economic incentives for EbA. The proposed programme will improve access to financial resources for
private sector and community-level adaptation interventions, as well as mainstream climate change adaption
into government planning and policy-making. This mainstreaming will enable the uptake of large-scale EbA and
other adaptation measures across Dry Corridor countries.
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
176. At the local level, vulnerable rural communities do not have the financial resources, knowledge base,
or technical capacity to: i) develop, implement, and maintain EbA and other adaptation measures; ii) co-ordinate
the frequent, cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder engagement that is necessary for EbA and other adaptation
interventions; and iii) capitalise on EbA interventions by generating new private income streams from the
ecosystem goods and services produced by restored climate-resilient ecosystems. The proposed programme
will provide access to technical and financial resources, knowledge products and government support
structures that will enable rural communities to adapt effectively to climate change in the Dry Corridor.
Country-specific allocation of GCF funds
177. Owing to the different socio-economic, development and environmental contexts of the different
participating countries, their respective needs for climate finance differ. With regards to the financial
mechanisms being established under Output 4 of the programme, the participating countries will likely
have different existing capacities for the uptake of EbA finance, meaning that some will be able to absorb
higher levels of finance than others. There will also be different levels of demand for EbA finance in each
country. The Regional Project Steering Committee will take into account all of these factors to agree on
concentration limits to be finally decided upon by CABEI and the financial institutions for investing GCF
Proceeds in a single country under the lending and guarantee facilities. The initial disbursement of the
loan will be equally distributed among the 7 countries and this will serve as a basis for decisions on
allocations of subsequent loan disbursements. With regards to GCF grant finance (Component 1), on-
the-ground interventions to be implemented in the target municipalities in each country were selected
based on extensive stakeholder engagement, availability of area for implementation and appropriateness
of interventions. A breakdown of grant proceeds distributed per country is provided in Annex 17.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Alignment with regional and national policies and strategies
178. Climate change adaptation is recognised as a priority in the Central American region and has been
integrated into several regional and national policies and strategies. Specifically, the programme is closely
aligned with several policies and strategies of the Central American Integration System (SICA)109, including
those listed below.
• The Regional Environmental Strategy Framework (2015–2020)110 provides a framework and objectives for the
regional integration of actions on, inter alia: i) climate change and risk management; ii) biodiversity; iii) water
resource management; and iv) finance for environmental management.
• The Regional Climate Change Strategy (2010)111 sets out projections for the impacts of climate change and
variability on the region and provides a framework for regional responses to climate change.
• The Regional Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in Mesoamerica (2003)112
articulates priorities for the regional integration of conservation and biodiversity management efforts.
• The Regional Strategic Program for Forest Ecosystems Management (2014)113 aims to support the sustainable
management and protection of forest ecosystems by promoting regional cooperation, through decentralised
governance and through recognising the multifunctional nature of these forests.
109 The Central American integration System (SICA) is a regional institution that facilitates diplomatic and economic integration between Central
American states. The members of the organisation are Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama and the Dominican
Republic. https://www.sica.int/sica/sica_breve_en.aspx
110 CCAD, 2014. Estrategia Regional Ambiental Marco 2015 – 2020 (ERAM). Available at: http://www.sica.int/download/?94463
111 CCAD, 2010. Estrategia Regional de Cambio Climático (ERCC). Available at: http://www.sica.int/ownload/?96568
112 CCAD, 2003. Estrategia Regional para la Conservación y Uso Sostenible de la Biodiversidad en Mesoamérica. Available at:
http://www.sica.int/download/?9032
113 CCAD & CAC, 2014. Programa Estratégico Regional para el Manejo de los Ecosistemas Forestales (Perfor): región de Centroamérica y República
Dominicana. Available at: http://www.sica.int/download/?96569

--- Table 1 on Page 67 ---
 | household-level; iii) establish effective financial mechanisms that develop climate-resilient, natural resource- | 
 | based livelihoods; and iv) strengthen policies, institutions and knowledge-sharing for the implementation of EbA | 
 | and economic incentives for EbA. The proposed programme will improve access to financial resources for | 
 | private sector and community-level adaptation interventions, as well as mainstream climate change adaption | 
 | into government planning and policy-making. This mainstreaming will enable the uptake of large-scale EbA and | 
 | other adaptation measures across Dry Corridor countries. | 
 |  | 
 | Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity | 
 | 176. At the local level, vulnerable rural communities do not have the financial resources, knowledge base, | 
 | or technical capacity to: i) develop, implement, and maintain EbA and other adaptation measures; ii) co-ordinate | 
 | the frequent, cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder engagement that is necessary for EbA and other adaptation | 
 | interventions; and iii) capitalise on EbA interventions by generating new private income streams from the | 
 | ecosystem goods and services produced by restored climate-resilient ecosystems. The proposed programme | 
 | will provide access to technical and financial resources, knowledge products and government support | 
 | structures that will enable rural communities to adapt effectively to climate change in the Dry Corridor. | 
 |  | 
 | Country-specific allocation of GCF funds | 
 | 177. Owing to the different socio-economic, development and environmental contexts of the different | 
 | participating countries, their respective needs for climate finance differ. With regards to the financial | 
 | mechanisms being established under Output 4 of the programme, the participating countries will likely | 
 | have different existing capacities for the uptake of EbA finance, meaning that some will be able to absorb | 
 | higher levels of finance than others. There will also be different levels of demand for EbA finance in each | 
 | country. The Regional Project Steering Committee will take into account all of these factors to agree on | 
 | concentration limits to be finally decided upon by CABEI and the financial institutions for investing GCF | 
 | Proceeds in a single country under the lending and guarantee facilities. The initial disbursement of the | 
 | loan will be equally distributed among the 7 countries and this will serve as a basis for decisions on | 
 | allocations of subsequent loan disbursements. With regards to GCF grant finance (Component 1), on- | 
 | the-ground interventions to be implemented in the target municipalities in each country were selected | 
 | based on extensive stakeholder engagement, availability of area for implementation and appropriateness | 
 | of interventions. A breakdown of grant proceeds distributed per country is provided in Annex 17. | 
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
Alignment with regional and national policies and strategies
178. Climate change adaptation is recognised as a priority in the Central American region and has been
integrated into several regional and national policies and strategies. Specifically, the programme is closely
aligned with several policies and strategies of the Central American Integration System (SICA)109, including
those listed below.
• The Regional Environmental Strategy Framework (2015–2020)110 provides a framework and objectives for the
regional integration of actions on, inter alia: i) climate change and risk management; ii) biodiversity; iii) water
resource management; and iv) finance for environmental management.
• The Regional Climate Change Strategy (2010)111 sets out projections for the impacts of climate change and
variability on the region and provides a framework for regional responses to climate change.
• The Regional Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in Mesoamerica (2003)112
articulates priorities for the regional integration of conservation and biodiversity management efforts.
• The Regional Strategic Program for Forest Ecosystems Management (2014)113 aims to support the sustainable
management and protection of forest ecosystems by promoting regional cooperation, through decentralised
governance and through recognising the multifunctional nature of these forests. |  | 

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 66 OF 96
G
• The Regional Agro-environmental and Health Strategy of Central America (2009–2024)114 aims to promote
sustainable, intersectoral management of agricultural ecosystems, with a focus on sustainable land
management, climate change, biodiversity, agro-environmental businesses and healthy lifestyles.
• The Food and Nutrition Security Policy for Central America and the Dominican Republic (2012–2032) promotes
regional action to develop sustainable, healthy and culturally-appropriate food and nutrition systems.
• The Regional Strategy for Sustainable and Climate-adapted Agriculture for the SICA region (2017)115 sets out
priorities for the agricultural sector in terms of climate change adaptation, sustainable livelihoods and the
development of sustainable, low-carbon agricultural landscapes.
• The Central American Strategy for Rural Development (2010–2030)116 seeks to build the capacity of rural
communities, government institutions and CSOs to promote innovative and inclusive rural development
mechanisms.
• The Strategy and Plan for Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) in Central America (2010)117
promotes regional cooperation for IWRM to improve water security and access to water and promote the
efficient and sustainable management of water resources.
179. In addition to this regional alignment, the programme contributes to achieving national priorities and
aligns with numerous policies in each of the seven target countries (summarised in Table 3). Further details of
the programme's alignment with the legal and policy framework of each country are given in Section 8 of Annex
2: Feasibility Study.
Table 3. Summary of national policies and strategies relating to climate change adaptation in each of the seven target countries.
Country Policy, strategy or plan
Guatemala National Climate Change Policy (2009)
Law on Climate Change (2013)
Framework Law to Regulate Vulnerability Reduction, Compulsory Adaptation to the
Effects of Climate Change and Mitigation of Greenhouse Gases (2013)
Nationally Determined Contribution (2017)
National Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation (nd)
Honduras Climate Change Act (2013)
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)
National Climate Change Strategy (nd)
Law and Action Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (nd)
El Salvador National Climate Change Strategy (2013)
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)
National Climate Change Plan (2015)
National Plan for Climate Change Adaptation (nd)
Nicaragua Nationally Determined Contribution (2018)
National Environmental Climate Change Strategy (nd)
National Policy for Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change and Creation of the
National Climate Change Response System (nd)
Plan for Adaptation to Climate Variability and Change in the Agricultural, Forestry and
Fishing Sectors (nd)
Costa Rica National Strategy on Climate Change and Plan of Action (2009)
Framework Law on Climate Change (2013)
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)
Panama National Climate Change Policy (2007)
National Climate Change Strategy (nd)
Nationally Determined Contribution (2016)
Dominican Republic National Strategy to Strengthen Human Resources and Skills for Advancing Green
Development with Low Emissions and Climate Resilience (2012)
National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agricultural Sector (2014–
2020)
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)
Climate Change Policy (2016)
114 COMISCA, CCAD & CAC. 2008. Estrategia Regional Agroambiental y de Salud de Centroamérica 2009-2024. Available at:
http://www.sica.int/download/?23679
115 CAC, 2017. Estrategia Agricultura Sostenible Adaptada al Clima para la región del SICA (2018-2030). Available at: http://apps.iica.int/observatorio-
girsa/Content/Archivos/Publicaciones/Archivos/10112017_EstrategiaASAC-CAC.pdf
116 CAC, 2010. Estrategia Centroamericana de Desarrollo Rural Territorial 2010 - 2030 (ECADERT). CAC, SICA, San José. Available at:
http://www.sica.int/download/?80566
117 CCAD, 2010. Estrategia y Plan para la Gestión Integrada de Recursos Hídricos en Centroamérica (ECGIRH). Available at:
http://www.sica.int/download/?79057

--- Table 1 on Page 68 ---
 | Country |  |  | Policy, strategy or plan | 
Guatemala |  |  | National Climate Change Policy (2009) |  | 
 |  |  | Law on Climate Change (2013) |  | 
 |  |  | Framework Law to Regulate Vulnerability Reduction, Compulsory Adaptation to the
Effects of Climate Change and Mitigation of Greenhouse Gases (2013) |  | 
 |  |  | Nationally Determined Contribution (2017) |  | 
 |  |  | National Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation (nd) |  | 
Honduras |  |  | Climate Change Act (2013) |  | 
 |  |  | Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015) |  | 
 |  |  | National Climate Change Strategy (nd) |  | 
 |  |  | Law and Action Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (nd) |  | 
El Salvador |  |  | National Climate Change Strategy (2013) |  | 
 |  |  | Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015) |  | 
 |  |  | National Climate Change Plan (2015) |  | 
 |  |  | National Plan for Climate Change Adaptation (nd) |  | 
Nicaragua |  |  | Nationally Determined Contribution (2018) |  | 
 |  |  | National Environmental Climate Change Strategy (nd) |  | 
 |  |  | National Policy for Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change and Creation of the
National Climate Change Response System (nd) |  | 
 |  |  | Plan for Adaptation to Climate Variability and Change in the Agricultural, Forestry and
Fishing Sectors (nd) |  | 
Costa Rica |  |  | National Strategy on Climate Change and Plan of Action (2009) |  | 
 |  |  | Framework Law on Climate Change (2013) |  | 
 |  |  | Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015) |  | 
Panama |  |  | National Climate Change Policy (2007) |  | 
 |  |  | National Climate Change Strategy (nd) |  | 
 |  |  | Nationally Determined Contribution (2016) |  | 
Dominican Republic |  |  | National Strategy to Strengthen Human Resources and Skills for Advancing Green
Development with Low Emissions and Climate Resilience (2012) |  | 
 |  |  | National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Agricultural Sector (2014–
2020) |  | 
 |  |  | Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2015) |  | 
 |  |  | Climate Change Policy (2016) |  | 

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 67 OF 96
G
National Adaptation Plan (nd)
Capacity of the Accredited and Executing Entities to deliver
180. The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) will be the Accredited Entity (AE) for this
programme. CABEI has supported economic and social development in the region since its establishment in
1960, including channelling more than US$600 million to support MSMEs in the agricultural sector. They have
worked extensively in all the target countries and are acting as the AE for the GCF project 'Productive
Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change' (CAMBio II)118 which was approved in 2018. CABEI also
served as the Executing Agency on the original CAMBio119 project funded by GEF, which aimed to assist
MSMEs in contributing to sustainable development and the protection of biodiversity through their products and
services.
181. Through a network of intermediate financial and microfinance institutions, CABEI has achieved a
comprehensive regional footprint, including having a significant presence in rural areas that will be targeted by
this programme. In addition, through their large portfolio of projects and programmes, CABEI has developed
strong relationships with local and national decision-makers. The extensive experience and proven track record
of the AE will enable them to support and equip the Executing Entity to effectively execute the programme and
contribute to its successful implementation.
The programme will be co-executed by three entities: CABEI, FAO and CCAD. FAO has been working
for more than ten years to expand climate investments for the agricultural sectors, building its partnership with
182.the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green Climate Fund (GCF) with a view to fostering climate-
resilient development trajectories. As an accredited entity to the GCF, FAO has the capacity and expertise to
mobilize, through its funding proposals, large flows of climate finance for climate change mitigation and
adaptation initiatives and to act as an implementation partner for grants granted under the GCF Readiness
Support Programme. As FAO's GCF portfolio is growing exponentially, the Organization is prepared to assist
countries whose ambitions for climate action are growing. FAO acts as an implementing entity in relation to
GCF grants for small and medium-sized projects (up to USD 250 million) with low and medium levels of
environmental and social risk and assists Member States in the development and implementation of country-
led projects. The Central American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD). This entity has
implemented a number of initiatives similar to the proposed programme in the region, using funding from the
GEF, the European Union, USAID, as well as through bilateral agreements with individual countries. In addition,
it has acted as the main regional coordination entity for the development and implementation of the Regional
Environmental Strategy for Central America. The Council of Ministers, which acts as the highest authority within
the CCAD, will ensure that the that programme implementation proceeds ensuring alignment with the national
priorities and visions of each of the participating countries.
Stakeholder Engagement
183. The development of this programme was initiated by the Council of Ministers of the CCAD, which
includes members from each of the seven target countries. In addition to engaging with the CCAD, regional
and national stakeholder consultations have been conducted throughout programme development. Initial
consultations took place in June–July 2016 in six countries120. Through these national workshops, priorities and
focus areas for the programme were identified. The draft Concept Note was circulated, and further consultations
were conducted in October–November 2017 with representatives from each country. A regional workshop was
also held in October 2017 to obtain input on the draft Concept Note from representatives of governments and
NGOs in the region. These inputs contributed to refining the programme concept and incorporating lessons
learned from previous initiatives in the region.
184. Further consultations took place at the International Central American Dry Corridor Symposium in
October 2018 and in each of the target countries from December 2018 to March 2019. These consultations
118 GCF. 2018. Funding Proposal: Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change. Available at:
https://www.greenclimate.fund/projects/fp097
119 Central American Markets for Biodiversity (CAMBio): Mainstreaming biodiversity conservation and sustainable use within Micro, Small and Medium-
sized Enterprise Development and Financing. Implemented from 2006–2017. Further information available at: https://www.thegef.org/project/central-
american-markets-biodiversity-cambio-mainstreaming-biodiversity-conservation-and
120 Nicaragua was incorporated into the programme after its inception and was therefore not included in the initial consultations.

--- Table 1 on Page 69 ---
 | National Adaptation Plan (nd)

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 68 OF 96
G
contributed to the finalisation of the Concept Note and the development of this Funding Proposal. Final national
consultations were conducted in October 2019 during the concluding phase of programme development. These
consultations were conducted in communities in each of the seven target catchments to get community inputs
on their needs and locally-appropriate interventions. The outputs of these consultations are presented in Annex
7.
185. As for financial sector stakeholders the CABEI team counts with information of 4 financial institutions
in Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Panama, 3 of which participate in the current UN MEbA
project and are actively involved in distributing targeted EbA Finance in the programme areas. Further
consultations are underway with up to 50 financial institutions out of a total of 134 in the programme areas via
interviews and online surveys with field personnel. Focus is on observed end beneficiaries’ EbA-aligned
agricultural practices in programme areas, the panorama of offered financial and non-financial products and
services potentially adjusted for EbA finance as well as appetite for participation in the programme.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency of programme interventions
186. The programme targets interventions on multi-stakeholder levels in order to prepare for EbA
mainstreaming and upscaling by combining forces between public and private actors in selected areas. While
US$84.3 million in grants are geared towards concrete and tangible benefits for an estimated total of 2,228,147
direct and indirect beneficiaries (outputs 1-3) via the strengthening of stakeholders’ capacities to better
understand, develop and implement EbA solutions, a further US$102.8 million in debt finance and US$ 30
million as guarantee facility leveraging further US$ 129,974,200 will build upon such created capacities, with
an estimated number of 134,694 direct beneficiaries and 83,544 indirect beneficiaries (total of 218,238 for
lending and guarantee facilities). Smallholder farming units, rural community projects and commercial farms
are expected to access loans to promote EbA in their regions121. The senior loans that make up the debt finance
will be supported by a guarantee fund, which will de-risk the loans, creating incentives for financial institutions
to engage in EbA finance, for which there exist no or only limited offerings as of today. While the grant solutions
provide the basis for the establishment and expansion of a body of knowledge in target regions, the debt
solutions will be managed fully self-sustained on a commercial basis, targeting potential further investment into
the mechanisms created. Hence, the programme forsees – considering the overall costs considered throughout
all components, as well as direct (financial) and indirect (economic) benefits resulting from their implementation
– an FIRR of 10.1% with a NPV of US$ 353,851,655 and an EIRR of 17.5% with an NPV of US$ 2,005,009,949
(both NPV discounted at an average of issued public bond rates as alternative investment).
Application of best practices
187. This programme draws on best practices from ground-breaking projects in the region and further afield.
One of these is the Microfinance for Ecosystem-Based Adaptation (MEbA) project which informed the selection
of appropriate EbA solutions for the proposed programme. Phase one of the project (MEbA I) was implemented
in Colombia and Peru, while activities were expanded to Ecuador, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Dominican
Republic, Senegal and Benin during phase two (MEbA II). EbA solutions drawn from MEbA will be supported
by implementing locally appropriate water- and resource-efficient technologies, such as rainwater harvesting
systems and half-orange kilns, for adapting to the increasing impacts of climate change, which were selected
through consultations with local communities. Furthermore, effective methods for increasing commercial and
smallholder farmers' access to financial resources for adaptation were drawn from the MEbA project as well as
the Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II) and projects. These methods
were applied to the design of activities under Component 2, in particular, to ensure the sustainable use of
financial resources for adaptation over the long term. Lessons learned from numerous baseline investments
into climate change adaptation in the seven participating countries in the Central American Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic were also used to guide the design of all programme interventions. Such
lessons include appropriate mechanisms for ensuring that all programme activities are implemented in a
participatory, gender-sensitive and sustainable way. Details on all best practices and lessons learned relevant
to the programme are presented in Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.
188. The primary international best practices and lessons learned identified for the programme include:
121 Assuming 5 members per household

--- Table 1 on Page 70 ---
contributed to the finalisation of the Concept Note and the development of this Funding Proposal. Final national
consultations were conducted in October 2019 during the concluding phase of programme development. These
consultations were conducted in communities in each of the seven target catchments to get community inputs
on their needs and locally-appropriate interventions. The outputs of these consultations are presented in Annex
7.
185. As for financial sector stakeholders the CABEI team counts with information of 4 financial institutions
in Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Panama, 3 of which participate in the current UN MEbA
project and are actively involved in distributing targeted EbA Finance in the programme areas. Further
consultations are underway with up to 50 financial institutions out of a total of 134 in the programme areas via
interviews and online surveys with field personnel. Focus is on observed end beneficiaries’ EbA-aligned
agricultural practices in programme areas, the panorama of offered financial and non-financial products and
services potentially adjusted for EbA finance as well as appetite for participation in the programme. |  | 
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness | 
 | Cost-effectiveness and efficiency of programme interventions | t
t
.
f
t
 | 186. The programme targets interventions on multi-stakeholder levels in order to prepare for EbA | 
 | mainstreaming and upscaling by combining forces between public and private actors in selected areas. While | 
 | US$84.3 million in grants are geared towards concrete and tangible benefits for an estimated total of 2,228,147 | 
 | direct and indirect beneficiaries (outputs 1-3) via the strengthening of stakeholders’ capacities to better | 
 | understand, develop and implement EbA solutions, a further US$102.8 million in debt finance and US$ 30 | 
 | million as guarantee facility leveraging further US$ 129,974,200 will build upon such created capacities, with | 
 | an estimated number of 134,694 direct beneficiaries and 83,544 indirect beneficiaries (total of 218,238 for | 
 | lending and guarantee facilities). Smallholder farming units, rural community projects and commercial farms | 
 | are expected to access loans to promote EbA in their regions121. The senior loans that make up the debt finance | 
 | will be supported by a guarantee fund, which will de-risk the loans, creating incentives for financial institutions | 
 | to engage in EbA finance, for which there exist no or only limited offerings as of today. While the grant solutions | 
 | provide the basis for the establishment and expansion of a body of knowledge in target regions, the deb | 
 | solutions will be managed fully self-sustained on a commercial basis, targeting potential further investment into | 
 | the mechanisms created. Hence, the programme forsees – considering the overall costs considered throughou | 
 | all components, as well as direct (financial) and indirect (economic) benefits resulting from their implementation | 
 | – an FIRR of 10.1% with a NPV of US$ 353,851,655 and an EIRR of 17.5% with an NPV of US$ 2,005,009,949 | 
 | (both NPV discounted at an average of issued public bond rates as alternative investment). | 
 |  | 
 | Application of best practices | 
 | 187. This programme draws on best practices from ground-breaking projects in the region and further afield | 
 | One of these is the Microfinance for Ecosystem-Based Adaptation (MEbA) project which informed the selection | 
 | of appropriate EbA solutions for the proposed programme. Phase one of the project (MEbA I) was implemented | 
 | in Colombia and Peru, while activities were expanded to Ecuador, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Dominican | 
 | Republic, Senegal and Benin during phase two (MEbA II). EbA solutions drawn from MEbA will be supported | 
 | by implementing locally appropriate water- and resource-efficient technologies, such as rainwater harvesting | 
 | systems and half-orange kilns, for adapting to the increasing impacts of climate change, which were selected | 
 | through consultations with local communities. Furthermore, effective methods for increasing commercial and | 
 | smallholder farmers' access to financial resources for adaptation were drawn from the MEbA project as well as | 
 | the Productive Investment Initiative for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II) and projects. These methods | 
 | were applied to the design of activities under Component 2, in particular, to ensure the sustainable use o | 
 | financial resources for adaptation over the long term. Lessons learned from numerous baseline investments | 
 | into climate change adaptation in the seven participating countries in the Central American Dry Corridor and | 
 | Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic were also used to guide the design of all programme interventions. Such | 
 | lessons include appropriate mechanisms for ensuring that all programme activities are implemented in a | 
 | participatory, gender-sensitive and sustainable way. Details on all best practices and lessons learned relevan | 
 | to the programme are presented in Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study. | 
 |  | 
 | 188. The primary international best practices and lessons learned identified for the programme include: | 

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 69 OF 96
G
• increasing commercial and smallholder farmers' capacity and access to finance for implementing EbA solutions
and promoting the uptake of water- and resource-efficient technologies to respond to the impacts of climate
change;
• effectively managing the available financial and human resources to ensure the efficient and cost-effective
implementation of programme interventions;
• building an effective evidence base drawing on relevant past and ongoing initiatives to inform the
implementation of a suite of complementary EbA strategies, promote the uptake of new financial mechanisms
and resources for adaptation and support capacity-building interventions;
• undertaking regular monitoring and evaluation of adaptation interventions during the implementation phase to
ensure that the most effective solutions are being implemented and that an adaptive management approach is
being applied that considers changing climatic conditions; and
• engaging and collaborating extensively with all relevant programme stakeholders within each of the seven
participating countries will encourage buy-in from national- and local-level decision-makers therefore
contributing to the sustainability of proposed adaptation interventions over the long term.
ç

--- Table 1 on Page 71 ---
 | • increasing commercial and smallholder farmers' capacity and access to finance for implementing EbA solutions | 
 | and promoting the uptake of water- and resource-efficient technologies to respond to the impacts of climate | 
 | change; | 
 | • effectively managing the available financial and human resources to ensure the efficient and cost-effective | 
 | implementation of programme interventions; | 
 | • building an effective evidence base drawing on relevant past and ongoing initiatives to inform the | 
 | implementation of a suite of complementary EbA strategies, promote the uptake of new financial mechanisms | 
 | and resources for adaptation and support capacity-building interventions; | 
 | • undertaking regular monitoring and evaluation of adaptation interventions during the implementation phase to | 
 | ensure that the most effective solutions are being implemented and that an adaptive management approach is | 
 | being applied that considers changing climatic conditions; and | 
 | • engaging and collaborating extensively with all relevant programme stakeholders within each of the seven | 
 | participating countries will encourage buy-in from national- and local-level decision-makers therefore | 
 | contributing to the sustainability of proposed adaptation interventions over the long term. | 

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 70 OF 96
G
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development
E.2. Core indicator targets
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to
Annual Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
be reduced or avoided (mitigation
and cross-cutting only)
Lifetime Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq
(a) Total project financing N/A USD
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 (b) Requested GCF amount N/A USD
eq, defined as total investment
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions N/A
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross- (d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) N/A Choose an item.
cutting only)
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed
N/A Choose an item.
(e = b / c)
(f) Total finance leveraged N/A USD
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the (g) Public source co-financed N/A USD
proposed project/programme as a
(h) Private source finance leveraged N/A USD
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) N/A
private sources (mitigation and (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) N/A
cross-cutting only)
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) N/A
1,084,441 TOTAL
325,335 females (30%)
Direct
759,106 males
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries, 1,364,044 TOTAL
(disaggregated by sex) 545,621 females (40%)
Indirect
818,423 males
By country Data provided in Annex 17
Direct
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
Indirect
(disaggregated by sex)
For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17.

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 |  | 
 | E.1. Paradigm shift objectives | 
☐ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☒ Increased climate resilient sustainable development |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 72 ---
 | E.2. Core indicator targets |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon |  | Annual |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be reduced or avoided (mitigation |  | Lifetime |  | Click here to enter text. t CO2 eq |  | 
 | and cross-cutting only) |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) |  |  |  | (a) Total project financing |  | N/A USD | 
 |  |  |  | (b) Requested GCF amount |  | N/A USD | 
 |  |  |  | (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | (d) Estimated cost per t CO2eq (d = a / c) |  | N/A Choose an item. | 
 |  |  |  | (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2eq removed
(e = b / c) |  | N/A Choose an item. | 
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only) |  |  |  | (f) Total finance leveraged |  | N/A USD | 
 |  |  |  | (g) Public source co-financed |  | N/A USD | 
 |  |  |  | (h) Private source finance leveraged |  | N/A USD | 
 |  |  |  | (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | (k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) |  | N/A | 
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  | 1,084,441 TOTAL
325,335 females (30%)
759,106 males |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  | 1,364,044 TOTAL
545,621 females (40%)
818,423 males |  | 
 |  |  | By country Data provided in Annex 17 |  |  |  | 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) |  |  | Direct |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Indirect |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | For a multi-country proposal, leave blank and provide the data per country in annex 17. |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 72 ---
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only)

--- Table 4 on Page 72 ---
E.2.3. Expected volume of
finance to be leveraged by the
proposed project/programme as a
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and
private sources (mitigation and

--- Table 5 on Page 72 ---
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex)

--- Table 6 on Page 72 ---
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex)

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 71 OF 96
G
E.3. Fund-level impacts
Means of
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Target Assumptions
Results
(MoV)
Mid-term Final
A1.0 Increased A1.2 Number of PFI Financial and EbA focused Commercial: Commercial: Farmers receiving EbA
resilience and males and females Programmatic finance is 700 females 3,500 females focussed finance will use
enhanced benefiting from the reports (related to limited to 1,300 males 6,500 males it for nature-based
livelihoods of the adoption of the lending isolated business and climate-
most vulnerable diversified, climate facilities); and examples in El Subsistence: Subsistence: resilient livelihood
people, resilient livelihood Salvador and 7,000 females 59,500 options
communities and options (including Site surveys Guatemala. 13,000 males females
regions fisheries, (related to the Stronger 110,500
agriculture, tourism, lending facilities) baseline to be males
etc.) determined at
inception phase
A4.0 Improved A4.1 Implementation 0 ha of new 2,000 ha of 4,160 ha of Sustainable land
resilience of Coverage/scale of reports; and forest forest protection forest management practices
ecosystems and ecosystems protection zones across all protection will improve the provision
ecosystem protected and Site surveys and zones seven target zones across of ecosystem services,
services stregnthened in remote sensing catchments. all seven including provision of
response to climate data. target water and agricultural
variability and catchments. productivity
change
0 ha of new 900 ha of 1,820 ha of
natural forest natural forest in natural forest
major recharge in major
areas and recharge
riparian zones areas and
in all seven riparian zones
target in all seven
catchments. target
catchments.
0 ha of restored 2,500 ha of 5,170 ha of
forest restored restored
forested areas forested areas
across all seven across all
target seven target
catchments. catchments.
0 ha of restored 400 ha of pine 820 ha of pine
pine forest forests restored forests
in Guatemala, restored in
Honduras and Guatemala,
Nicaragua. Honduras and
Nicaragua.
600 km of living 1,293 km of
0 km of living
fence living fence
fence
agroforestry agroforestry agroforestry
systems systems across systems
all seven target across all
catchments. seven target
catchments.
0 ha of new 300 ha of 612 ha of
agroforestry agroforestry agroforestry
systems for systems for systems for
natural shade natural shade in natural shade
coffee in coffee
plantations in plantations in
Guatemala, Guatemala,
Honduras, Honduras,
Nicaragua and Nicaragua and
Costa Rica. Costa Rica.

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
 | E.3. Fund-level impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline | Target |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term | Final |  | 
A1.0 Increased
resilience and
enhanced
livelihoods of the
most vulnerable
people,
communities and
regions |  | A1.2 Number of
males and females
benefiting from the
adoption of
diversified, climate
resilient livelihood
options (including
fisheries,
agriculture, tourism,
etc.) | PFI Financial and
Programmatic
reports (related to
the lending
facilities); and
Site surveys
(related to the
lending facilities) |  |  | EbA focused
finance is
limited to
isolated
examples in El
Salvador and
Guatemala.
Stronger
baseline to be
determined at
inception phase | Commercial:
700 females
1,300 males
Subsistence:
7,000 females
13,000 males | Commercial:
3,500 females
6,500 males
Subsistence:
59,500
females
110,500
males | Farmers receiving EbA
focussed finance will use
it for nature-based
business and climate-
resilient livelihood
options | 
A4.0 Improved
resilience of
ecosystems and
ecosystem
services |  | A4.1
Coverage/scale of
ecosystems
protected and
stregnthened in
response to climate
variability and
change | Implementation
reports; and
Site surveys and
remote sensing
data. |  |  | 0 ha of new
forest
protection
zones
0 ha of new
natural forest
0 ha of restored
forest
0 ha of restored
pine forest
0 km of living
fence
agroforestry
systems
0 ha of new
agroforestry
systems for
natural shade | 2,000 ha of
forest protection
zones across all
seven target
catchments.
900 ha of
natural forest in
major recharge
areas and
riparian zones
in all seven
target
catchments.
2,500 ha of
restored
forested areas
across all seven
target
catchments.
400 ha of pine
forests restored
in Guatemala,
Honduras and
Nicaragua.
600 km of living
fence
agroforestry
systems across
all seven target
catchments.
300 ha of
agroforestry
systems for
natural shade in
coffee
plantations in
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Nicaragua and
Costa Rica. | 4,160 ha of
forest
protection
zones across
all seven
target
catchments.
1,820 ha of
natural forest
in major
recharge
areas and
riparian zones
in all seven
target
catchments.
5,170 ha of
restored
forested areas
across all
seven target
catchments.
820 ha of pine
forests
restored in
Guatemala,
Honduras and
Nicaragua.
1,293 km of
living fence
agroforestry
systems
across all
seven target
catchments.
612 ha of
agroforestry
systems for
natural shade
in coffee
plantations in
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Nicaragua and
Costa Rica. | Sustainable land
management practices
will improve the provision
of ecosystem services,
including provision of
water and agricultural
productivity | 

--- Table 2 on Page 73 ---
Expected
Results

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 72 OF 96
G
0 km of 600 km of 1,280 km of
diversified living diversified living diversified
fence fence living fence
silvopasture silvopasture silvopasture
systems across systems
all seven target across all
catchments. seven target
catchments.
600 ha of 1,280 ha of
0 ha of new
silvopasture silvopasture
silvopasture
systems using systems using
systems
individual trees individual
across all seven trees across
target all seven
catchments. target
catchments.
E.4. Fund-level outcomes
Means of Target Assumptions
Expected Outcomes Indicator Verification Baseline
(MoV) Mid-term) Final
Municipal No new 15 36 Developing
policy incentives municipalitie municipalitie accounts
documents developed for s with at s with at profiles of
and action investment in least Level 1 least Level 2 natural capital,
plans. EbA policy uptake policy developing
uptake guidelines for
A5.0 Strengthened institutional A5.1 Institutional and Key informant economic
and regulatory systems for regulatory systems that interviews incentives and
climate-responsive planning improve incentives for training local
and development climate resilience and their Policy uptake governments will
effective implementation scorecard 122 lead to incentive
programmes
being integrated
Interviews with
into policies.
PMU
Household 0 10,000 36,482 Financial
surveys investments investments investments mechanisms
123 made into made into made into developed by
Digital EbA EbA the programme
EbA
management interventions interventions are suitable for
interventions
A7.1 Use by vulnerable reports on with an with an vulnerable
with an
households, communities, EbA capacity expected expected communities to
expected
businesses and public- index verified increase in increase in access finance
increase in
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive sector services of Fund- by PFIs productivity / productivity / for EbA and
productivity
capacity and reduced exposure supported tools
/hectare (in
hectare (in hectare (in water/resource-
to climate risks instruments, strategies and relation to a relation to a efficient
relation to a
activities to respond to control control technologies.
control
climate change and population) population)
population) of
variability of at least of at least
at least 5%,
7.5%, of 10%, of
of which:
which: which:
• 0 are • 1,000 are • 2,094 are
commercial
commercia commerci
operators.
122 This policy uptake scorecard will have four levels and will measure the extent of use of the incentives for EbA in relevant local government policies
and plans.
Level 0: Incentives not integrated meaningfully into municipal policy.
Level 1: Incentives narrative woven through the draft municipal policy – including for the payment of ecosystem services (PES) and the establishment of
water funds – but not yet operational.
Level 2: Action plans have been developed for implementation of incentives for EbA – including PES and water funds – with communities aware of the
availability of incentives, but no projects operating under the incentive programme yet.
Level 3: Incentive programmes fully operational, with budgets allocated to implement the incentives and at least one EbA project under implementation
under the incentive programme.
123 Baseline to be determined through activity 1.1 “Develop site-specific intervention plans for the 7 target catchments to integrate EbA
measures through a participatory process with municipal authorities, local communities and other stakeholders”.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 |  |  | 0 km of
diversified living
fence
silvopasture
0 ha of new
silvopasture
systems | 600 km of
diversified living
fence
silvopasture
systems across
all seven target
catchments.
600 ha of
silvopasture
systems using
individual trees
across all seven
target
catchments. | 1,280 km of
diversified
living fence
silvopasture
systems
across all
seven target
catchments.
1,280 ha of
silvopasture
systems using
individual
trees across
all seven
target
catchments. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 74 ---
E.4. Fund-level outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected Outcomes | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  |  | Target |  | Assumptions
 |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term) | Final | 
 |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional
and regulatory systems for
climate-responsive planning
and development | A5.1 Institutional and
regulatory systems that
improve incentives for
climate resilience and their
effective implementation |  | Municipal |  | No new
incentives
developed for
investment in
EbA |  |  | 15
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 1
policy uptake | 36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 2
policy
uptake | Developing
accounts
profiles of
natural capital,
developing
guidelines for
economic
incentives and
training local
governments will
lead to incentive
programmes
being integrated
into policies.
 |  |  | policy |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | documents |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | and action |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | plans. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Key informant |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | interviews |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Policy uptake |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | 122
scorecard |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Interviews with |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | PMU |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive
capacity and reduced exposure
to climate risks | A7.1 Use by vulnerable
households, communities,
businesses and public-
sector services of Fund-
supported tools
instruments, strategies and
activities to respond to
climate change and
variability | Household
surveys
Digital
management
reports on
EbA capacity
index verified
by PFIs | Household |  |  | 0 |  | 10,000
investments
made into
EbA
interventions
with an
expected
increase in
productivity /
hectare (in
relation to a
control
population)
of at least
7.5%, of
which:
• 1,000 are
commercia | 36,482
investments
made into
EbA
interventions
with an
expected
increase in
productivity /
hectare (in
relation to a
control
population)
of at least
10%, of
which:
• 2,094 are
commerci | Financial
mechanisms
developed by
the programme
are suitable for
vulnerable
communities to
access finance
for EbA and
water/resource-
efficient
technologies.
 |  |  | surveys |  |  | investments |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 123
made into |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Digital |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | EbA |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | management |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | interventions |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | reports on |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | with an |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | EbA capacity |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | expected |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | index verified |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | by PFIs |  |  | increase in |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | productivity |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | /hectare (in
relation to a |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | control |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | population) of |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | at least 5%, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | of which: |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | • 0 are |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | commercial |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | operators. |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 74 ---
No new
incentives
developed for
investment in
EbA

--- Table 4 on Page 74 ---
15
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 1
policy uptake

--- Table 5 on Page 74 ---
36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 2
policy
uptake

--- Table 6 on Page 74 ---
Developing
accounts
profiles of
natural capital,
developing
guidelines for
economic
incentives and
training local
governments will
lead to incentive
programmes
being integrated
into policies.

--- Table 7 on Page 74 ---
A5.1 Institutional and
egulatory systems that
mprove incentives for
limate resilience and their
effective implementation

--- Table 8 on Page 74 ---
A5.0 Strengthened institutional
and regulatory systems for
climate-responsive planning
and development

--- Table 9 on Page 74 ---
10,000
investments
made into
EbA
interventions
with an
expected
increase in
productivity /
hectare (in
relation to a
control
population)
of at least
7.5%, of
which:
• 1,000 are
commercia

--- Table 10 on Page 74 ---
36,482
investments
made into
EbA
interventions
with an
expected
increase in
productivity /
hectare (in
relation to a
control
population)
of at least
10%, of
which:
• 2,094 are
commerci

--- Table 11 on Page 74 ---
Financial
mechanisms
developed by
the programme
are suitable for
vulnerable
communities to
access finance
for EbA and
water/resource-
efficient
technologies.

--- Table 12 on Page 74 ---
A7.1 Use by vulnerable
households, communities,
businesses and public-
ector services of Fund-
upported tools
nstruments, strategies and
activities to respond to
limate change and
ariability

--- Table 13 on Page 74 ---
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive
capacity and reduced exposure
to climate risks

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 73 OF 96
G
• 0 are l al
subsistenc operators. operators.
e farmers. • 9,000 are • 34,388 are
subsistenc subsistenc
e farmers. e farmers.
Household Limited 104,000 227,500 Training of
surveys awareness males males trainers
among 56,000 122,500 programmes are
Training vulnerable females females effective in
reports communities disseminating
of locally information on
Participant appropriate adaptation
surveys adaptation options to local
following interventions community
training members
A8.1 Number of males and
A8.0 Strengthened awareness sessions All community
females made aware of
of climate threats and risk- members who
climate threats and related
reduction processes attend a training
appropriate responses
workshop or
access
information on
the knowledge
hub are
considered to be
aware of climate
risks and related
appropriate
responses

--- Table 1 on Page 75 ---
 |  |  | • 0 are
subsistenc
e farmers. |  | l |  | al
operators.
• 34,388 are
subsistenc
e farmers. |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | operators. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | • 9,000 are |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | subsistenc |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | e farmers. |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness
of climate threats and risk-
reduction processes | A8.1 Number of males and
females made aware of
climate threats and related
appropriate responses | Household
surveys
Training
reports
Participant
surveys
following
training
sessions | Limited
awareness
among
vulnerable
communities
of locally
appropriate
adaptation
interventions | 104,000
males
56,000
females | 104,000 |  | 227,500
males
122,500
females |  | Training of | 
 |  |  |  |  | males |  |  |  | trainers | 
 |  |  |  |  | 56,000 |  |  |  | programmes are | 
 |  |  |  |  | females |  |  |  | effective in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | disseminating | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | information on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | adaptation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | options to local | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | community | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | members | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | All community | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | members who | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | attend a training | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | workshop or | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | access | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | information on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the knowledge | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | hub are | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | considered to be | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | aware of climate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | risks and related | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | appropriate | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | responses | 

--- Table 2 on Page 75 ---
• 0 are
subsistenc
e farmers.

--- Table 3 on Page 75 ---
al
operators.
• 34,388 are
subsistenc
e farmers.

--- Table 4 on Page 75 ---
Household
surveys

Training
reports

Participant
surveys
following
training
sessions

--- Table 5 on Page 75 ---
Limited
awareness
among
vulnerable
communities
of locally
appropriate
adaptation
interventions

--- Table 6 on Page 75 ---
227,500
males
122,500
females

--- Table 7 on Page 75 ---
A8.1 Number of males and
emales made aware of
limate threats and related
appropriate responses

--- Table 8 on Page 75 ---
A8.0 Strengthened awareness
of climate threats and risk-
reduction processes

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 74 OF 96
G
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators
Means of Target
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Results
(MoV) Mid-term Final
Component 1: Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into selected
catchments
Output 1. Technical capacity of local Capacity Baseline to be 15 local 36 local Local monitoring
Strengthened government institutions to scorecard 124 determined at institutions institutions systems provide
technical capacity of plan for and implement inception phase with at least with at least sufficient detail to
focused on
local government, EbA and other adaptation a capacity a capacity guide effective
independent
farmers and rural measures, as measured
stakeholders
score of 3 score of 7 planning.
communities to by the capacity scorecard. out of 8 out of 8
implement EbA and
other adaptation
measures. Number of males and Household Baseline to be 104,000 227,500 The training of
females implementing surveys determined at males males trainers programme,
EbA, water/resource- inception phase 56,000 122,500 supported by
efficient technologies, Monitoring reports females females training workshops
and/or climate-resilient from local-level and farmer-to-
livelihood options as a M&E committees farmer knowledge
result of improved exchanges are
knowledge on how to do Participant exit sufficient to enable
so. surveys linked to community
training workshops members to adopt
climate-resilient
practices. At least
half of the direct
beneficiaries from
the lending facility
will have benefitted
from some kind of
training, knowledge
sharing activity or
participated in
demonstration
activities
Output 2. Tons of fuelwood Site surveys Baseline to be 13,000 tons 212,200 Introducing SLM
Demonstration produced through determined of fuelwood tons of practices will
adaptation plantations to reduce Remote sensing through produced fuelwood enhance the
interventions impacts of fuelwood data activity 1.1 in produced provision of
implemented in rural collection on natural year 1 125 ecosystem services.
communities across forests Implementation
seven target reports
catchments in the Rainwater harvesting Site surveys Baseline to be 1,250 m3 2,725 m3 Communities will
Dry Corridor and capacity determined rainwater rainwater continue to use the
Arid Zones. Implementation through harvesting harvesting introduced
reports activity 1.1 in capacity capacity technologies and
year 1 will not revert to old
practices
Rainwater storage capacity Site surveys Baseline to be 35,000 m3 78,000 m3 Communities will
determined rainwater rainwater continue to use the
Implementation through storage storage introduced
reports activity 1.1 in capacity capacity technologies and
year 1 will not revert to old
practices
124 The indicator scale is based on four-step criteria of capacity assessment for each stakeholders group. Each question is scored from 0–2, with: 0 =
not at all, 1 = partially; and 2 = to a large extent/completely. An overall score is calculated, with a maximum score of 8 given four criteria.
i) Are the stakeholders aware of the current and expected impacts of climate change and the availability of climate-resilient practices available
to adapt to these impacts?
ii) Do local institutions have access to the EbA and water/resource-efficient technology protocols?
iii) Do local institutions have the capacity to monitor and evaluate the state of ecosystems and the effectiveness of EbA interventions at the
landscape level?
iv) Do local institutions have the capacity to train farmers on the adoption of EbA and water/resource-efficient technologies?
These four criteria will be elaborated, reviewed and validated at inception phase of the programme.
125 Baseline to be determined through activity 1.1 “Develop site-specific intervention plans for the 7 target catchments to integrate EbA
measures through a participatory process with municipal authorities, local communities and other stakeholders”.

--- Table 1 on Page 76 ---
E.5. Project/programme performance indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results | Indicator |  |  |  | Means of |  | Baseline | Target |  | Assumptions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Verification |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term | Final |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (MoV) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Component 1: Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into selected
catchments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 1.
Strengthened
technical capacity of
local government,
farmers and rural
communities to
implement EbA and
other adaptation
measures. | Technical capacity of local
government institutions to
plan for and implement
EbA and other adaptation
measures, as measured
by the capacity scorecard. |  |  |  | Capacity |  | Baseline to be
determined at
inception phase | 15 local
institutions
with at least
a capacity
score of 3
out of 8 | 36 local
institutions
with at least
a capacity
score of 7
out of 8 | Local monitoring
systems provide
sufficient detail to
guide effective
planning. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 124
scorecard |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | focused on |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | independent |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | stakeholders |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Number of males and
females implementing
EbA, water/resource-
efficient technologies,
and/or climate-resilient
livelihood options as a
result of improved
knowledge on how to do
so. |  |  | Household
surveys
Monitoring reports
from local-level
M&E committees
Participant exit
surveys linked to
training workshops | Household |  | Baseline to be
determined at
inception phase | 104,000
males
56,000
females | 227,500
males
122,500
females |  | The training of | 
 |  |  |  |  | surveys |  |  |  |  |  | trainers programme, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | supported by | 
 |  |  |  |  | Monitoring reports |  |  |  |  |  | training workshops | 
 |  |  |  |  | from local-level |  |  |  |  |  | and farmer-to- | 
 |  |  |  |  | M&E committees |  |  |  |  |  | farmer knowledge | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | exchanges are | 
 |  |  |  |  | Participant exit |  |  |  |  |  | sufficient to enable | 
 |  |  |  |  | surveys linked to |  |  |  |  |  | community | 
 |  |  |  |  | training workshops |  |  |  |  |  | members to adopt | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | climate-resilient | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices. At least | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | half of the direct | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries from | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the lending facility | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will have benefitted | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | from some kind of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | training, knowledge | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | sharing activity or | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | participated in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | demonstration | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | activities | 
Output 2.
Demonstration
adaptation
interventions
implemented in rural
communities across
seven target
catchments in the
Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones. |  | Tons of fuelwood |  |  | Site surveys |  | Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
125
year 1 | 13,000 tons
of fuelwood
produced | 212,200
tons of
fuelwood
produced | Introducing SLM
practices will
enhance the
provision of
ecosystem services. | Introducing SLM | 
 |  | produced through |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices will | 
 |  | plantations to reduce |  |  | Remote sensing |  |  |  |  |  | enhance the | 
 |  | impacts of fuelwood |  |  | data |  |  |  |  |  | provision of | 
 |  | collection on natural |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ecosystem services. | 
 |  | forests |  |  | Implementation |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | reports |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Rainwater harvesting
capacity | Rainwater harvesting |  | Site surveys
Implementation
reports | Site surveys |  | Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1 | 1,250 m3
rainwater
harvesting
capacity | 2,725 m3
rainwater
harvesting
capacity |  | Communities will | 
 |  | apacity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | continue to use the | 
 |  |  |  |  | Implementation |  |  |  |  |  | introduced | 
 |  |  |  |  | reports |  |  |  |  |  | technologies and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will not revert to old | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices | 
 | Rainwater storage capacity |  |  | Site surveys
Implementation
reports |  |  | Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1 | 35,000 m3
rainwater
storage
capacity | 78,000 m3
rainwater
storage
capacity |  | Communities will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | continue to use the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | introduced | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technologies and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will not revert to old | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices | 

--- Table 2 on Page 76 ---
Component 1: Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural resource-based businesses into selected
catchments

--- Table 3 on Page 76 ---
Output 1.
Strengthened
technical capacity of
local government,
farmers and rural
communities to
implement EbA and
other adaptation
measures.

--- Table 4 on Page 76 ---
Technical capacity of local
government institutions to
plan for and implement
EbA and other adaptation
measures, as measured
by the capacity scorecard.

--- Table 5 on Page 76 ---
Baseline to be
determined at
inception phas

--- Table 6 on Page 76 ---
15 local
institutions
with at least
a capacity
score of 3
out of 8


--- Table 7 on Page 76 ---
36 local
institutions
with at least
a capacity
score of 7
out of 8

--- Table 8 on Page 76 ---
Local monitoring
systems provide
sufficient detail to
guide effective
planning.

--- Table 9 on Page 76 ---
Number of males and
females implementing
EbA, water/resource-
efficient technologies,
and/or climate-resilient
livelihood options as a
result of improved
knowledge on how to do
so.

--- Table 10 on Page 76 ---
Baseline to be
determined at
inception phas


--- Table 11 on Page 76 ---
104,000
males
56,000
females

--- Table 12 on Page 76 ---
227,500
males
122,500
females

--- Table 13 on Page 76 ---
Output 2.
Demonstration
adaptation
interventions
implemented in rural
communities across
seven target
catchments in the
Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones.

--- Table 14 on Page 76 ---
Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
125
year 1


--- Table 15 on Page 76 ---
13,000 tons
of fuelwood
produced


--- Table 16 on Page 76 ---
212,200
tons of
fuelwood
produced


--- Table 17 on Page 76 ---
Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1

--- Table 18 on Page 76 ---
1,250 m3
rainwater
harvesting
capacity

--- Table 19 on Page 76 ---
2,725 m3
rainwater
harvesting
capacity

--- Table 20 on Page 76 ---
Site surveys

Implementation
reports

--- Table 21 on Page 76 ---
Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1

--- Table 22 on Page 76 ---
35,000 m3
rainwater
storage
capacity

--- Table 23 on Page 76 ---
78,000 m3
rainwater
storage
capacity

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 75 OF 96
G
Use of resource- efficient Site surveys Baseline to be 20 half- 43 half- Communities will
technologies determined orange kilns orange kilns continue to use the
Implementation through in use in use introduced
reports activity 1.1 in technologies and
year 1 will not revert to old
practices
Output 3. Level of integration of Policy uptake Limited 36 36 Lessons learned
Information on climate change adaptation scorecard 126 integration of municipalitie municipalitie from programme
climate change in municipal-level political CCA in s with at s with at activities are
adaptation and its and technical decision- municipal-level least Level 1 least Level 2 sufficient to support
financing making for climate political and policy policy the mainstreaming
disseminated across resilience. technical uptake uptake of CCA into local
the region and decision- and national
mainstreamed into making for policies.
local and national climate
policies. resilience
Component 2: Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across selected catchments
Output 4. Financial Cumulative investments Management Approx. Baseline Baseline PFIs need specific
products and (US$) into EbA through the reports of financial US$10M (from plus plus EbA financing and
services to finance lending facility and or support previous US$149.643 US$381.880 support (e.g. risk
EbA investments are expected average interest mechanisms disbursements M in M in transfer)
offered by Partner rates in the region, investments, investments, mechanisms to fully
Financial Institutions Digital e.g. MEbA). financed via financed via take advantage of
(PFI), including PFI management An average EbA loans, EbA loans, last-mile solutions.
access to EbA on- reports interest rate of with average with average
lending funds and 22% is interest interest End beneficiaries
support Audit reports assumed for rates rates will adhere to
mechanisms. (general + non-EbA expected at expected at specific EbA finance
programme- loans127. relative 15% relative 10% products and non-
specific) below below financial services to
average average invest into EbA
rates for rates for capacity once
non-EbA non-EbA available.
control control
populations. populations. The concessionality
will diminish over
time, as function of
more leveraged
capital crowding in –
which will have only
the guarantee
facility benefits – but
not GCF fund
blending.
EbA investments financed Management 0 investments 0 At least PFIs need specific
by leveraged finance only reports of financial financed by investments 80,000 EbA financing and
and covered by the EbA or support loans covered financed by investments support (e.g. risk
guarantee facility. mechanisms by CABEI loans financed for transfer)
cofinancing, covered by a total mechanisms to fully
Digital leveraged CABEI amount of at take advantage of
management finance and cofinancing, least last-mile solutions
reports covered by the leveraged US$250,00,
EbA finance and steming End beneficiaries
Audit reports guarantee covered by leveraged will adhere to
(general + facility. the EbA and covered specific EbA finance
programme- guarantee finance by products and non-
specific) facility. the financial services to
guarantee invest into EbA
facility. capacity once
available
The guarantee
facility will leverage
finance at interest
126 This policy uptake scorecard will have four levels and will measure the extent of CCA mainstreaming in relevant local government policies and
plans. Level 0: CCA not integrated meaningfully into municipal policy; Level 1: Evidence-base in place to guide policy adjustments in local
municipalities; Level 2: CCA narrative woven through the draft municipal policy; Level 3: Policies updated to fully account for climate change
adaptation.
127 No data is available for baseline values of average interest rate for EbA loans, but will be collected in year 1.

--- Table 1 on Page 77 ---
 |  |  | Use of resource- efficient
technologies | Site surveys
Implementation
reports | Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1 |  |  | 20 half-
orange kilns
in use | 43 half-
orange kilns
in use |  | Communities will | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | continue to use the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | introduced | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | technologies and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will not revert to old | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | practices | 
 | Output 3. |  | Level of integration of
climate change adaptation
in municipal-level political
and technical decision-
making for climate
resilience. | Policy uptake
126
scorecard |  | Limited |  | 36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 1
policy
uptake | 36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 2
policy
uptake | Lessons learned
from programme
activities are
sufficient to support
the mainstreaming
of CCA into local
and national
policies. | Lessons learned | 
 | Information on |  |  |  |  | integration of |  |  |  |  | from programme | 
 | climate change |  |  |  |  | CCA in |  |  |  |  | activities are | 
 | adaptation and its |  |  |  |  | municipal-level |  |  |  |  | sufficient to support | 
 | financing |  |  |  |  | political and |  |  |  |  | the mainstreaming | 
 | disseminated across |  |  |  |  | technical |  |  |  |  | of CCA into local | 
 | the region and |  |  |  |  | decision- |  |  |  |  | and national | 
 | mainstreamed into |  |  |  |  | making for |  |  |  |  | policies. | 
 | local and national |  |  |  |  | climate |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | policies. |  |  |  |  | resilience |  |  |  |  |  | 
Component 2: Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across selected catchments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 4. Financial
products and
services to finance
EbA investments are
offered by Partner
Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI
access to EbA on-
lending funds and
support
mechanisms. |  |  | Cumulative investments
(US$) into EbA through the
lending facility and
expected average interest
rates | Management
reports of financial
or support
mechanisms
Digital
management
reports
Audit reports
(general +
programme-
specific) | Approx.
US$10M (from
previous
disbursements
in the region,
e.g. MEbA).
An average
interest rate of
22% is
assumed for
non-EbA
loans127. |  |  | Baseline
plus
US$149.643
M in
investments,
financed via
EbA loans,
with average
interest
rates
expected at
relative 15%
below
average
rates for
non-EbA
control
populations. | Baseline
plus
US$381.880
M in
investments,
financed via
EbA loans,
with average
interest
rates
expected at
relative 10%
below
average
rates for
non-EbA
control
populations. |  | PFIs need specific | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | EbA financing and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | support (e.g. risk | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | transfer) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mechanisms to fully | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | take advantage of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | last-mile solutions. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | End beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will adhere to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | specific EbA finance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | products and non- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financial services to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | invest into EbA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity once | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | available. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The concessionality | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will diminish over | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | time, as function of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | more leveraged | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capital crowding in – | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | which will have only | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the guarantee | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | facility benefits – but | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | not GCF fund | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | blending. | 
 |  |  | EbA investments financed
by leveraged finance only
and covered by the EbA
guarantee facility. | Management
reports of financial
or support
mechanisms
Digital
management
reports
Audit reports
(general +
programme-
specific) | 0 investments
financed by
loans covered
by CABEI
cofinancing,
leveraged
finance and
covered by the
EbA
guarantee
facility. |  |  | 0
investments
financed by
loans
covered by
CABEI
cofinancing,
leveraged
finance and
covered by
the EbA
guarantee
facility. | At least
80,000
investments
financed for
a total
amount of at
least
US$250,00,
steming
leveraged
and covered
finance by
the
guarantee
facility. |  | PFIs need specific | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | EbA financing and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | support (e.g. risk | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | transfer) | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mechanisms to fully | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | take advantage of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | last-mile solutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | End beneficiaries | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | will adhere to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | specific EbA finance | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | products and non- | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | financial services to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | invest into EbA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity once | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | available | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | The guarantee | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | facility will leverage | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | finance at interest | 

--- Table 2 on Page 77 ---
Use of resource- efficient
echnologies


--- Table 3 on Page 77 ---
Site surveys

Implementation
reports

--- Table 4 on Page 77 ---
Baseline to be
determined
through
activity 1.1 in
year 1

--- Table 5 on Page 77 ---
20 half-
orange kilns
in use

--- Table 6 on Page 77 ---
43 half-
orange kilns
in use

--- Table 7 on Page 77 ---
Level of integration of
climate change adaptation
in municipal-level political
and technical decision-
making for climate
resilience.



--- Table 8 on Page 77 ---
Policy uptake
126
scorecard



--- Table 9 on Page 77 ---
36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 1
policy
uptake

--- Table 10 on Page 77 ---
36
municipalitie
s with at
least Level 2
policy
uptake

--- Table 11 on Page 77 ---
Component 2: Financing and implementation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies across selected catchments


--- Table 12 on Page 77 ---
Output 4. Financial
products and
services to finance
EbA investments are
offered by Partner
Financial Institutions
(PFI), including PFI
access to EbA on-
lending funds and
support
mechanisms.

--- Table 13 on Page 77 ---
Cumulative investments
US$) into EbA through the
ending facility and
expected average interest
ates







--- Table 14 on Page 77 ---
Management
reports of financial
or support
mechanisms

Digital
management
reports

Audit reports
(general +
programme-
specific)

--- Table 15 on Page 77 ---
Approx.
US$10M (from
previous
disbursements
in the region,
e.g. MEbA).
An average
interest rate of
22% is
assumed for
non-EbA
loans127.



--- Table 16 on Page 77 ---
Baseline
plus
US$149.643
M in
investments,
financed via
EbA loans,
with average
interest
rates
expected at
relative 15%
below
average
rates for
non-EbA
control
populations.

--- Table 17 on Page 77 ---
Baseline
plus
US$381.880
M in
investments,
financed via
EbA loans,
with average
interest
rates
expected at
relative 10%
below
average
rates for
non-EbA
control
populations.

--- Table 18 on Page 77 ---
EbA investments financed
by leveraged finance only
and covered by the EbA
guarantee facility.


--- Table 19 on Page 77 ---
Management
reports of financial
or support
mechanisms

Digital
management
reports

Audit reports
(general +
programme-
specific)

--- Table 20 on Page 77 ---
0 investments
financed by
loans covered
by CABEI
cofinancing,
leveraged
finance and
covered by the
EbA
guarantee
facility.

--- Table 21 on Page 77 ---
0
investments
financed by
loans
covered by
CABEI
cofinancing,
leveraged
finance and
covered by
the EbA
guarantee
facility.

--- Table 22 on Page 77 ---
At least
80,000
investments
financed for
a total
amount of at
least
US$250,00,
steming
leveraged
and covered
finance by
the
guarantee
facility.


=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 76 OF 96
G
rates more aligned
with but still below
market interest rates
for non-ebA
financing.
Institutional capacity of Institutional Baseline to be 12 28 PFIs need specific
financial institutions to capacity determined at institutions institutions EbA financing and
channel funds for small- scorecard 128 inception with at least with at least support (e.g. risk
and large-scale EbA phase Level 3 (out Level 4 (out transfer)
investments of 5) of 5) mechanisms to fully
capacity capacity take advantage of
last-mile solutions
E.6. Activities
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Activity 1.1. Develop site-specific A community-based approach will 1.1.1 Establish a community-level • 36 monitoring and evaluation
intervention plans for the 7 target be adopted to identify site-specific monitoring and evaluation committees established
catchments to integrate EbA interventions in each of the seven committee in each • 7 site-specific intervention
measures through a participatory municipalities. A community-level municipality and build the plans
process with municipal authorities, monitoring and evaluation capacity of these
local communities, and other committee will be established and committees to monitor the
stakeholders. capacitated in each municipality to
biophysical, social and
monitor biophysical, social and
economic conditions in their
economic conditions in their local
local catchment areas as
catchment areas as well as to
well as to assess the level
assess the level of climate
of climate vulnerability, risks
vulnerability, risks and
and opportunities.
opportunities. Baseline
assessments conducted by these 1.1.2 Hold community
committees – with support from engagement workshops in
regional M&E specialists – will each municipality to
underpin the refinement of site- develop a framework for
specific intervention plans, site-specific intervention
focussing on the selection of plans in each of the seven
appropriate land for the targeted catchments.
implementation of interventions 1.1.3 Draft site-specific
identified through stakeholder intervention plans for each
consultations during the of the seven targeted
programme preparation phase. catchments.
The outcomes of these
1.1.4 Hold a stakeholder
assessments will be fed into the
workshop to validate and
Regional Knowledge Hub(Activity
get stakeholder buy-in for
3.1). The suite of identified EbA
site-specific intervention
interventions includes the
plans in each of the seven
conservation and restoration of
targeted catchments.
natural forest, as well as the
introduction of agroforestry,
silvopastoral and
agrosilvopastoral systems, along
with sustainable fuelwood
plantations. Specific consideration
will be given for connectivity of
128 Within the MEbA II project an institutional capacity scorecard has been developed that assesses the capacity of a given institution in five main
dimensions and expresses findings over 100 points in total, implemented with 13 institutions in Latin America and Sub-Sahara Africa:
i) EbA solutions: does the institution have a basic understanding of concrete EbA and efficient water management solutions and is it able to
distinguish and verify the application of these solutions by target end beneficiaries (survey-based)?
ii) Information management: is internal information management structured in a way that enables the assessment of loan applications based on
EbA and water/resource-efficient technology protocols (e.g. via MEbA II EbA capacity and EbA verification indicators) and spur ongoing
learning to enable autonomous and effective EbA by target end beneficiaries?
iii) Risk management: is the institution in a position to integrate climate and ecosystem risk management (identification, measurement, monitoring
and mitigation of these risks) into daily operations, including incorporating business continuity and contingency plans?
iv) Products & services: is the portfolio of financial and non-financial products sufficiently sophisticated to integrate EbA and water-efficient
technology-focused products and services relevant to PFI’s areas of operations?
v) Marketing: is the marketing management incorporating all aspects needed to raise awareness of target end beneficiaries regarding the
importance and potential impact of climate change, ecosystem services and water scarcity
Questions are scored between 1 and 10 points with different weights applied; 20% percentiles define 5 segments of development status of an
institution. [we do not have it as that – we use it to steer TA and close gaps] Each question is scored from 0—2, with: 0 = not at all, 1 = partially; and
2 = to a large extent/completely. An overall score is calculated, with a maximum score of 8. These four criteria will be elaborated, reviewed and
validated at inception phase of the programme.

--- Table 1 on Page 78 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | rates more aligned | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | with but still below | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | market interest rates | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | for non-ebA | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | financing. | 
 | Institutional capacity of
financial institutions to
channel funds for small-
and large-scale EbA
investments | Institutional
capacity
128
scorecard | Baseline to be
determined at
inception
phase | 12
institutions
with at least
Level 3 (out
of 5)
capacity | 28 |  | PFIs need specific | 
 |  |  |  |  | institutions |  | EbA financing and | 
 |  |  |  |  | with at least |  | support (e.g. risk | 
 |  |  |  |  | Level 4 (out |  | transfer) | 
 |  |  |  |  | of 5) |  | mechanisms to fully | 
 |  |  |  |  | capacity |  | take advantage of | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | last-mile solutions | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 78 ---
nstitutional capacity of
inancial institutions to
hannel funds for small-
and large-scale EbA
nvestments

--- Table 3 on Page 78 ---
Institutional
capacity
128
scorecard


--- Table 4 on Page 78 ---
Baseline to be
determined at
inception
phase

--- Table 5 on Page 78 ---
12
institutions
with at least
Level 3 (out
of 5)
capacity

--- Table 6 on Page 78 ---
 | E.6. Activities |  |  |  | 
Activity |  | Description | Sub-activities | Deliverables | 
Activity 1.1. Develop site-specific
intervention plans for the 7 target
catchments to integrate EbA
measures through a participatory
process with municipal authorities,
local communities, and other
stakeholders. |  | A community-based approach will
be adopted to identify site-specific
interventions in each of the seven
municipalities. A community-level
monitoring and evaluation
committee will be established and
capacitated in each municipality to
monitor biophysical, social and
economic conditions in their local
catchment areas as well as to
assess the level of climate
vulnerability, risks and
opportunities. Baseline
assessments conducted by these
committees – with support from
regional M&E specialists – will
underpin the refinement of site-
specific intervention plans,
focussing on the selection of
appropriate land for the
implementation of interventions
identified through stakeholder
consultations during the
programme preparation phase.
The outcomes of these
assessments will be fed into the
Regional Knowledge Hub(Activity
3.1). The suite of identified EbA
interventions includes the
conservation and restoration of
natural forest, as well as the
introduction of agroforestry,
silvopastoral and
agrosilvopastoral systems, along
with sustainable fuelwood
plantations. Specific consideration
will be given for connectivity of | 1.1.1 Establish a community-level
monitoring and evaluation
committee in each
municipality and build the
capacity of these
committees to monitor the
biophysical, social and
economic conditions in their
local catchment areas as
well as to assess the level
of climate vulnerability, risks
and opportunities.
1.1.2 Hold community
engagement workshops in
each municipality to
develop a framework for
site-specific intervention
plans in each of the seven
targeted catchments.
1.1.3 Draft site-specific
intervention plans for each
of the seven targeted
catchments.
1.1.4 Hold a stakeholder
workshop to validate and
get stakeholder buy-in for
site-specific intervention
plans in each of the seven
targeted catchments. | • 36 monitoring and evaluation
committees established
• 7 site-specific intervention
plans | 

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 77 OF 96
G
targeted ecosystems to maximise
ecosystem services, as well as for
land-tenure and the needs of local
communities for the land to
ensure long-term sustainability.
Finally, sites will be identified for
the implementation of water- and
resource-efficient technologies
within rural communities across
the seven target catchments.
Details of proposed interventions
for each site are presented in
Section 14 of Annex 2: Feasibility
Study.
Activity 1.2. Provide technical Effective implementation of EbA 1.2.1 Develop cooperation • Cooperation agreements with
assistance to municipal practices and water-/resource- agreements with commercial farmers
authorities, farmers and rural efficient technologies requires commercial farmers for • 3 EbA implementation protocols
communities for the training for both the recipients and forest restoration and • 1 protocol for the adoptions of
implementation of EbA practices the local-level authorities that sustainable land
water-efficient technologies
as well as water- and resource- provide support services to the management.
• 1 protocol for the adoptions of
efficient technologies recipients. Under the proposed 1.2.2 Train commercial farmers
resource-efficient technologies
programme, protocols will be on sustainable EbA
developed for a range of practices, including • 7 training of trainers
sustainable practices, including : i) silvopasture, agroforestry programmes
conservation and restoration of and SLM. • 36 training workshops
forested areas; ii) establishment 1.2.3 Develop protocols for the
existing agroforestry systems; iii) implementation of
development of sustainable sustainable EbA practices,
fuelwood source; iv) water- including the: i)
efficient technologies; and v) conservation and
resource-efficient technologies restoration of forested
that reduce fuelwood demand. To areas; ii) establishment
facilitate/promote the adoption of existing agroforestry
these protocols, cooperation systems; and iii)
agreements will be developed development of sustainable
with commercial farmers and fuelwood source.
training will also be provided to 1.2.4 Develop protocols for the
build their technical capacity to adoption of water-efficient
implement sustainable practices. technologies by households
In addition to the direct training (e.g. rainwater harvesting
provided to commercial farmers, a systems), by communities
training of trainers programme will (e.g. water intakes) and by
be established in each country to smallholder and commercial
facilitate long-term knowledge farmers (e.g. (drip irrigation,
transfer to vulnerable solar water pumping)
communities. To increase the 1.2.5 Develop protocols for the
reach of the training programmes, adoption of resource-
trainers will be selected from a efficient technologies that
range of organisations, including reduce fuelwood demand,
local departments of environment, (e.g. efficient charcoal kilns,
CBOs, water committees, fuelwood drying, efficient
women's organisations and local biomass stoves).
cooperatives within each target 1.2.6 Establish a training of
country. Formal training trainers programme for
workshops will also be arranged representatives of local
within each municipality, which departments of
will include site visits to environment, CBOs, water
demonstration sites established committees, women's
under Output 4. organisations and local
cooperatives within each
target country for EbA and
water-efficient technologies
based on the protocols
developed under sub-
activities 1.2.3–1.2.5.
1.2.7 Organise training
workshops linked to
community meetings within
each target municipality to
train local communities on
EbA and water-efficient
technologies, including
visits to demonstration sites
to facilitate farmer to farmer
knowledge exchange.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
 | targeted ecosystems to maximise
ecosystem services, as well as for
land-tenure and the needs of local
communities for the land to
ensure long-term sustainability.
Finally, sites will be identified for
the implementation of water- and
resource-efficient technologies
within rural communities across
the seven target catchments.
Details of proposed interventions
for each site are presented in
Section 14 of Annex 2: Feasibility
Study. |  | 
Activity 1.2. Provide technical
assistance to municipal
authorities, farmers and rural
communities for the
implementation of EbA practices
as well as water- and resource-
efficient technologies | Effective implementation of EbA
practices and water-/resource-
efficient technologies requires
training for both the recipients and
the local-level authorities that
provide support services to the
recipients. Under the proposed
programme, protocols will be
developed for a range of
sustainable practices, including : i)
conservation and restoration of
forested areas; ii) establishment
existing agroforestry systems; iii)
development of sustainable
fuelwood source; iv) water-
efficient technologies; and v)
resource-efficient technologies
that reduce fuelwood demand. To
facilitate/promote the adoption of
these protocols, cooperation
agreements will be developed
with commercial farmers and
training will also be provided to
build their technical capacity to
implement sustainable practices.
In addition to the direct training
provided to commercial farmers, a
training of trainers programme will
be established in each country to
facilitate long-term knowledge
transfer to vulnerable
communities. To increase the
reach of the training programmes,
trainers will be selected from a
range of organisations, including
local departments of environment,
CBOs, water committees,
women's organisations and local
cooperatives within each target
country. Formal training
workshops will also be arranged
within each municipality, which
will include site visits to
demonstration sites established
under Output 4. | 1.2.1 Develop cooperation
agreements with
commercial farmers for
forest restoration and
sustainable land
management.
1.2.2 Train commercial farmers
on sustainable EbA
practices, including
silvopasture, agroforestry
and SLM.
1.2.3 Develop protocols for the
implementation of
sustainable EbA practices,
including the: i)
conservation and
restoration of forested
areas; ii) establishment
existing agroforestry
systems; and iii)
development of sustainable
fuelwood source.
1.2.4 Develop protocols for the
adoption of water-efficient
technologies by households
(e.g. rainwater harvesting
systems), by communities
(e.g. water intakes) and by
smallholder and commercial
farmers (e.g. (drip irrigation,
solar water pumping)
1.2.5 Develop protocols for the
adoption of resource-
efficient technologies that
reduce fuelwood demand,
(e.g. efficient charcoal kilns,
fuelwood drying, efficient
biomass stoves).
1.2.6 Establish a training of
trainers programme for
representatives of local
departments of
environment, CBOs, water
committees, women's
organisations and local
cooperatives within each
target country for EbA and
water-efficient technologies
based on the protocols
developed under sub-
activities 1.2.3–1.2.5.
1.2.7 Organise training
workshops linked to
community meetings within
each target municipality to
train local communities on
EbA and water-efficient
technologies, including
visits to demonstration sites
to facilitate farmer to farmer
knowledge exchange. | • Cooperation agreements with
commercial farmers
• 3 EbA implementation protocols
• 1 protocol for the adoptions of
water-efficient technologies
• 1 protocol for the adoptions of
resource-efficient technologies
• 7 training of trainers
programmes
• 36 training workshops

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 78 OF 96
G
Activity 1.3. Provide technical A community-based approach will 1.3.1 Conduct a livelihood • 7 livelihood action plans
assistance to farmers and rural be taken to improve the climate- assessment within each of • 108 training workshops
communities for the development resilience of vulnerable, natural the seven target
of natural resource-based resource-based livelihoods in the catchments, focusing on
businesses and alternative target municipalities. This will climate risks and alternative
climate-resilient livelihoods. involve the establishment of options.
technical training programmes to 1.3.2 Conduct community
farmers and rural communities on engagement workshops to
locally appropriate natural develop livelihood action
resource-based business plans for each target
opportunities and climate-resilient community based on the
practices that will improve the assessments conducted in
sustainability of natural resource- 1.3.1.
based livelihoods. This training 1.3.3 Establish livelihood training
will be underpinned by a detailed programmes in each
livelihood assessment that will municipality for farmers and
identify climate risks impacting the rural communities on locally
livelihoods of local communities, appropriate natural
as well as potential alternative resource-based businesses
practices that will reduce this and climate-resilient
vulnerability. The results of this livelihoods as identified in
assessment will be used to the livelihood action plans.
develop livelihood action plans for
each municipality identifying at
least three natural resource-based
businesses and/or climate-
resilient livelihoods options per
municipality. Targeted training
programmes workshop will be
designed for each livelihood
option, taking into consideration
the local context and inputs from
community consultations to
customise the training for each
municipality. These programmes
will then be rolled out through
community training workshops,
with one workshop per livelihood
being held per target municipality.
Activity 2.1. Implement landscape On-the-ground EbA interventions 2.1.1 Establish tree nurseries • 36 tree nurseries
EbA interventions within rural will be implemented on public land focused on native species. • 4,160 ha of forest protection
communities across the seven across each of the target 2.1.2 Establish forest protection zones.
target catchments. municipalities. Interventions are zones. • 1,820 ha of restored and
listed below. 2.1.3 Protect and restore natural protected natural forest
• Conservation of existing forest forest in major recharge • 5,170 ha of restored forest
ecosystems to maintain the areas and riparian zones. across seven catchments
provision of ecosystem
2.1.4 Restore forested areas • 820 ha of restored pine forest
services.
• Active restoration of partially across seven catchments. • 1,293 km of agroforestry
2.1.5 Restore pine forests in
degraded forest ecosystems, systems established using
Guatemala, Honduras and
including assisted natural diversified living fence
Nicaragua.
regeneration and enrichment arrangements
2.1.6 Establish agroforestry
planting. • 612 ha of agroforestry systems
• Establishment of agroforestry, systems using diversified established in coffee plantations
living fence arrangements in
silvopastoral and • 1,280 km of silvopasture
agrosilvopastural systems. basic grains crops. treelines
• Establishment of fire breaks. 2.1.7 Establish agroforestry • 1,280 ha of silvopasture
• Establishment of mixed-use systems for natural shade in systems using individual trees
plantations using native coffee plantations. • 5,305 ha of sustainable
species with multiple 2.1.8 Establish silvopasture
fuelwood plantations
ecosystem services, including systems using diversified
• 129 km of firebreaks
non-timber forest products. living fence arrangements.
• Establishment of sustainable 2.1.9 Establish silvopasture • 118 km of living barriers
fuelwood plantations to reduce systems using individual • 118 km of superficial drainage
pressure on natural forests. trees. solutions
• Soil conservation measures. 2.1.10 Establish sustainable
fuelwood and timber
These interventions will serve as plantations.
demonstration sites to promote 2.1.11 Establish firebreaks for
the uptake of EbA practices forests and plantations.
through the financial mechanisms
2.1.12 Construct living barriers for
established through Output 1.
soil conservation.
Details on specific interventions
and targets for each municipality
are provided in Annex 17b.

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
Activity 1.3. Provide technical
assistance to farmers and rural
communities for the development
of natural resource-based
businesses and alternative
climate-resilient livelihoods. | A community-based approach will
be taken to improve the climate-
resilience of vulnerable, natural
resource-based livelihoods in the
target municipalities. This will
involve the establishment of
technical training programmes to
farmers and rural communities on
locally appropriate natural
resource-based business
opportunities and climate-resilient
practices that will improve the
sustainability of natural resource-
based livelihoods. This training
will be underpinned by a detailed
livelihood assessment that will
identify climate risks impacting the
livelihoods of local communities,
as well as potential alternative
practices that will reduce this
vulnerability. The results of this
assessment will be used to
develop livelihood action plans for
each municipality identifying at
least three natural resource-based
businesses and/or climate-
resilient livelihoods options per
municipality. Targeted training
programmes workshop will be
designed for each livelihood
option, taking into consideration
the local context and inputs from
community consultations to
customise the training for each
municipality. These programmes
will then be rolled out through
community training workshops,
with one workshop per livelihood
being held per target municipality. | 1.3.1 Conduct a livelihood
assessment within each of
the seven target
catchments, focusing on
climate risks and alternative
options.
1.3.2 Conduct community
engagement workshops to
develop livelihood action
plans for each target
community based on the
assessments conducted in
1.3.1.
1.3.3 Establish livelihood training
programmes in each
municipality for farmers and
rural communities on locally
appropriate natural
resource-based businesses
and climate-resilient
livelihoods as identified in
the livelihood action plans. | • 7 livelihood action plans
• 108 training workshops
Activity 2.1. Implement landscape
EbA interventions within rural
communities across the seven
target catchments. | On-the-ground EbA interventions
will be implemented on public land
across each of the target
municipalities. Interventions are
listed below.
• Conservation of existing forest
ecosystems to maintain the
provision of ecosystem
services.
• Active restoration of partially
degraded forest ecosystems,
including assisted natural
regeneration and enrichment
planting.
• Establishment of agroforestry,
silvopastoral and
agrosilvopastural systems.
• Establishment of fire breaks.
• Establishment of mixed-use
plantations using native
species with multiple
ecosystem services, including
non-timber forest products.
• Establishment of sustainable
fuelwood plantations to reduce
pressure on natural forests.
• Soil conservation measures.
These interventions will serve as
demonstration sites to promote
the uptake of EbA practices
through the financial mechanisms
established through Output 1.
Details on specific interventions
and targets for each municipality
are provided in Annex 17b. | 2.1.1 Establish tree nurseries
focused on native species.
2.1.2 Establish forest protection
zones.
2.1.3 Protect and restore natural
forest in major recharge
areas and riparian zones.
2.1.4 Restore forested areas
across seven catchments.
2.1.5 Restore pine forests in
Guatemala, Honduras and
Nicaragua.
2.1.6 Establish agroforestry
systems using diversified
living fence arrangements in
basic grains crops.
2.1.7 Establish agroforestry
systems for natural shade in
coffee plantations.
2.1.8 Establish silvopasture
systems using diversified
living fence arrangements.
2.1.9 Establish silvopasture
systems using individual
trees.
2.1.10 Establish sustainable
fuelwood and timber
plantations.
2.1.11 Establish firebreaks for
forests and plantations.
2.1.12 Construct living barriers for
soil conservation. | • 36 tree nurseries
• 4,160 ha of forest protection
zones.
• 1,820 ha of restored and
protected natural forest
• 5,170 ha of restored forest
across seven catchments
• 820 ha of restored pine forest
• 1,293 km of agroforestry
systems established using
diversified living fence
arrangements
• 612 ha of agroforestry systems
established in coffee plantations
• 1,280 km of silvopasture
treelines
• 1,280 ha of silvopasture
systems using individual trees
• 5,305 ha of sustainable
fuelwood plantations
• 129 km of firebreaks
• 118 km of living barriers
• 118 km of superficial drainage
solutions

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 79 OF 96
G
2.1.13 Construct superficial
drainage for soil
conservation.
2.1.14 Technical design and
guidance for the
implementation of Forestry
Measures.
Activity 2.2. Implement Water- and resource-efficient 2.2.1 Install rainwater harvesting • 109 rainwater harvesting
demonstration water- and technologies will be installed in systems on public or systems on community
resource-efficient technologies each target municipality. community buildings using buildings
within rural communities across Rainwater harvesting rooftop capture and plastic • 156 community-level rainwater
the seven target catchments. interventions will target or geomembrane deposits reservoirs
community buildings such as for storage (25 m3) to • 43 half-orange kilns for efficient
schools and clinics where they will
supply water for 8-12 charcoal production
benefit the most vulnerable
families. • 38 community-level water
people. By targeting communities,
these interventions will also serve 2.2.2 Install community-level pumping systems by solar
as demonstration sites of the rainwater reservoirs (500 panels
technologies to promote uptake of
m3).
2.2.3 Install half-orange kilns for
interventions through the financial
mechanisms established in efficient charcoal production
Output 1. Similarly, resource- to be administered by
efficient technologies will be made existing local cooperatives.
communally available to maximise 2.2.4 Install community-level
beneficiaries and promote water pumping systems by
upscales within the target solar panels.
communities and surrounding 2.2.5 Technical design and
communities across the region. guidance for the
Upscaling will be promoted implementation of Water &
through the training and Resource Measures.
demonstration site visits
implemented through Activity 2.3.
Details on specific interventions
and targets for each municipality
are provided in Annex 17b.
Activity 2.3. Establish the grant The grant facility is intended to 2.3.1 Define eligibility criteria from • 1 Grant facility operational
facility to support bottom-up identify and promote site-specific Steering Committee manual developed and
selection and promotion of local and relevant EbA and water- guidelines and align to approved
EbA activities through non- efficient technologies. A bottom- national and municipal • 28 awareness raising and
reimbursable financing and start up approach to identification of adaptation policies and
promotion events executed
operations eligible projects will be initiatives, define final
• Marketing and communication
established. Eligible projects can operability of the grant
materials
be community-level investments, facility, including the
the establishment of water funds, definition of a competitive • Audit reports
or the support of selected solution selection model.
providers (to be defined), among 2.3.2 Raise awareness on grant
others. The grant facility will availability for EbA
channel investment to selected investment in conjunction
projects via PFIs in each of the 7 with community
catchment areas. Operational engagement workshops
expenses will be borne by the under 1.1.1.
fund's overall activities. 2.3.3 Monitor success of selected
projects, including definition
and documentation of
underlying economics
(knowledge gained to be
disseminated to inform
scale-up finance)
2.3.4 Communicate results via
specific events and media
initiatives.
2.3.5 Secure initial set-up and
running cost of grant facility
Activity 3.1. Establish regional A regional knowledge hub will be 3.1.1 Establish a knowledge • 1 knowledge management hub
knowledge hub for the established to facilitate the management hub linked to • Knowledge products for:
dissemination of information on sharing of best practices and the Environmental o sustainable landscape
EbA in the Dry Corridor and Arid lessons learned for EbA across Observatory to disseminate management standards and
Zones. the seven target countries. The best practices and lessons procedures;
platform will be hosted by the learned from the o opportunities for access to
CCAD, building on the existing programme, to support financing and women's
Environmental Observatory portal. decision-making related to economic empowerment;
The knowledge hub will serve two EbA implementation. The o sustainable natural resource-
main purposes. First, it will act as based business opportunities;
hub will incorporate specific
a repository for climate change and
modules for engagement
adaptation information, including

--- Table 1 on Page 81 ---
 |  | 2.1.13 Construct superficial
drainage for soil
conservation.
2.1.14 Technical design and
guidance for the
implementation of Forestry
Measures. | 
Activity 2.2. Implement
demonstration water- and
resource-efficient technologies
within rural communities across
the seven target catchments. | Water- and resource-efficient
technologies will be installed in
each target municipality.
Rainwater harvesting
interventions will target
community buildings such as
schools and clinics where they will
benefit the most vulnerable
people. By targeting communities,
these interventions will also serve
as demonstration sites of the
technologies to promote uptake of
interventions through the financial
mechanisms established in
Output 1. Similarly, resource-
efficient technologies will be made
communally available to maximise
beneficiaries and promote
upscales within the target
communities and surrounding
communities across the region.
Upscaling will be promoted
through the training and
demonstration site visits
implemented through Activity 2.3.
Details on specific interventions
and targets for each municipality
are provided in Annex 17b. | 2.2.1 Install rainwater harvesting
systems on public or
community buildings using
rooftop capture and plastic
or geomembrane deposits
for storage (25 m3) to
supply water for 8-12
families.
2.2.2 Install community-level
rainwater reservoirs (500
m3).
2.2.3 Install half-orange kilns for
efficient charcoal production
to be administered by
existing local cooperatives.
2.2.4 Install community-level
water pumping systems by
solar panels.
2.2.5 Technical design and
guidance for the
implementation of Water &
Resource Measures. | • 109 rainwater harvesting
systems on community
buildings
• 156 community-level rainwater
reservoirs
• 43 half-orange kilns for efficient
charcoal production
• 38 community-level water
pumping systems by solar
panels
Activity 2.3. Establish the grant
facility to support bottom-up
selection and promotion of local
EbA activities through non-
reimbursable financing and start
operations | The grant facility is intended to
identify and promote site-specific
and relevant EbA and water-
efficient technologies. A bottom-
up approach to identification of
eligible projects will be
established. Eligible projects can
be community-level investments,
the establishment of water funds,
or the support of selected solution
providers (to be defined), among
others. The grant facility will
channel investment to selected
projects via PFIs in each of the 7
catchment areas. Operational
expenses will be borne by the
fund's overall activities. | 2.3.1 Define eligibility criteria from
Steering Committee
guidelines and align to
national and municipal
adaptation policies and
initiatives, define final
operability of the grant
facility, including the
definition of a competitive
selection model.
2.3.2 Raise awareness on grant
availability for EbA
investment in conjunction
with community
engagement workshops
under 1.1.1.
2.3.3 Monitor success of selected
projects, including definition
and documentation of
underlying economics
(knowledge gained to be
disseminated to inform
scale-up finance)
2.3.4 Communicate results via
specific events and media
initiatives.
2.3.5 Secure initial set-up and
running cost of grant facility | • 1 Grant facility operational
manual developed and
approved
• 28 awareness raising and
promotion events executed
• Marketing and communication
materials
• Audit reports
Activity 3.1. Establish regional
knowledge hub for the
dissemination of information on
EbA in the Dry Corridor and Arid
Zones. | A regional knowledge hub will be
established to facilitate the
sharing of best practices and
lessons learned for EbA across
the seven target countries. The
platform will be hosted by the
CCAD, building on the existing
Environmental Observatory portal.
The knowledge hub will serve two
main purposes. First, it will act as
a repository for climate change
adaptation information, including | 3.1.1 Establish a knowledge
management hub linked to
the Environmental
Observatory to disseminate
best practices and lessons
learned from the
programme, to support
decision-making related to
EbA implementation. The
hub will incorporate specific
modules for engagement | • 1 knowledge management hub
• Knowledge products for:
o sustainable landscape
management standards and
procedures;
o opportunities for access to
financing and women's
economic empowerment;
o sustainable natural resource-
based business opportunities;
and

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 80 OF 96
G
all protocols developed by the with universities, research o technical guidelines for the
programme as well as the best centers and private sector assessment of ecosystem
practices and lessons learned in the region for EbA services.
collected through the Measures. • 36 training workshops
programme's monitoring and 3.1.2 Develop knowledge 36 community champions
evaluation processes. Second, it products to be disseminated
will provide users with specific
through the knowledge hub,
knowledge products that will guide
including sustainable
policy- and decision-makers to
landscape
effective implement sustainable
management standards and
landscape management practices.
procedures, opportunities
This will include guidance on how
for access to financing and
to access opportunities for
accessing finance provided women's economic
through the programme, with empowerment as well as
specific focus on women's technical assistance,
economic empowerment. The business opportunities,
knowledge products will also technical guidelines for the
include technical assistance for assessment of ecosystem
creating business opportunities as services and their
well as technical guidelines for the contribution to human well-
assessment of ecosystem being.
services. Training will also be 3.1.3 Train policy- and decision-
provided to policy- and decision- makers at the municipal
makers at the municipal level on
level on climate change
how to use the knowledge hub
impacts, including the
and associated tools. Finally,
impacts of gender
community organisations –
inequality, and the role of
including women's groups – and
EbA in mitigating climate
traditional leaders will be trained
change impacts to support
to act as champions in
developing, revising and political and technical
disseminating information decision-making for climate
products to support the adoption resilience in the Dry
of EbA and other resilient Corridor and Arid Zones.
practices. This approach will 3.1.4 Strengthen the technical
facilitate the sharing of ideas and capacity of community
sustainable practices between organisations, including
communities from the grass root women's groups, and local
level, using existing structures champions in developing,
and traditional methods which will revising and disseminating
not only extend the reach of the information products to
dissemination campaign, but also
support the adoption of EbA
the uptake by local communities.
and other resilient practices.
Activity 3.2. Raise awareness of Output 1 is establishing several 3.2.1 Train public • 36 municipal-level public
financial mechanisms for the financial mechanisms that will be officers/agencies at the officers/agencies trained
implementation of accessible to communities to municipal level to facilitate • 36 training workshops targeting
CCA interventions. support the adoption of the uptake of financial medium—large scale private
sustainable land management mechanisms in their sector organisations and
practices. To ensure the effective communities. commercial farmers
uptake of these mechanisms, 3.2.2 Train medium–large scale • 36 awareness campaigns,
training will be provided at three private organisations/ involving at least one
levels. First, public officers and/or farmers to access loans community organisation per
agencies will be identified each municipality.
through the EbA credit line.
municipality to serve as
3.2.3 Raise awareness among
community liaisons. These
vulnerable communities and
officers/agencies will be trained
on how to access the various their organisations,
financial mechanisms and how to including women's groups,
disseminate this knowledge to about available financial
their communities. Second, mechanisms, including the
medium—large scale private EbA Credit Line and Trust
sector organisations and farmers Fund.
will be trained on how to access
loans through the EbA credit line.
This training will be closely linked
to the technical training provided
under Outcome 2. And third,
awareness will be raised among
the most vulnerable communities
on the EbA Credit Line and Trust
Fund, and how to access them.
This will include targeting
community organisations,
including women's groups, to

--- Table 1 on Page 82 ---
 | all protocols developed by the
programme as well as the best
practices and lessons learned
collected through the
programme's monitoring and
evaluation processes. Second, it
will provide users with specific
knowledge products that will guide
policy- and decision-makers to
effective implement sustainable
landscape management practices.
This will include guidance on how
to access opportunities for
accessing finance provided
through the programme, with
specific focus on women's
economic empowerment. The
knowledge products will also
include technical assistance for
creating business opportunities as
well as technical guidelines for the
assessment of ecosystem
services. Training will also be
provided to policy- and decision-
makers at the municipal level on
how to use the knowledge hub
and associated tools. Finally,
community organisations –
including women's groups – and
traditional leaders will be trained
to act as champions in
developing, revising and
disseminating information
products to support the adoption
of EbA and other resilient
practices. This approach will
facilitate the sharing of ideas and
sustainable practices between
communities from the grass root
level, using existing structures
and traditional methods which will
not only extend the reach of the
dissemination campaign, but also
the uptake by local communities. | with universities, research
centers and private sector
in the region for EbA
Measures.
3.1.2 Develop knowledge
products to be disseminated
through the knowledge hub,
including sustainable
landscape
management standards and
procedures, opportunities
for access to financing and
women's economic
empowerment as well as
technical assistance,
business opportunities,
technical guidelines for the
assessment of ecosystem
services and their
contribution to human well-
being.
3.1.3 Train policy- and decision-
makers at the municipal
level on climate change
impacts, including the
impacts of gender
inequality, and the role of
EbA in mitigating climate
change impacts to support
political and technical
decision-making for climate
resilience in the Dry
Corridor and Arid Zones.
3.1.4 Strengthen the technical
capacity of community
organisations, including
women's groups, and local
champions in developing,
revising and disseminating
information products to
support the adoption of EbA
and other resilient practices. | o technical guidelines for the
assessment of ecosystem
services.
• 36 training workshops
36 community champions
Activity 3.2. Raise awareness of
financial mechanisms for the
implementation of
CCA interventions. | Output 1 is establishing several
financial mechanisms that will be
accessible to communities to
support the adoption of
sustainable land management
practices. To ensure the effective
uptake of these mechanisms,
training will be provided at three
levels. First, public officers and/or
agencies will be identified each
municipality to serve as
community liaisons. These
officers/agencies will be trained
on how to access the various
financial mechanisms and how to
disseminate this knowledge to
their communities. Second,
medium—large scale private
sector organisations and farmers
will be trained on how to access
loans through the EbA credit line.
This training will be closely linked
to the technical training provided
under Outcome 2. And third,
awareness will be raised among
the most vulnerable communities
on the EbA Credit Line and Trust
Fund, and how to access them.
This will include targeting
community organisations,
including women's groups, to | 3.2.1 Train public
officers/agencies at the
municipal level to facilitate
the uptake of financial
mechanisms in their
communities.
3.2.2 Train medium–large scale
private organisations/
farmers to access loans
through the EbA credit line.
3.2.3 Raise awareness among
vulnerable communities and
their organisations,
including women's groups,
about available financial
mechanisms, including the
EbA Credit Line and Trust
Fund. | • 36 municipal-level public
officers/agencies trained
• 36 training workshops targeting
medium—large scale private
sector organisations and
commercial farmers
• 36 awareness campaigns,
involving at least one
community organisation per
municipality.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 81 OF 96
G
maximise the reach of the
awareness campaign.
Activity 3.3. Enhance capacity of To facilitate the mainstreaming of 3.3.1 Build an evidence base, • Refined methodology for
national and local-level policy- climate change adaptation – using both in-country valuing ecosystem services
makers, in partnership with sustainable land management research and findings from • 7 country-specific guidelines for
knowledge network of universities, practices in particular – it is comparable ecological the implementation of economic
research centers and private necessary to build a strong zones in other countries, to incentives
sector, to integrate climate evidence base for the efficiency clearly demonstrate the • 36 training workshops
change adaptation and the and effectiveness of sustainable
value and effectiveness of
valuation of natural capital into practices. To achieve this,
proposed adaptation
local policies. information will be collated from
activities to municipal-level
lessons learned through the
policy-makers.
programme interventions as well
3.3.2 Develop or adjust a
as from other comparable
methodology to value
ecological zones in other
countries, supported by the ecosystems services to
development of methodologies for develop accounts profiles of
assessing the value of ecosystem natural capital so that it is
services and natural capital. integrated into development
These methodologies will provide plans in the Dry Corridor.
empirical evidence for the positive 3.3.3 Develop guidelines for local
economic benefits of sustainable governments outlining
land management practices, protocols and criteria for
which will support the implementation of economic
mainstreaming of such practices incentives for SLM (e.g.
into local development plans. water funds, payments for
Furthermore, an effective
environmental services).
methodology for the valuation of
3.3.4 Train local governments to
ecosystem services will facilitate
make policy changes,
the establishment of economic
including the use of
incentives for SLM, including
protocols and criteria for the
water funds and payment for
adoption of EbA and
environmental service schemes.
Local governments will then be implementation of economic
trained to make the policy incentives for SLM (e.g.
changes to implement economic water funds, payments for
incentives for investment in SLM environmental services).
practices, with country-specific 3.3.5 Organise workshops
guidelines being developed to targeting municipalities
support this training. within the Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones to disseminate
the evidence resulting from
local government
experiences to promote the
integration of climate
resilience in broader
policies and actions across
the region.
Activity 4.1. Set-up and establish Lending and guarantee facilities, 4.1.1 Set-up relevant fiscal, legal • 1 lending facility established
the financial structure for the as well as their respective and regulatory compliance and operational
lending and guarantee facilities investment and coverage criteria, structures for the Lending • 1 guarantee facility established
are set up following relevant facility and Guarantee
and operational
regulations and legal frameworks. facility’s operation.
• 21 technical studies carried out
4.1.2 Create legal agreements,
in 7 countries
including regulatory, legal
• 1 EbA lending operational
and fiscal approvals for the
lending and guarantee manual developed and
facilities. approved, including all
4.1.3 Develop Steering contractual framework
Committee statutes and
operational guidelines for
the two facilities including
eligibility criteria and
processes for the blended
EbA lending facility.
4.1.4 Define investment criteria
from Steering Committee
guidelines and align with
national laws and
regulations, responsible
banking principles, national
and municipal adaptation
policies and initiatives,
define final operability of the

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
 | maximise the reach of the
awareness campaign. |  | 
Activity 3.3. Enhance capacity of
national and local-level policy-
makers, in partnership with
knowledge network of universities,
research centers and private
sector, to integrate climate
change adaptation and the
valuation of natural capital into
local policies. | To facilitate the mainstreaming of
climate change adaptation –
sustainable land management
practices in particular – it is
necessary to build a strong
evidence base for the efficiency
and effectiveness of sustainable
practices. To achieve this,
information will be collated from
lessons learned through the
programme interventions as well
as from other comparable
ecological zones in other
countries, supported by the
development of methodologies for
assessing the value of ecosystem
services and natural capital.
These methodologies will provide
empirical evidence for the positive
economic benefits of sustainable
land management practices,
which will support the
mainstreaming of such practices
into local development plans.
Furthermore, an effective
methodology for the valuation of
ecosystem services will facilitate
the establishment of economic
incentives for SLM, including
water funds and payment for
environmental service schemes.
Local governments will then be
trained to make the policy
changes to implement economic
incentives for investment in SLM
practices, with country-specific
guidelines being developed to
support this training. | 3.3.1 Build an evidence base,
using both in-country
research and findings from
comparable ecological
zones in other countries, to
clearly demonstrate the
value and effectiveness of
proposed adaptation
activities to municipal-level
policy-makers.
3.3.2 Develop or adjust a
methodology to value
ecosystems services to
develop accounts profiles of
natural capital so that it is
integrated into development
plans in the Dry Corridor.
3.3.3 Develop guidelines for local
governments outlining
protocols and criteria for
implementation of economic
incentives for SLM (e.g.
water funds, payments for
environmental services).
3.3.4 Train local governments to
make policy changes,
including the use of
protocols and criteria for the
adoption of EbA and
implementation of economic
incentives for SLM (e.g.
water funds, payments for
environmental services).
3.3.5 Organise workshops
targeting municipalities
within the Dry Corridor and
Arid Zones to disseminate
the evidence resulting from
local government
experiences to promote the
integration of climate
resilience in broader
policies and actions across
the region. | • Refined methodology for
valuing ecosystem services
• 7 country-specific guidelines for
the implementation of economic
incentives
• 36 training workshops
Activity 4.1. Set-up and establish
the financial structure for the
lending and guarantee facilities | Lending and guarantee facilities,
as well as their respective
investment and coverage criteria,
are set up following relevant
regulations and legal frameworks. | 4.1.1 Set-up relevant fiscal, legal
and regulatory compliance
structures for the Lending
facility and Guarantee
facility’s operation.
4.1.2 Create legal agreements,
including regulatory, legal
and fiscal approvals for the
lending and guarantee
facilities.
4.1.3 Develop Steering
Committee statutes and
operational guidelines for
the two facilities including
eligibility criteria and
processes for the blended
EbA lending facility.
4.1.4 Define investment criteria
from Steering Committee
guidelines and align with
national laws and
regulations, responsible
banking principles, national
and municipal adaptation
policies and initiatives,
define final operability of the | • 1 lending facility established
and operational
• 1 guarantee facility established
and operational
• 21 technical studies carried out
in 7 countries
• 1 EbA lending operational
manual developed and
approved, including all
contractual framework

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 82 OF 96
G
blended EbA lending
facility.
4.1.5 Establish the guarantee
facility to support EbA
finance via the lending
facility - define guarantee
coverage criteria. Based on
Regional Project Steering
Committee guidelines and
aligned with national laws
and regulations, responsible
banking principles, national
and municipal adaptation
policies and initiatives, the
final operability of the EbA
Guarantee Facility will be
defined.
Activity 4.2. Financing mechanism The EbA lending facility will 4.2.1 Deployment of the EbA • 28 partner financial institutions
of the EbA lending and guarantee provide an EbA credit line to PFIs lending facility onboarded including initial
facility that have been selected based on 4.2.2 Deployment of the capacity evaluation
outreach and financial guarantee facility • A minimum of 90,000 EbA
performance, to on-lend to end
loans disbursed
beneficiaries for investment into
EbA or water-efficient
technologies. Such investment
can be targeted towards
community-level investment, rural
MSMEs including smallholder
farmers or other institutions that
can foster EbA for end
beneficiaries across different
sectors.
Activity 4.3. Technical assistance The financial facilities are 4.3.1 Develop or adjust training • Standardised technical
(TA) facility to strengthen accompanied by training and curriculums and technical assistance and training
technical capacity of accredited technical assistance activities to assistance methodology package, including ToT or
and non-regulated financial communities in the areas of the targeted to fill gaps online course and certification
institutions to access and channel programme. Successful identified during initial due • At least 28 partner financial
funds for small- and large-scale implementation will catalyse the diligence based on ToT or
institutions received technical
EbA investments uptake of EbA and EWT solutions online course
assistance and increased their
to be financed by specific financial methodologies and
EbA capacity
mechanisms The EbA credit line targeting certification
will be accompanied by a TA financial institution
facility that will develop capacity personnel
within PFIs for the adequate 4.3.2 Initiate and execute
promotion and management of tailormade technical
EbA finance to end beneficiaries, assistance programme for
such as data management for the PFIs based on gaps
measurement, monitoring, identified during initial due
reporting and verification (MRV) of diligence
climate risks and adaptation 4.3.3 Periodic monitoring of TA
strategy impacts or effects, the and training success via
implementation of EbA-oriented reassessment based on
awareness raising and marketing scorecard used during initial
campaigns with end beneficiaries due diligence
and the development of financial 4.3.4 Adjust TA methodology and
and non-financial products and training curriculum
services geared towards EbA according to periodic
investments. This will enhance the reassessment
capacity of PFIs to monitor and 4.3.5 Promote the blended EbA
assess the implementation of EbA lending facility with potential
and EWT investment projects as network institutions and
well as to monitor and document non-network institutions in
the respective economic and each of the 7 countries
ecosystem benefits. Where
possible Information and
Communication Technologies will
be introduced to provide data
analytics and satellite data
insights into the EbA lending
portfolio and climate impacts on
the portfolio.

--- Table 1 on Page 84 ---
 |  | blended EbA lending
facility.
4.1.5 Establish the guarantee
facility to support EbA
finance via the lending
facility - define guarantee
coverage criteria. Based on
Regional Project Steering
Committee guidelines and
aligned with national laws
and regulations, responsible
banking principles, national
and municipal adaptation
policies and initiatives, the
final operability of the EbA
Guarantee Facility will be
defined. | 
Activity 4.2. Financing mechanism
of the EbA lending and guarantee
facility | The EbA lending facility will
provide an EbA credit line to PFIs
that have been selected based on
outreach and financial
performance, to on-lend to end
beneficiaries for investment into
EbA or water-efficient
technologies. Such investment
can be targeted towards
community-level investment, rural
MSMEs including smallholder
farmers or other institutions that
can foster EbA for end
beneficiaries across different
sectors. | 4.2.1 Deployment of the EbA
lending facility
4.2.2 Deployment of the
guarantee facility | • 28 partner financial institutions
onboarded including initial
capacity evaluation
• A minimum of 90,000 EbA
loans disbursed
Activity 4.3. Technical assistance
(TA) facility to strengthen
technical capacity of accredited
and non-regulated financial
institutions to access and channel
funds for small- and large-scale
EbA investments | The financial facilities are
accompanied by training and
technical assistance activities to
communities in the areas of the
programme. Successful
implementation will catalyse the
uptake of EbA and EWT solutions
to be financed by specific financial
mechanisms The EbA credit line
will be accompanied by a TA
facility that will develop capacity
within PFIs for the adequate
promotion and management of
EbA finance to end beneficiaries,
such as data management for the
measurement, monitoring,
reporting and verification (MRV) of
climate risks and adaptation
strategy impacts or effects, the
implementation of EbA-oriented
awareness raising and marketing
campaigns with end beneficiaries
and the development of financial
and non-financial products and
services geared towards EbA
investments. This will enhance the
capacity of PFIs to monitor and
assess the implementation of EbA
and EWT investment projects as
well as to monitor and document
the respective economic and
ecosystem benefits. Where
possible Information and
Communication Technologies will
be introduced to provide data
analytics and satellite data
insights into the EbA lending
portfolio and climate impacts on
the portfolio. | 4.3.1 Develop or adjust training
curriculums and technical
assistance methodology
targeted to fill gaps
identified during initial due
diligence based on ToT or
online course
methodologies and
targeting certification
financial institution
personnel
4.3.2 Initiate and execute
tailormade technical
assistance programme for
PFIs based on gaps
identified during initial due
diligence
4.3.3 Periodic monitoring of TA
and training success via
reassessment based on
scorecard used during initial
due diligence
4.3.4 Adjust TA methodology and
training curriculum
according to periodic
reassessment
4.3.5 Promote the blended EbA
lending facility with potential
network institutions and
non-network institutions in
each of the 7 countries | • Standardised technical
assistance and training
package, including ToT or
online course and certification
• At least 28 partner financial
institutions received technical
assistance and increased their
EbA capacity

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 83 OF 96
G
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements
189. The Project Manager (PM) will be responsible for the overall monitoring of programme progress against
the outcome-based indicators during implementation, as well reporting programme progress to the Regional
Project Steering Committee (RPSC). For on-the-ground monitoring of programme interventions, a Regional
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, supported by seven National M&E Specialists (one per beneficiary
country), will be employed to develop practical guidelines for — and operationalise — a performance monitoring
framework to track the programme's progress towards achieving its targets. The Regional M&E Specialist will
primarily be responsible for: i) establishing a performance monitoring framework to define biannual targets for
the programme to meet the mid-term and final targets defined in the Logical Framework (Section E.3–5 of this
Funding Proporsal); ii) measuring the indicators at least 1–2 times per year to evaluate the progress of the
programme in meeting the targets and the application of gender-disaggregated indicators; iii) reporting to the
PM and RSPC on the performance of the programme according to programme indicators; and iv) participating
in the production of reports. Given the scale of the programme, National M&E Specialists will be procured in
each beneficiary country to support the Regional M&E Specialist in monitoring the performance of programme
interventions at a national level. Specifically, the National M&E Specialists will be responsible for: i) following
guidelines developed by the Regional M&E specialist to conduct performance monitoring for the programme,
aimed at meeting the targets defined in the programme document by the end of the implementation phase; ii)
measuring the national indicators at least 1–2 times per year to evaluate the progress of the programme in
meeting the targets and indicators; iii) reporting to the NAC on the performance of the programme according to
programme indicators; iv) ensuring that all activities under the programme comply with the Programme’s ESMF
process and procedures; v) supporting environmental screening of sub activities and help to follow the activity
specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs); and vi) participating in the production of reports to the
RSSPC and RPMU. Both the Regional and National M&E Specialists will be supported by a Gender Officer
(GO), who will be employed on a part-time basis to oversee and monitor the application of gender-
disaggregated indicators.
190. The Regional M&E Specialist and GO will perform regular visits — at least once a year to each country
— randomly selecting municipalities to monitor on-the-ground implementation of programme interventions.
They will use these visits to cross-check the information provided by PFIs and beneficiaries in programme
monitoring reports. During each field visit, the Regional M&E Specialist and GO will collect qualitative data on
the outcomes and difficulties experienced during implementation through focus group discussions with different
beneficiaries, as well as through in-depth interviews with key stakeholders. Using this information, the Regional
M&E Specialist, supported by the National M&E Specialists, will compile six-monthly programme reports to be
shared with the RPMU and RPSC. These reports will outline programme progress in each country as well as
regionally, and will allow feedback and advisory support from the RPMU and RPSC in the case of potential
programme delays or other challenges that may arise during implementation. Annual programme progress
reports and annual gender reports will also be produced to be sent to the GCF Secretariat with information
regarding programme progress measured against expected outputs.
191. CABEI, as the Accredited Entity (AE) will perform supervision missions from year two of programme
implementation onwards, selecting three countries each year to visit and assess the status of programme
implementation. This process will allow CABEI to maintain oversight throughout the programme's lifetime. In
addition, CABEI's Credit Supervision Department — which oversees the destination and use of funds disbursed
to PFIs — will monitor the programme's compliance with policies and procedures, as well as the alignment
between implementation and programme objectives.
192. As per the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), an independent consultant will be contracted by
CABEI to conduct a Mid-Term Evaluation (MTE) and the Terminal Evaluation (TE) of the programme. Both
evaluations will comply with GCF guidelines and international standards and will make use of qualitative as well
as quantitative data analyses, including interviews with relevant stakeholders, data provided by the Regional
and National M&E Specialists and GO, participative workshops and focus groups with beneficiaries to promote
participative learning. The MTE will provide an assessment of programme performance against its targets at
the programme's mid-point. This will be a formative exercise and will include analysing whether the programme
is on track, what problems and challenges the programme is encountering, and what corrective actions are
required, so that the programme can achieve its intended outcomes by programme completion in the most
efficient and sustainable way. The RPSC and RPMU will be informed of all MTE findings and will develop a

--- Table 1 on Page 85 ---
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements |  | 
 | 189. The Project Manager (PM) will be responsible for the overall monitoring of programme progress agains | t
l
l
l
,
.
t
l
l
t
l
l
t
t
 | the outcome-based indicators during implementation, as well reporting programme progress to the Regiona | 
 | Project Steering Committee (RPSC). For on-the-ground monitoring of programme interventions, a Regiona | 
 | Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, supported by seven National M&E Specialists (one per beneficiary | 
 | country), will be employed to develop practical guidelines for — and operationalise — a performance monitoring | 
 | framework to track the programme's progress towards achieving its targets. The Regional M&E Specialist wil | 
 | primarily be responsible for: i) establishing a performance monitoring framework to define biannual targets for | 
 | the programme to meet the mid-term and final targets defined in the Logical Framework (Section E.3–5 of this | 
 | Funding Proporsal); ii) measuring the indicators at least 1–2 times per year to evaluate the progress of the | 
 | programme in meeting the targets and the application of gender-disaggregated indicators; iii) reporting to the | 
 | PM and RSPC on the performance of the programme according to programme indicators; and iv) participating | 
 | in the production of reports. Given the scale of the programme, National M&E Specialists will be procured in | 
 | each beneficiary country to support the Regional M&E Specialist in monitoring the performance of programme | 
 | interventions at a national level. Specifically, the National M&E Specialists will be responsible for: i) following | 
 | guidelines developed by the Regional M&E specialist to conduct performance monitoring for the programme | 
 | aimed at meeting the targets defined in the programme document by the end of the implementation phase; ii) | 
 | measuring the national indicators at least 1–2 times per year to evaluate the progress of the programme in | 
 | meeting the targets and indicators; iii) reporting to the NAC on the performance of the programme according to | 
 | programme indicators; iv) ensuring that all activities under the programme comply with the Programme’s ESMF | 
 | process and procedures; v) supporting environmental screening of sub activities and help to follow the activity | 
 | specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs); and vi) participating in the production of reports to the | 
 | RSSPC and RPMU. Both the Regional and National M&E Specialists will be supported by a Gender Officer | 
 | (GO), who will be employed on a part-time basis to oversee and monitor the application of gender- | 
 | disaggregated indicators. | 
 |  | 
 | 190. The Regional M&E Specialist and GO will perform regular visits — at least once a year to each country | 
 | — randomly selecting municipalities to monitor on-the-ground implementation of programme interventions | 
 | They will use these visits to cross-check the information provided by PFIs and beneficiaries in programme | 
 | monitoring reports. During each field visit, the Regional M&E Specialist and GO will collect qualitative data on | 
 | the outcomes and difficulties experienced during implementation through focus group discussions with differen | 
 | beneficiaries, as well as through in-depth interviews with key stakeholders. Using this information, the Regiona | 
 | M&E Specialist, supported by the National M&E Specialists, will compile six-monthly programme reports to be | 
 | shared with the RPMU and RPSC. These reports will outline programme progress in each country as well as | 
 | regionally, and will allow feedback and advisory support from the RPMU and RPSC in the case of potentia | 
 | programme delays or other challenges that may arise during implementation. Annual programme progress | 
 | reports and annual gender reports will also be produced to be sent to the GCF Secretariat with information | 
 | regarding programme progress measured against expected outputs. | 
 |  | 
 | 191. CABEI, as the Accredited Entity (AE) will perform supervision missions from year two of programme | 
 | implementation onwards, selecting three countries each year to visit and assess the status of programme | 
 | implementation. This process will allow CABEI to maintain oversight throughout the programme's lifetime. In | 
 | addition, CABEI's Credit Supervision Department — which oversees the destination and use of funds disbursed | 
 | to PFIs — will monitor the programme's compliance with policies and procedures, as well as the alignmen | 
 | between implementation and programme objectives. | 
 |  | 
 | 192. As per the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), an independent consultant will be contracted by | 
 | CABEI to conduct a Mid-Term Evaluation (MTE) and the Terminal Evaluation (TE) of the programme. Both | 
 | evaluations will comply with GCF guidelines and international standards and will make use of qualitative as wel | 
 | as quantitative data analyses, including interviews with relevant stakeholders, data provided by the Regiona | 
 | and National M&E Specialists and GO, participative workshops and focus groups with beneficiaries to promote | 
 | participative learning. The MTE will provide an assessment of programme performance against its targets a | 
 | the programme's mid-point. This will be a formative exercise and will include analysing whether the programme | 
 | is on track, what problems and challenges the programme is encountering, and what corrective actions are | 
 | required, so that the programme can achieve its intended outcomes by programme completion in the mos | 
 | efficient and sustainable way. The RPSC and RPMU will be informed of all MTE findings and will develop a | 

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 84 OF 96
G
management response to the evaluation recommendations along with an implementation plan. It will be the
responsibility of the PM to monitor whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented during the
remainder of the programme's operational life.
193. The TE will take place at the end of programme implementation and will be an independent assessment
of programme performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability). This assessment will be done based on documented
evidence, stakeholder interviews and, in most cases, a field mission. In addition to an assessment of expected
results and impacts, unexpected outcomes will be evaluated, including unexpected co-benefits, best practices
and lessons learned. The draft TE report will be sent to programme stakeholders for comment and subsequently
disclosed publicly.
194. The costs for results monitoring and performance evaluation will be covered by the salaries of the
Regional and National M&E Specialists, which are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget and Annex 11

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | management response to the evaluation recommendations along with an implementation plan. It will be the | t
,
 | responsibility of the PM to monitor whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented during the | 
 | remainder of the programme's operational life. | 
 |  | 
 | 193. The TE will take place at the end of programme implementation and will be an independent assessmen | 
 | of programme performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, effectiveness | 
 | efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability). This assessment will be done based on documented | 
 | evidence, stakeholder interviews and, in most cases, a field mission. In addition to an assessment of expected | 
 | results and impacts, unexpected outcomes will be evaluated, including unexpected co-benefits, best practices | 
 | and lessons learned. The draft TE report will be sent to programme stakeholders for comment and subsequently | 
 | disclosed publicly. | 
 |  | 
 | 194. The costs for results monitoring and performance evaluation will be covered by the salaries of the | 
 | Regional and National M&E Specialists, which are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget and Annex 11 | 

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 85 OF 96
G
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
195. There are no United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanction regimes currently under implementation
in any of the seven countries involved in the programme. In addition, no individual, entity or other group listed
on the UNSC sanctions list, including the consolidated list, will be involved in any manner with the programme
or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer or beneficiary.
196. The identified risks to the proposed programme's implementation and sustainability, associated impacts
and mitigation measures are described in detail below, with summaries provided in the following two tables.
Risks were classified according to a risk matrix (Table 4), with a summary presented in Table 5 which shows
the risk level based on the probability and impact of the risk factors. The mitigation potential is based on the
mitigation actions detailed below and is combined with the risk level to determine overall risk after mitigation.
Table 4. Risk matrix to determine risk categorisations129.
Impact Risk
Low Medium High
Very Low Risk
Low Risk
baborP
ytili
Low Medium Risk
Medium High Risk
High Extreme Risk
Table 5. Programme risk factors and mitigated risks.
Risk
Mitigation Mitigated
Factor Probability Impact Risk
Potential Risk
#
1 Medium Medium Medium Risk High Very Low Risk
2 Medium Low Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk
3 Medium Low Low Risk High Very Low Risk
4 Medium Medium Medium Risk High Low Risk
5 Medium High High Risk High Medium Risk
6 Low Medium Low Risk Low Low Risk
7 Low Medium Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk
8 Medium Low Low Risk Low Very Low Risk
9 Medium Medium Medium Risk Medium Low Risk
10 Low High Medium Risk High Very Low Risk
11 Low Medium Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk
Selected Risk Factor 1
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Behaviour change does not occur and the implementation of proposed programme activities (including operations
and maintenance of those established under Output 2) cease after conclusion of the programme, because rural
communities are unwilling to invest in EbA interventions. Ecosystem degradation and unsustainable practices
continue.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme will facilitate long-term change in land-use practices and uptake of EbA by making financial
instruments available to support investment into EbA. In addition, the programme will engage directly with communities
129 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 2017. National Disaster Risk Assessment, Governance System, Methodologies, and
Use of Results.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  | 
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  | 
195. There are no United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanction regimes currently under implementation
in any of the seven countries involved in the programme. In addition, no individual, entity or other group listed
on the UNSC sanctions list, including the consolidated list, will be involved in any manner with the programme
or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer or beneficiary.
196. The identified risks to the proposed programme's implementation and sustainability, associated impacts
and mitigation measures are described in detail below, with summaries provided in the following two tables.
Risks were classified according to a risk matrix (Table 4), with a summary presented in Table 5 which shows
the risk level based on the probability and impact of the risk factors. The mitigation potential is based on the
mitigation actions detailed below and is combined with the risk level to determine overall risk after mitigation.
Table 4. Risk matrix to determine risk categorisations129.
Impact Risk
Very Low Risk
Low Medium High
Low Risk
baborP Low Medium Risk
ytili
Medium High Risk
High Extreme Risk
Table 5. Programme risk factors and mitigated risks.
Risk
Mitigation Mitigated
Factor Probability Impact Risk
Potential Risk
#
1 Medium Medium Medium Risk High Very Low Risk
2 Medium Low Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk
3 Medium Low Low Risk High Very Low Risk
4 Medium Medium Medium Risk High Low Risk
5 Medium High High Risk High Medium Risk
6 Low Medium Low Risk Low Low Risk
7 Low Medium Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk
8 Medium Low Low Risk Low Very Low Risk
9 Medium Medium Medium Risk Medium Low Risk
10 Low High Medium Risk High Very Low Risk
11 Low Medium Low Risk Medium Very Low Risk |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium
Description |  |  | 
Behaviour change does not occur and the implementation of proposed programme activities (including operations
and maintenance of those established under Output 2) cease after conclusion of the programme, because rural
communities are unwilling to invest in EbA interventions. Ecosystem degradation and unsustainable practices
continue. |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
The programme will facilitate long-term change in land-use practices and uptake of EbA by making financial
instruments available to support investment into EbA. In addition, the programme will engage directly with communities |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 87 ---
 |  |  |  | Impact |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Low |  | Medium |  | High | 
baborP | ytili | Low |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Medium |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | High |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 87 ---
 | Risk |  |  | 
 |  |  | Very Low Risk | 
 |  |  | Low Risk | 
 |  |  | Medium Risk | 
 |  |  | High Risk | 
 |  |  | Extreme Risk | 

--- Table 4 on Page 87 ---
 | Risk
Factor
# | Probability | Impact | Risk |  |  |  |  | Mitigation
Potential | Mitigated
Risk |  | 
1 |  | Medium | Medium | Medium Risk |  |  |  |  | High |  | Very Low Risk | 
2 |  | Medium | Low | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | Medium |  | Very Low Risk | 
3 |  | Medium | Low | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | High |  | Very Low Risk | 
4 |  | Medium | Medium | Medium Risk |  |  |  |  | High |  | Low Risk | 
5 |  | Medium | High |  | High Risk |  |  |  | High |  | Medium Risk | 
6 |  | Low | Medium | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | Low |  | Low Risk | 
7 |  | Low | Medium | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | Medium |  | Very Low Risk | 
8 |  | Medium | Low | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | Low |  | Very Low Risk | 
9 |  | Medium | Medium | Medium Risk |  |  |  |  | Medium |  | Low Risk | 
10 |  | Low | High | Medium Risk |  |  |  |  | High |  | Very Low Risk | 
11 |  | Low | Medium | Low Risk |  |  |  |  | Medium |  | Very Low Risk | 

--- Table 5 on Page 87 ---
Mitigation
Potential

--- Table 6 on Page 87 ---
Mitigated
Risk

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 86 OF 96
G
as well as with local and national governments to create an enabling environment for EbA interventions, including
through:
• incorporating comprehensive engagement with communities for planning, implementation and monitoring of EbA
initiatives (for example Activities 4.1 and 1.1);
• providing training for communities, commercial farmers and decision-makers to develop capacity for supporting and
implementing EbA and to build a common understanding of the benefits of these approaches (for example Activity
1.2);
• developing protocols and guidelines for the adoption of EbA and water/resource-efficient technologies that will guide
ongoing training(Activity 1.2);
• developing an evidence base for the effectiveness of EbA in the local context including assessing the economic
benefits of these interventions (Activity 1.3); and
• mainstreaming climate adaptation and EbA into local- and national-level policies, to promote ongoing
implementation of EbA interventions beyond the programme lifetime (Activity 3.3).
A detailed Exit Strategy has been developed to ensure the proposed programme's long-term sustainability and to
decrease the likelihood that this risk will occur (Section B.6). In addition, an operations and maintenance (O&M)
manual is provided in Annex 21 which further details how interventions will be maintained post-programme
implementation.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
High turnover of staff in implementing institutions, frequent changes in government bodies and limited institutional
memory results in a disruption and/or delays in the programme implementation and may jeopardise the sustainability
of the programme.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Decisions, best practices and lessons learned will be documented throughout the programme to support institutional
memory that will sustain programme activities. This memory will also be strengthened through the regional knowledge
hub that will be established under Activity 3.1. Protocols for EbA will be developed in both English and the main local
languages to guide new staff who become involved in EbA implementation during and after the programme.
Furthermore, through the programme, PFIs and communities will be trained and engaged in the implementation as
well as the monitoring and evaluation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient interventions, thereby
strengthening the capacity of local communities and institutions to plan and implement EbA. Where possible, the RPSC
will make use of established regional and national structures to capitalise on well-established practices and systems
that are familiar to government staff.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Low
Description
Overlapping or misalignment between the proposed programme activities and those being implemented by other
departments or organisations in the programme area.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The proposed programme has been designed with extensive stakeholder engagement and desktop research to ensure
that there is alignment with any past and ongoing initiatives in the region. Regular engagements will be conducted with
relevant individuals/organisations to prevent duplication of effort, support collaboration and ensure that current and
future projects are aligned with the proposed programme's interventions. Coordination mechanisms — including the
regional knowledge hub which will facilitate the sharing of lessons learned — will be established at the regional and
national levels to ensure synergy among efforts of government and other national and regional stakeholders.
Selected Risk Factor 4
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
as well as with local and national governments to create an enabling environment for EbA interventions, including
through:
• incorporating comprehensive engagement with communities for planning, implementation and monitoring of EbA
initiatives (for example Activities 4.1 and 1.1);
• providing training for communities, commercial farmers and decision-makers to develop capacity for supporting and
implementing EbA and to build a common understanding of the benefits of these approaches (for example Activity
1.2);
• developing protocols and guidelines for the adoption of EbA and water/resource-efficient technologies that will guide
ongoing training(Activity 1.2);
• developing an evidence base for the effectiveness of EbA in the local context including assessing the economic
benefits of these interventions (Activity 1.3); and
• mainstreaming climate adaptation and EbA into local- and national-level policies, to promote ongoing
implementation of EbA interventions beyond the programme lifetime (Activity 3.3).
A detailed Exit Strategy has been developed to ensure the proposed programme's long-term sustainability and to
decrease the likelihood that this risk will occur (Section B.6). In addition, an operations and maintenance (O&M)
manual is provided in Annex 21 which further details how interventions will be maintained post-programme
implementation. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
High turnover of staff in implementing institutions, frequent changes in government bodies and limited institutional
memory results in a disruption and/or delays in the programme implementation and may jeopardise the sustainability
of the programme. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Decisions, best practices and lessons learned will be documented throughout the programme to support institutional
memory that will sustain programme activities. This memory will also be strengthened through the regional knowledge
hub that will be established under Activity 3.1. Protocols for EbA will be developed in both English and the main local
languages to guide new staff who become involved in EbA implementation during and after the programme.
Furthermore, through the programme, PFIs and communities will be trained and engaged in the implementation as
well as the monitoring and evaluation of EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient interventions, thereby
strengthening the capacity of local communities and institutions to plan and implement EbA. Where possible, the RPSC
will make use of established regional and national structures to capitalise on well-established practices and systems
that are familiar to government staff. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Overlapping or misalignment between the proposed programme activities and those being implemented by other
departments or organisations in the programme area. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The proposed programme has been designed with extensive stakeholder engagement and desktop research to ensure
that there is alignment with any past and ongoing initiatives in the region. Regular engagements will be conducted with
relevant individuals/organisations to prevent duplication of effort, support collaboration and ensure that current and
future projects are aligned with the proposed programme's interventions. Coordination mechanisms — including the
regional knowledge hub which will facilitate the sharing of lessons learned — will be established at the regional and
national levels to ensure synergy among efforts of government and other national and regional stakeholders. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 4 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | Medium

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 87 OF 96
G
Description
Inadequate engagement with local-level stakeholders and programme partners. This may result in limited integration
of local knowledge into programme activities.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme design has involved extensive engagement with local-level stakeholders over a period of three years
to ensure support for programme activities and extensive engagements with programme partners and stakeholders
will continue during the programme's implementation (detail provided in Annex 7: Stakeholder engagement plan).
Implementation activities will build on the local knowledge and experience of PFIs (Output 4) and other local
organisations. In addition, communities will be engaged in the planning of EbA interventions and their monitoring and
evaluation (for example Activity 1.1) to ensure alignment between programme activities and the needs of local
stakeholders.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium High
Description
Limited technical capacity among PFIs, government authorities and local communities to channel funds for and
implement EbA interventions.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Training and technical assistance will be provided for relevant PFIs, government authorities and local communities that
will be involved in programme activities. In particular, a technical assistance facility will be established to facilitate
financial institutions' abilities to access funds for EBA interventions. In addition, technical capacity of government
authorities and local communities will be strengthened to improve their abilities to: i) implement EbA protocols in a
scientifically rigorous manner; and ii) monitor and evaluate the success of these interventions.
Selected Risk Factor 6
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Natural disasters undermine the: i) implementation of EbA interventions and result in economic loss and/or damage
to the interventions; and ii) restoration and sustainable management of forests, wetlands and agro-systems.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme's EbA and water/resource-efficient interventions will target areas that have been identified as being
vulnerable to climate change impacts. For example, EbA will be implemented in sites that are prone to drought as a
measure to reduce the risk or physical impact of this type of climate-related natural disaster. Water/resource-efficient
solutions will also increase the resilience of these communities to droughts. Furthermore, the programme will integrate
information on local climate change risks and impacts into training for PFIs and communities to ensure that forecasts
are taken into consideration during the planning and implementation of EbA interventions. The RPMU will also oversee
the incorporation of forecasts into programme planning and implementation.
Selected Risk Factor 7
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Social tensions may arise as existing power relations within the community might disrupt equal opportunities to use
and benefit from water- and resource-efficient technologies.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme's activities have been designed to be transparent and will maintain a broadly consultative approach
throughout the implementation period. The beneficiaries of the water- and resource-efficient technologies have been
identified through local stakeholder consultations. In addition, the activities have been designed to ensure that all
individuals are afforded access to the technologies, which will be installed in public facilities — for example rainwater

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
Description |  | 
Inadequate engagement with local-level stakeholders and programme partners. This may result in limited integration
of local knowledge into programme activities. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The programme design has involved extensive engagement with local-level stakeholders over a period of three years
to ensure support for programme activities and extensive engagements with programme partners and stakeholders
will continue during the programme's implementation (detail provided in Annex 7: Stakeholder engagement plan).
Implementation activities will build on the local knowledge and experience of PFIs (Output 4) and other local
organisations. In addition, communities will be engaged in the planning of EbA interventions and their monitoring and
evaluation (for example Activity 1.1) to ensure alignment between programme activities and the needs of local
stakeholders. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Medium | High
Description |  | 
Limited technical capacity among PFIs, government authorities and local communities to channel funds for and
implement EbA interventions. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Training and technical assistance will be provided for relevant PFIs, government authorities and local communities that
will be involved in programme activities. In particular, a technical assistance facility will be established to facilitate
financial institutions' abilities to access funds for EBA interventions. In addition, technical capacity of government
authorities and local communities will be strengthened to improve their abilities to: i) implement EbA protocols in a
scientifically rigorous manner; and ii) monitor and evaluate the success of these interventions. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Natural disasters undermine the: i) implementation of EbA interventions and result in economic loss and/or damage
to the interventions; and ii) restoration and sustainable management of forests, wetlands and agro-systems. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The programme's EbA and water/resource-efficient interventions will target areas that have been identified as being
vulnerable to climate change impacts. For example, EbA will be implemented in sites that are prone to drought as a
measure to reduce the risk or physical impact of this type of climate-related natural disaster. Water/resource-efficient
solutions will also increase the resilience of these communities to droughts. Furthermore, the programme will integrate
information on local climate change risks and impacts into training for PFIs and communities to ensure that forecasts
are taken into consideration during the planning and implementation of EbA interventions. The RPMU will also oversee
the incorporation of forecasts into programme planning and implementation. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 7 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Social tensions may arise as existing power relations within the community might disrupt equal opportunities to use
and benefit from water- and resource-efficient technologies. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The programme's activities have been designed to be transparent and will maintain a broadly consultative approach
throughout the implementation period. The beneficiaries of the water- and resource-efficient technologies have been
identified through local stakeholder consultations. In addition, the activities have been designed to ensure that all
individuals are afforded access to the technologies, which will be installed in public facilities — for example rainwater |  | 

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 88 OF 96
G
harvesting in schools — rather than in private households. Mechanisms for resolving conflicts and addressing disputes
and complaints will be established to ensure that the programme's activities are transparent and that the programme
management team can be held accountable by beneficiary communities.
Selected Risk Factor 8
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Low
Description
Changes in political leadership, which may result in delays in implementation.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Regular engagement with non-political actors — such as government agency officials, local authorities, staff and local
community members — will be prioritised during programme implementation. Additionally, formulation of local
ordinances, mainstreaming of programme interventions in local planning and budgeting systems will ensure that
political issues will have negligible impact on the sustainability of programme interventions. Finally, support from
regional bodies such as the CCAD will promote continued political support.
Selected Risk Factor 9
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Medium
Description
Insufficient coordination, collaboration and information-sharing between countries and implementing partners at a
regional level and between relevant government departments, research institutions and private sector entities within
the countries. This can result in the limited participation of relevant institutions and agencies, reducing the timely
delivery and effectiveness of the programme.
Mitigation Measure(s)
Detailed implementation arrangements have been designed to ensure effective coordination of programme activities
between regional stakeholders. These arrangements are outlined in Section B.4. The relevant institutions were
involved in the design of the programme activities and have agreed on all roles and responsibilities. Coordination
between them will be supported by regular meetings/engagements between implementing partners to facilitate
information sharing.
In addition, programme countries, relevant government departments, research institutions and the private sector will
be encouraged to share information through a number of technologies and systems that will be established or
strengthened by the programme. Technologies and systems will be selected based on the most appropriate
approaches to sharing information in both the relevant regional and local contexts. Examples include:
• a regional knowledge hub to facilitate sharing of best practices and lessons learned across countries and sectors
as well as to provide policy- and decision-makers with relevant information regarding EbA;
• cooperation agreements with stakeholders to promote an understanding of roles and responsibilities within the
programme and facilitate effective participation; and
• training workshops for local authorities, community organisations and partner financial institutions, among others,
to ensure a shared understanding of EbA and water/resource-efficient strategies.
Selected Risk Factor 10
Category Probability Impact
Other Low High
Description
Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) considerations into the
implementation of the proposed programme activities as well as its management structures and systems.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The programme has been assessed according to the GCF's environmental and social protection standards and
associated risks and mitigation measures have been identified. In addition, a Gender Action Plan has been developed
and will be implemented to ensure that gender equality is incorporated into all interventions. An Environmental and

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
harvesting in schools — rather than in private households. Mechanisms for resolving conflicts and addressing disputes
and complaints will be established to ensure that the programme's activities are transparent and that the programme
management team can be held accountable by beneficiary communities. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 8 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Governance | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Changes in political leadership, which may result in delays in implementation. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Regular engagement with non-political actors — such as government agency officials, local authorities, staff and local
community members — will be prioritised during programme implementation. Additionally, formulation of local
ordinances, mainstreaming of programme interventions in local planning and budgeting systems will ensure that
political issues will have negligible impact on the sustainability of programme interventions. Finally, support from
regional bodies such as the CCAD will promote continued political support. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 9 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Governance | Medium | Medium
Description |  | 
Insufficient coordination, collaboration and information-sharing between countries and implementing partners at a
regional level and between relevant government departments, research institutions and private sector entities within
the countries. This can result in the limited participation of relevant institutions and agencies, reducing the timely
delivery and effectiveness of the programme. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
Detailed implementation arrangements have been designed to ensure effective coordination of programme activities
between regional stakeholders. These arrangements are outlined in Section B.4. The relevant institutions were
involved in the design of the programme activities and have agreed on all roles and responsibilities. Coordination
between them will be supported by regular meetings/engagements between implementing partners to facilitate
information sharing.
In addition, programme countries, relevant government departments, research institutions and the private sector will
be encouraged to share information through a number of technologies and systems that will be established or
strengthened by the programme. Technologies and systems will be selected based on the most appropriate
approaches to sharing information in both the relevant regional and local contexts. Examples include:
• a regional knowledge hub to facilitate sharing of best practices and lessons learned across countries and sectors
as well as to provide policy- and decision-makers with relevant information regarding EbA;
• cooperation agreements with stakeholders to promote an understanding of roles and responsibilities within the
programme and facilitate effective participation; and
• training workshops for local authorities, community organisations and partner financial institutions, among others,
to ensure a shared understanding of EbA and water/resource-efficient strategies. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 10 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Other | Low | High
Description |  | 
Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) considerations into the
implementation of the proposed programme activities as well as its management structures and systems. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
The programme has been assessed according to the GCF's environmental and social protection standards and
associated risks and mitigation measures have been identified. In addition, a Gender Action Plan has been developed
and will be implemented to ensure that gender equality is incorporated into all interventions. An Environmental and |  | 

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 89 OF 96
G
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has also been designed based on a detailed screening process. The ESMP will
provide a framework for ensuring that programme activities do not have a negative impact on the environment or local
communities.
Selected Risk Factor 11
Category Probability Impact
Credit Low Medium
Description
Deteriorating economic situation of end beneficiaries and in consequence payment capacity as well as lack of
management capacity at the level of PFIs and IFIs can lead to increased credit risk of funds provided by GCF and
CABEI. This increased credit risk not only can affect the funds provided by GCF and CABEI, but also put the overall
success of the programme at risk. Hence the potential impact is considered ‘medium, while the probability is considered
as ‘low’ as the financing mechanisms – three financial facilities – build upon proven and established structures and the
programme as a whole is targeting the increase of end beneficiaries’ resilience, lowering their credit risk.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The mitigation of credit risk within the programme relies upon mitigation measures on three different levels:
1. Eligibility of IFIs, PFIs and end beneficiaries: CABEI will define strict eligibility criteria for all actors involved
down-stream of its provision (co-finance) and management (GCF funds) of funds, hence the selection of
counterparts will be used to limit the credit risk
a. IFIs: only institutions forming part of CABEI’s already accredited network of IFI will gain access to the
programme; these institutions regularly lead their respective markets in terms of credit risk
management capacity (as expressed per their ratings)
b. PFIs: CABEI’s minimum eligibility criteria will ensure that only the most solid institutions will gain
access to the programme; further, by assigning part of the PFI’s credit risk to IFIs (via the on-lending
stream of funds), these IFIs will ensure to strengthen the selection of low-risk PFIs
2. Promotion of EbA finance: targeting the investment into EbA solutions that increase resilience and hence lower
credit risk of end beneficiaries as main objective of the programme ties the activities of the programme directly
to concrete measures to mitigate credit risk
3. Introduction of solid MRV system: via the introduction of proven digital toots, will enable a centralized
monitoring of credit risk tendencies in resulting portfolios and sub-portfolios, with the aim to introduce early
warning routines as well prioritize contingency plan activities, following methodologies UNEP’s MEbA project
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment
197. The environmental and social risk associated with the programme was evaluated in accordance with
GCF's Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS). According to the assessment, the programme is
considered to be Category I-2 or Medium Risk. This categorisation is supported by an Environmental and Social
Assessment and associated Management Framework (Annex 6). The assessment and management plan
comply with GCF requirements by: i) defining the context and baseline of each target area in which the
interventions will be implemented; ii) identifying all negative and positive impacts associated with each of the
proposed interventions; and iii) providing a management plan to describe how any adverse impacts identified
during risk screening will be accounted for or mitigated throughout the programme implementation period. The
primary environmental and social risks that may be associated with the programme — as identified by the
assessment — are presented below.
198. Overall, the environmental and social risks assessed to be presented under this programme are minor
and can be mitigated and/or effectively managed with the implementation of an appropriate strategy. The
programme is expected to result in net-positive environmental and social benefits in the long term, which
include: i) supporting economic security and environmental benefits by facilitating access to micro-finance and
grant facilities for the implementation of small-scale EbA interventions; and ii) increasing water security through
improved catchment management and the provision of water-efficient technologies and systems. However,
several risks have been identified that, if not adequately managed, will reduce the resilience of certain
communities or result in adverse environmental, social or economic impacts. These potential impacts are
detailed below.
Environmental impacts

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has also been designed based on a detailed screening process. The ESMP will
provide a framework for ensuring that programme activities do not have a negative impact on the environment or local
communities. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 11 |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact
Credit |  |  | Low |  |  | Medium | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  | 
Deteriorating economic situation of end beneficiaries and in consequence payment capacity as well as lack of
management capacity at the level of PFIs and IFIs can lead to increased credit risk of funds provided by GCF and
CABEI. This increased credit risk not only can affect the funds provided by GCF and CABEI, but also put the overall
success of the programme at risk. Hence the potential impact is considered ‘medium, while the probability is considered
as ‘low’ as the financing mechanisms – three financial facilities – build upon proven and established structures and the
programme as a whole is targeting the increase of end beneficiaries’ resilience, lowering their credit risk. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  | 
The mitigation of credit risk within the programme relies upon mitigation measures on three different levels:
1. Eligibility of IFIs, PFIs and end beneficiaries: CABEI will define strict eligibility criteria for all actors involved
down-stream of its provision (co-finance) and management (GCF funds) of funds, hence the selection of
counterparts will be used to limit the credit risk
a. IFIs: only institutions forming part of CABEI’s already accredited network of IFI will gain access to the
programme; these institutions regularly lead their respective markets in terms of credit risk
management capacity (as expressed per their ratings)
b. PFIs: CABEI’s minimum eligibility criteria will ensure that only the most solid institutions will gain
access to the programme; further, by assigning part of the PFI’s credit risk to IFIs (via the on-lending
stream of funds), these IFIs will ensure to strengthen the selection of low-risk PFIs
2. Promotion of EbA finance: targeting the investment into EbA solutions that increase resilience and hence lower
credit risk of end beneficiaries as main objective of the programme ties the activities of the programme directly
to concrete measures to mitigate credit risk
3. Introduction of solid MRV system: via the introduction of proven digital toots, will enable a centralized
monitoring of credit risk tendencies in resulting portfolios and sub-portfolios, with the aim to introduce early
warning routines as well prioritize contingency plan activities, following methodologies UNEP’s MEbA project |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment |  |  |  |  |  | 
197. The environmental and social risk associated with the programme was evaluated in accordance with
GCF's Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS). According to the assessment, the programme is
considered to be Category I-2 or Medium Risk. This categorisation is supported by an Environmental and Social
Assessment and associated Management Framework (Annex 6). The assessment and management plan
comply with GCF requirements by: i) defining the context and baseline of each target area in which the
interventions will be implemented; ii) identifying all negative and positive impacts associated with each of the
proposed interventions; and iii) providing a management plan to describe how any adverse impacts identified
during risk screening will be accounted for or mitigated throughout the programme implementation period. The
primary environmental and social risks that may be associated with the programme — as identified by the
assessment — are presented below.
198. Overall, the environmental and social risks assessed to be presented under this programme are minor
and can be mitigated and/or effectively managed with the implementation of an appropriate strategy. The
programme is expected to result in net-positive environmental and social benefits in the long term, which
include: i) supporting economic security and environmental benefits by facilitating access to micro-finance and
grant facilities for the implementation of small-scale EbA interventions; and ii) increasing water security through
improved catchment management and the provision of water-efficient technologies and systems. However,
several risks have been identified that, if not adequately managed, will reduce the resilience of certain
communities or result in adverse environmental, social or economic impacts. These potential impacts are
detailed below.
Environmental impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 90 OF 96
G
199. Several potential environmental impacts have been identified as being associated with the
implementation of the proposed activities. These impacts are, however, avoidable and can be mitigated
effectively through appropriate management measures. The main environmental impacts include:
i) a possible increase in the use of pesticides and fertilisers in the EbA options, which may create both environmental
and social risks by polluting natural resources;
ii) an increase in the emission of short- and long-lived climate pollutants, by the execution of protocols and EbA
measures, especially if the implementation of agroforestry systems includes the use of chemically sourced nitrogen
fertilisers;
iii) methodological approaches to assessing ecosystem services may generate biases at the time of assessment,
affecting the perceived importance of specific ecosystems, therefore impacting on biodiversity and habitats; and
iv) unintended promotion of deforestation for fuelwood to be used in the furnaces and stoves being marketed under the
programme.
200. The environmental impacts listed above can be effectively managed by, for example: i) the
dissemination of specific guidelines on the use of fertilisers; ii) awareness-raising on strategies for the
sustainable harvesting of fuelwood; and iii) clear methodological approaches to assessing ecosystems. For
further information on specific management and mitigation strategies relating to each activity, please refer to
Annex 6: Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
Social impacts
201. The potential for adverse social impacts under the programme has been assessed as more likely than
environmental impacts. These adverse impacts largely pertain to the potential for economic and cultural
displacement, adverse economic impacts resulting from debt accrued through the use of financing mechanisms
and restrictions on land use. The main potential social impacts include:
i) non-recognition or alteration of Indigenous People's livelihood strategies, cultural practices, religious beliefs or
governance structures;
ii) economic displacement and an increase in economic insecurity in the event that credit conditions are not suitable
for small producers, or that interest rates are not commensurate with the return rate of EbA interventions;
iii) increased restrictions on land-use for small scale farmers, Indigenous Peoples or other marginalised groups;
iv) unequal opportunities for indigenous peoples and other marginalised groups to benefit from the programme
interventions, particularly if the opportunities are not promoted in an accessible, culturally appropriate and inclusive
manner; and
v) limited inclusion of all stakeholder priorities given the large geographic extent, diverse stakeholder groups and range
of sociocultural contexts.
202. These impacts are all manageable or avoidable and can be effectively reduced and/or mitigated
through the implementation of appropriate management strategies. For further information please refer to
Annex 6: ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples
203. Potential adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples are a critical concern for the GCF and although no
unavoidable impacts on Indigenous Peoples have been identified in the risk screening, certain interventions
may result in unintended impacts. However, it is important to note that the programme has been designed to
be open and inclusive and it will consider the languages, dialects and cultural practices of all beneficiary groups
throughout implementation to ensure equal access and fair distribution of programme benefits. In addition,
because adaptation measures have been designed with an ecosystem-based approach that inherently respects
Indigenous Peoples' cultural relationship with their territory, it is assumed that Indigenous Peoples will not be
affected. CABEI — as the AE — has experience in facilitating the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples in GCF-
financed projects and will maintain oversight.
Grievance Redress Mechanism
204. The established CABEI Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be implemented for this
programme. The mechanism is approved by the GCF and has been used for a prior GCF project. The GRM
will be used at all stages of the programme and will provide an accessible, rapid, fair and effective response to
concerned stakeholders, especially any vulnerable groups who may lack access to formal legal systems or
support. For further information please refer to Annex 6: ESMF.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 91 OF 96
G
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan
205. During programme preparation, a gender assessment was conducted to understand the differential
vulnerability to, and impact of, climate change on women and men in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones of the
seven participating countries. From the findings of this assessment, and an analysis of the proposed
programme solution, a gender action plan (GAP) was developed. The process to produce these components
included a desktop review of available literature, as well as stakeholder and beneficiary consultations held in
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and Dominican Republic. The assessment
does note that gender-disaggregated data is limited, particularly regarding indicators and information on land
tenure, participation in decision-making, livelihood activities, and access to credit and finance.
206. Traditional gender roles and stereotypes in the programme area, as well as the resulting asymmetrical
power differences they produce, create a culture of social exclusion that leaves women vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, with reduced capacity or opportunity to adapt. The patriarchal and sexist roles,
norms and stereotypes create inequalities in social relations and cultural institutions, wherein men maintain
'productive', income-generating roles and women perform mostly 'reproductive', unpaid duties. Notably, this
manifests in women's: i) reduced knowledge of information systems (such as early warning or forecasts); i) low
participation in training; iii), limited access to finance and credit; iv) inequitable management and control of
natural resources and land; v) greater exposure to violence; vi) limited participation in decision-making
institutions; and vii) exclusion from accessing benefits and public resources for development. In addition to
undermining their agency, capabilities and safety, this system limits the realisation of women and girls' rights,
which is particularly evident in rural and indigenous contexts where gender inequalities are most pronounced
and baseline vulnerability (for all genders) is highest.
207. The profile of migration from the region has changed in the past decade, with women increasingly
becoming active agents in the migration process, rather than passive actors relative to the husbands or male
family members' decisions. This is notable because migrant women face additional risks to men because of the
same gender conditions that shape their vulnerability at origin. This can manifest in isolation, lack of social
networks, precarious employment conditions, unsafe living environments, and exposure to violence,
exploitation and even enslavement.
208. Although potentially more relevant to mitigation activities, the assessment also notes that female
environmental and rights activists in the region are particularly targeted by extractive industries (mining,
hydroelectric, monocultures and/or oil) for violence, stigmatisation and criminalisation. These conditions,
wherein women experience discriminatory, violent and exclusionary practices, are unfavourable to their
continued participation and representation in activist spaces, which may result in unfavourable biases and even
further inequality.
209. Regarding climate change, consultations conducted for the assessment described the effects of
droughts and floods on women, which include: i) multiplication of the 'reproductive' day, wherein women's
burden of work increases; ii) negative impacts on agriculture and fishing for smallholder families, particularly
for female-headed households; iii) increased migration and displacement; iv) decreased forest cover reducing
access to resources like water, food, fuels, and non-timber forest products (including herbs and medicinal
plants) which has additional implications for household health; v) reduced opportunities for women in income-
generating work such as agriculture or handcrafts (as a result of reduced resources); vi) reduced access to
clean drinking water, which has further opportunity costs for women and girls' exposure and time spent
collecting water; vii) negative impacts on women's largely-marginalised physical and mental health due to
stress, hunger and malnutrition, heatstroke and kidney disease, and 'household' diseases such as Zika and
mites.
210. The assessment describes how the conditions and vulnerabilities described above will influence
programme implementation, particularly noting how social exclusion may preclude women from participating
meaningfully in decision-making processes and accessing the benefits of the programme, such as training and
economic empowerment. To mitigate against biasing against women as programme beneficiaries during
implementation and subsequently, the gender action plan outlines several interventions in response. These
interventions will help ensure the programme does not unintentionally contribute to perpetuating or worsening
gender equality and gender-based climate vulnerability in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. The GAP seeks to

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan | 
205. During programme preparation, a gender assessment was conducted to understand the differential
vulnerability to, and impact of, climate change on women and men in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones of the
seven participating countries. From the findings of this assessment, and an analysis of the proposed
programme solution, a gender action plan (GAP) was developed. The process to produce these components
included a desktop review of available literature, as well as stakeholder and beneficiary consultations held in
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and Dominican Republic. The assessment
does note that gender-disaggregated data is limited, particularly regarding indicators and information on land
tenure, participation in decision-making, livelihood activities, and access to credit and finance.
206. Traditional gender roles and stereotypes in the programme area, as well as the resulting asymmetrical
power differences they produce, create a culture of social exclusion that leaves women vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, with reduced capacity or opportunity to adapt. The patriarchal and sexist roles,
norms and stereotypes create inequalities in social relations and cultural institutions, wherein men maintain
'productive', income-generating roles and women perform mostly 'reproductive', unpaid duties. Notably, this
manifests in women's: i) reduced knowledge of information systems (such as early warning or forecasts); i) low
participation in training; iii), limited access to finance and credit; iv) inequitable management and control of
natural resources and land; v) greater exposure to violence; vi) limited participation in decision-making
institutions; and vii) exclusion from accessing benefits and public resources for development. In addition to
undermining their agency, capabilities and safety, this system limits the realisation of women and girls' rights,
which is particularly evident in rural and indigenous contexts where gender inequalities are most pronounced
and baseline vulnerability (for all genders) is highest.
207. The profile of migration from the region has changed in the past decade, with women increasingly
becoming active agents in the migration process, rather than passive actors relative to the husbands or male
family members' decisions. This is notable because migrant women face additional risks to men because of the
same gender conditions that shape their vulnerability at origin. This can manifest in isolation, lack of social
networks, precarious employment conditions, unsafe living environments, and exposure to violence,
exploitation and even enslavement.
208. Although potentially more relevant to mitigation activities, the assessment also notes that female
environmental and rights activists in the region are particularly targeted by extractive industries (mining,
hydroelectric, monocultures and/or oil) for violence, stigmatisation and criminalisation. These conditions,
wherein women experience discriminatory, violent and exclusionary practices, are unfavourable to their
continued participation and representation in activist spaces, which may result in unfavourable biases and even
further inequality.
209. Regarding climate change, consultations conducted for the assessment described the effects of
droughts and floods on women, which include: i) multiplication of the 'reproductive' day, wherein women's
burden of work increases; ii) negative impacts on agriculture and fishing for smallholder families, particularly
for female-headed households; iii) increased migration and displacement; iv) decreased forest cover reducing
access to resources like water, food, fuels, and non-timber forest products (including herbs and medicinal
plants) which has additional implications for household health; v) reduced opportunities for women in income-
generating work such as agriculture or handcrafts (as a result of reduced resources); vi) reduced access to
clean drinking water, which has further opportunity costs for women and girls' exposure and time spent
collecting water; vii) negative impacts on women's largely-marginalised physical and mental health due to
stress, hunger and malnutrition, heatstroke and kidney disease, and 'household' diseases such as Zika and
mites.
210. The assessment describes how the conditions and vulnerabilities described above will influence
programme implementation, particularly noting how social exclusion may preclude women from participating
meaningfully in decision-making processes and accessing the benefits of the programme, such as training and
economic empowerment. To mitigate against biasing against women as programme beneficiaries during
implementation and subsequently, the gender action plan outlines several interventions in response. These
interventions will help ensure the programme does not unintentionally contribute to perpetuating or worsening
gender equality and gender-based climate vulnerability in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. The GAP seeks to |  | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 92 OF 96
G
ensure women are empowered and enabled to meaningfully contribute to, and benefit from, programme
activities and that stakeholders' actions and programme processes make considerations for the needs, interests
and vulnerabilities of women. The GAP includes clear targets, gender-sensitive design features and quantifiable
performance indicators to promote women's participation and benefits from the programme.
211. The actions of the GAP include:
• developing women-oriented financial products and services to finance EbA investments;
• capacity-building and awareness-raising amongst stakeholders on the importance and implementation of gender
mainstreaming/gender equality;
• strengthening the technical capacities of women's organisations at the local level; and
• ensuring the active participation and empowerment of women producers and women's organisations in programme
processes.
212. Implementation arrangements of the programme also include a Gender Officer under the RPMU and a
gender expert in each of the PEUs.
213. The full gender assessment and programme-level gender action plan are included as Annex 8.
G.3. Financial management and procurement
214. CABEI, through its current structure, including its Representation Offices in each country of the
Programme, the Office of Compliance, the Office of Environmental and Social Safeguards, the Office of
Supervision of Credit Operations, and the Internal Audit Office, will oversee, monitor and follow up the
implementation of the Dry Corridor Programme. It is through this structure and the legal obligations derived
from the contracts between CABEI and the IFIs, and the contracts between CABEI & FAO and CABEI & CCAD
that CABEI can guarantees that the programme will be implemented under CABEI’s policies and procedures.
In particular:
• The Private Sector Division, through CABEI’s Representation Office in the countries will be responsible
for the coordination of actions and activities regarding the follow up, monitoring and oversight of the
programme; the management and process of the disbursements needed by the programme executing
entities, the IFIs and the PMU to carry out the programme’s planned activities.
• The Credit Division, through its Office of Credit Operations Supervision will be responsible for leading
the oversight process of the physical and financial execution of the programme.
• The Office of Environmental and Social Sustainability will be responsible for designing, completing and
validating the I-BCIE questionnaire, as well as generating the calculation and Final Evaluation Report ex
ante, which is an integral part of the intervention's credit opinion, which is presented with the operation
to the CABEI approval authorities, as well as accompanying the supervision process with the Office of
Credit Operations Supervision.
• The CABEI Independent Evaluation Office is responsible for the validation of the I-BCIE questionnaire,
the development of the mid-term and ex post calculation and Final Evaluation Report.
• CABEI’s Procurement Unit, in coordination with CABEI’s Office in the countries, will oversee the
procurement activities required by the programme, to ensure that the implementation is in line with
CABEI´s Policy for Procurement of Goods, Works, Services and Consulting with Bank resources and its
application rules. The purpose of these regulations is to establish the guidelines and procedures that the
executing entities must comply with for procurement in the execution of operations.
• The CABEI’s Integrity and Compliance Office will be responsible for analyzing and proposing a course
of action of the reports/allegations related to prohibited practices to an Integrity Committee, in accordance
with CABEI´s internal regulations and the applicable terms to the different contractual relationships with
counterparties.
• The Finance Division through its Partnerships and International Cooperation Department is responsible
for acting as the GCF focal point for the follow up of the programme execution and coordinating the

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
ensure women are empowered and enabled to meaningfully contribute to, and benefit from, programme
activities and that stakeholders' actions and programme processes make considerations for the needs, interests
and vulnerabilities of women. The GAP includes clear targets, gender-sensitive design features and quantifiable
performance indicators to promote women's participation and benefits from the programme.
211. The actions of the GAP include:
• developing women-oriented financial products and services to finance EbA investments;
• capacity-building and awareness-raising amongst stakeholders on the importance and implementation of gender
mainstreaming/gender equality;
• strengthening the technical capacities of women's organisations at the local level; and
• ensuring the active participation and empowerment of women producers and women's organisations in programme
processes.
212. Implementation arrangements of the programme also include a Gender Officer under the RPMU and a
gender expert in each of the PEUs.
213. The full gender assessment and programme-level gender action plan are included as Annex 8. |  | 
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement | 
 |  | .
f
 | 214. CABEI, through its current structure, including its Representation Offices in each country of the | 
 | Programme, the Office of Compliance, the Office of Environmental and Social Safeguards, the Office of | 
 | Supervision of Credit Operations, and the Internal Audit Office, will oversee, monitor and follow up the | 
 | implementation of the Dry Corridor Programme. It is through this structure and the legal obligations derived | 
 | from the contracts between CABEI and the IFIs, and the contracts between CABEI & FAO and CABEI & CCAD | 
 | that CABEI can guarantees that the programme will be implemented under CABEI’s policies and procedures | 
 | In particular: | 
 | • The Private Sector Division, through CABEI’s Representation Office in the countries will be responsible | 
 | for the coordination of actions and activities regarding the follow up, monitoring and oversight of the | 
 | programme; the management and process of the disbursements needed by the programme executing | 
 | entities, the IFIs and the PMU to carry out the programme’s planned activities. | 
 | • The Credit Division, through its Office of Credit Operations Supervision will be responsible for leading | 
 | the oversight process of the physical and financial execution of the programme. | 
 | • The Office of Environmental and Social Sustainability will be responsible for designing, completing and | 
 | validating the I-BCIE questionnaire, as well as generating the calculation and Final Evaluation Report ex | 
 | ante, which is an integral part of the intervention's credit opinion, which is presented with the operation | 
 | to the CABEI approval authorities, as well as accompanying the supervision process with the Office o | 
 | Credit Operations Supervision. | 
 | • The CABEI Independent Evaluation Office is responsible for the validation of the I-BCIE questionnaire, | 
 | the development of the mid-term and ex post calculation and Final Evaluation Report. | 
 | • CABEI’s Procurement Unit, in coordination with CABEI’s Office in the countries, will oversee the | 
 | procurement activities required by the programme, to ensure that the implementation is in line with | 
 | CABEI´s Policy for Procurement of Goods, Works, Services and Consulting with Bank resources and its | 
 | application rules. The purpose of these regulations is to establish the guidelines and procedures that the | 
 | executing entities must comply with for procurement in the execution of operations. | 
 | • The CABEI’s Integrity and Compliance Office will be responsible for analyzing and proposing a course | 
 | of action of the reports/allegations related to prohibited practices to an Integrity Committee, in accordance | 
 | with CABEI´s internal regulations and the applicable terms to the different contractual relationships with | 
 | counterparties. | 
 | • The Finance Division through its Partnerships and International Cooperation Department is responsible | 
 | for acting as the GCF focal point for the follow up of the programme execution and coordinating the | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 93 OF 96
G
development and delivery of all reports agreed with GCF in order to guarantee a proper monitoring and
programme execution.
215. Regarding the Fiduciary Compliance, CABEI is an International Multilateral Development Bank, who
has policies and procedures in place regarding antifraud/anticorruption, AML/CFT and sanctions in accordance
with CABEI´s nature and are currently in force and in accordance with current international standards.
216. Policy and Procedural Manual is applied and observed in all active and passive operations, and in
those involving procurement of goods and services in which the Bank interacts or is the counterpart of another
natural or juridical person. CABEI´s Money Laundering Prevention Policy, Manual and procedures are currently
in force and in accordance with current international standards. This Policies and Manuals will be applied in
order for the programme and its activities to conform to any UNSC sanctions programs that may be applicable,
also to prevent that no entities or individuals involved in the programme as counterparties or implementers are
listed on any UNSC sanctions lists.
217. CABEI shall neither accept nor maintain a commercial relationship or operation if it suspects that funds
of a client or potential client may originate from criminal activities.
218. CABEI has a Risk Rating System, which is comprised of comprehensive and periodic reviews of all
private and non-sovereign sector operations.
219. CABEI uses Sentinel (World Check) for the screening of all counterparties. We use Google in order to
review our direct counterparties and PEP. Additionally, CABEI has implemented a swift sanctions screening to
monitor all incoming and outgoing CABEI transactions and has acquired banker’s almanac.
220. On the other hand, CABEI has implemented several mechanisms (web, email, voice mail, among
others) in which reports and allegations of irregularities, unethical situations, the commission of prohibited
practices or regulatory breaches in the use of its funds or resources administered by CABEI can be submitted.
Reports about environmental and/or social issues or damages related to CABEI´s projects can be reported as
well. Any natural or juridical person, including CABEI´s staff members may submit a report. Anonymously
reports are permitted.
221. The Integrity and Compliance Office is in charge of analysing and proposing a course of action of the
reports/allegations related to prohibited practices to an Integrity Committee, in accordance with CABEI´s
internal regulation and the applicable terms to the different contractual relationships with counterparties.
222. As demonstrated by its status as an Accredited Entity to the GCF, CABEI has extensive expertise in
working with international funds and has a good track record in implementing projects using international
financial management practices. For the proposed programme, CABEI will be responsible for the fiduciary
aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment activities.
223. The procurement of goods and services (including consultants' services) for activities financed by the
GCF will be carried out following CABEI's standard practices and procedures — including its procurement and
consultants' guidelines — which are aligned to those of the GCF, as well as to all national laws. Further details
on the procurement of goods and services, as well as CABEI's applicable procurement procedures are provided
in the Procurement Plan in Annex 10. Procurement executed by EE’s will abide to each EE’s regulations, that
can be found in annex 29. The EEs will be accountable to the sound management of funds to the AE while
applying its internal control of procedures, guaranteeing the adequate internal control for operability of
administrative areas.
224. CABEI will provide to the GCF:

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
 | development and delivery of all reports agreed with GCF in order to guarantee a proper monitoring and | l
.
l
 | programme execution. | 
 |  | 
 | 215. Regarding the Fiduciary Compliance, CABEI is an International Multilateral Development Bank, who | 
 | has policies and procedures in place regarding antifraud/anticorruption, AML/CFT and sanctions in accordance | 
 | with CABEI´s nature and are currently in force and in accordance with current international standards. | 
 |  | 
 | 216. Policy and Procedural Manual is applied and observed in all active and passive operations, and in | 
 | those involving procurement of goods and services in which the Bank interacts or is the counterpart of another | 
 | natural or juridical person. CABEI´s Money Laundering Prevention Policy, Manual and procedures are currently | 
 | in force and in accordance with current international standards. This Policies and Manuals will be applied in | 
 | order for the programme and its activities to conform to any UNSC sanctions programs that may be applicable, | 
 | also to prevent that no entities or individuals involved in the programme as counterparties or implementers are | 
 | listed on any UNSC sanctions lists. | 
 |  | 
 | 217. CABEI shall neither accept nor maintain a commercial relationship or operation if it suspects that funds | 
 | of a client or potential client may originate from criminal activities. | 
 |  | 
 | 218. CABEI has a Risk Rating System, which is comprised of comprehensive and periodic reviews of al | 
 | private and non-sovereign sector operations. | 
 |  | 
 | 219. CABEI uses Sentinel (World Check) for the screening of all counterparties. We use Google in order to | 
 | review our direct counterparties and PEP. Additionally, CABEI has implemented a swift sanctions screening to | 
 | monitor all incoming and outgoing CABEI transactions and has acquired banker’s almanac. | 
 |  | 
 | 220. On the other hand, CABEI has implemented several mechanisms (web, email, voice mail, among | 
 | others) in which reports and allegations of irregularities, unethical situations, the commission of prohibited | 
 | practices or regulatory breaches in the use of its funds or resources administered by CABEI can be submitted | 
 | Reports about environmental and/or social issues or damages related to CABEI´s projects can be reported as | 
 | well. Any natural or juridical person, including CABEI´s staff members may submit a report. Anonymously | 
 | reports are permitted. | 
 |  | 
 | 221. The Integrity and Compliance Office is in charge of analysing and proposing a course of action of the | 
 | reports/allegations related to prohibited practices to an Integrity Committee, in accordance with CABEI´s | 
 | internal regulation and the applicable terms to the different contractual relationships with counterparties. | 
 |  | 
 | 222. As demonstrated by its status as an Accredited Entity to the GCF, CABEI has extensive expertise in | 
 | working with international funds and has a good track record in implementing projects using internationa | 
 | financial management practices. For the proposed programme, CABEI will be responsible for the fiduciary | 
 | aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment activities. | 
 |  | 
 | 223. The procurement of goods and services (including consultants' services) for activities financed by the | 
 | GCF will be carried out following CABEI's standard practices and procedures — including its procurement and | 
 | consultants' guidelines — which are aligned to those of the GCF, as well as to all national laws. Further details | 
 | on the procurement of goods and services, as well as CABEI's applicable procurement procedures are provided | 
 | in the Procurement Plan in Annex 10. Procurement executed by EE’s will abide to each EE’s regulations, that | 
 | can be found in annex 29. The EEs will be accountable to the sound management of funds to the AE while | 
 | applying its internal control of procedures, guaranteeing the adequate internal control for operability of | 
 | administrative areas. | 
 |  | 
 | 224. CABEI will provide to the GCF: | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 94 OF 96
G
• Annual progress reports on the status of programme implementation, including the disbursements made
during the relevant period — or more frequent progress reports if requested by the GCF; and
• an annual audited financial statement of the specific account prepared by an independent auditor or
evaluation body.
225. CABEI will observe the highest ethical standards during the procurement and execution of this
programme. CABEI will ensure: i) substantive quality of programme implementation; ii) effective use of both
international and national resources allocated to it; and iii) proper coordination among all programme
stakeholders, in particular national, sub-national and local partners. Details of the programme management
structure of the programme and the respective roles that will be played by CABEI are provided in Section B.4.
Implementation arrangements.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity's disclosure policy, and
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
 | • Annual progress reports on the status of programme implementation, including the disbursements made | .
 | during the relevant period — or more frequent progress reports if requested by the GCF; and | 
 | • an annual audited financial statement of the specific account prepared by an independent auditor or | 
 | evaluation body. | 
 |  | 
 | 225. CABEI will observe the highest ethical standards during the procurement and execution of this | 
 | programme. CABEI will ensure: i) substantive quality of programme implementation; ii) effective use of both | 
 | international and national resources allocated to it; and iii) proper coordination among all programme | 
 | stakeholders, in particular national, sub-national and local partners. Details of the programme management | 
 | structure of the programme and the respective roles that will be played by CABEI are provided in Section B.4 | 
 | Implementation arrangements. | 
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 | Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure | 
 | for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and | 
 | programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, | 
 | subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in | 
 | confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the | 
 | document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm. | 
 |  | 
 | Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. | 
 |  | 
 | ☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 |   full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity's disclosure policy, and | 
 |   redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 95 OF 96
H
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People's Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☐ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☒ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
☒ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☒ Annex 22 Description of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies eligible for finance
☒ Annex 23 Operational guidelines for financial mechanisms
☒ Annex 24 Forestry and agricultural sectors baseline
☒ Annex 25 Food and water security baseline
☒ Annex 26 Description of selected municipalities

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People's Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
 |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☒ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☒ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☒ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 22 | Description of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies eligible for finance | 
☒ |  | Annex 23 | Operational guidelines for financial mechanisms | 
☒ |  | Annex 24 | Forestry and agricultural sectors baseline | 
☒ |  | Annex 25 | Food and water security baseline | 
☒ |  | Annex 26 | Description of selected municipalities | 

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 96 OF 96
H
☒ Annex 27 Past and ongoing projects in the region
☒ Annex 28 ToR for main programme posts
☒ Annex 29 EE Capacity assessment
☒ Annex 30 EbA finace demand and capacity assessment
☒ Annex 31 EbA site specific plans for Costa Rica and Honduras
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 98 ---
☒ | Annex 27 | Past and ongoing projects in the region
☒ | Annex 28 | ToR for main programme posts
☒ | Annex 29 | EE Capacity assessment
☒ | Annex 30 | EbA finace demand and capacity assessment
☒ | Annex 31 | EbA site specific plans for Costa Rica and Honduras

=== PAGE 99 ===
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)
Despacho de la Ministra
Ministerio de Ambiente y Energía
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)
San José, Costa Rica, September 9th, 2021
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Central American Bank for Economic Integration
(CABEI) regarding Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the
Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Dear Madame, Sir,
We refer to the programme titled Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience
in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic in Costa
Rica as included in the funding proposal submitted by Central American Bank for Economic
Integration (CABEI) to us on November 27th, 2019.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Minister of Environment and
Energy, Andrea Meza Murillo, the NDA of Costa Rica.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme Ecosystem-based Adaptation to
increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the
Dominican Republic as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Costa Rica has no-objection to the programme Ecosystem-based
Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor and the
Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The programme Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the
Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities, strategies
and plans of Costa Rica;
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American
Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic as included in the funding
proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry
Corridor and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic as included in the funding proposal
has been duly followed.
Teléfono (506) 2257-5456 o 2233-4533 Ext. 8503 Apdo. Postal: 10104-1000
San José, Costa Rica
Correo electrónico: despachominae@minae.go.cr

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---



=== PAGE 100 ===
Despacho de la Ministra
Ministerio de Ambiente y Energía
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
Andrea Meza Murillo
Minister of Environment and Energy
Costa Rica
Teléfono (506) 2257-5456 o 2233-4533 Ext. 8503 Apdo. Postal: 10104-1000
San José, Costa Rica
Correo electrónico: despachominae@minae.go.cr

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---



=== PAGE 112 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or programme title
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience
Existence of subproject(s) to in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of
be identified after GCF Board the Dominican Republic
approval
Sector (public or private) Yes
Accredited entity
Environmental and social Private
safeguards (ESS) category Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)
Location – specific
Category I-2
location(s) of project or
target country or location(s)
of programme Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Remarks N/A
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Date of disclosure on
N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable)
Remarks N/A
Date of disclosure on
Thursday, May 6, 2021
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure English and Spanish
Spanish is the national language of all participating
Explanation on language
countries.
English:
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/dry-corridor-program
Link to disclosure
Spanish:
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y-
adquisiciones/programa-del-corredor-seco-
centroamericano
Other link(s) N/A

--- Table 1 on Page 112 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
Project or programme title |  |  | Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience | 
 | Existence of subproject(s) to |  | in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of
the Dominican Republic | 
 | be identified after GCF Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public or private) |  | Yes | 
 | Accredited entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental and social |  | Private
Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) | 
 | safeguards (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – specific |  | Category I-2
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, | 
 | location(s) of project or |  |  | 
 | target country or location(s) |  |  | 
 | of programme |  |  | 
 | Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) | Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) N/A
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of disclosure on |  | Thursday, May 6, 2021 | 
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure |  |  | English and Spanish | 
Explanation on language
Link to disclosure |  |  | Spanish is the national language of all participating
countries.
English:
https://www.bcie.org/en/operations/in-process-
operations/dry-corridor-program
Spanish:
https://www.bcie.org/operaciones-y- | 
 |  |  | adquisiciones/programa-del-corredor-seco- | 

=== PAGE 113 ===
An ESMS consistent with the requirements of a Category I-2
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Remarks Management Framework”, developed according to CABEI’s
Any other relevant ESS reports, pe.ogl.i cRieess etatnledm pernotc Aedctuiroens Polann E(RnvAiPro)n, Rmeesnetttalle manedn tS ocial
Policy Framework (RPF), IndigeSnaofuegs uPaerodps l(eEsS PS)l.a n (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosure on N/A
accredited entity’s website
Language(s) of disclosure N/A
Explanation on language N/A
Link to disclosure N/A
Other link(s) N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Remarks N/A
Date Friday, May 28, 2021
Office and website of the NDAs of Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and
Panama.
Costa Rica:
https://minae.go.cr/noticias-minae/documentos/153-
marco-de-gestion-ambiental-y-social
Dominican Republic:
https://ambiente.gob.do/transparencia/informes-de-
seguimientos-a-los-programas-y-proyectos/#1017-wpfd-
marco-de-gestion-ambiental-y-social-mgas
El Salvador:
https://marn.gob.sv/programas/adaptacion-basada-en-el-
ecosistema-para-aumentar-la-resiliencia-climatica-en-el-
corredor-seco-centroamericano-y-las-zonas-aridas-de-la-
republica-dominicana/
Place
Guatemala:
https://www.marn.gob.gt/paginas/Programa_del_Corredo
r_Seco_Centroamericano
Honduras:
http://www.miambiente.gob.hn/static/documentos/MAR
CODEGESTIONAMBIENTALYSOCIALMGAS.pdf
Nicaragua:
http://www.hacienda.gob.ni/documentos/documentos-
mhcp/documentos-despacho-del-
ministro/publicaciones/Annex%206-
Marco%20de%20Gestio301n%20Ambiental%20y%20Soci
al-MGAS.pdf/view
Panama:
https://dcc.miambiente.gob.pa/adaptacion-y-resiliencia/

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
Remarks |  |  | An ESMS consistent with the requirements of a Category I-2
programme is contained in the “Environmental and Social
Management Framework”, developed according to CABEI’s | 
 | Any other relevant ESS reports, pe.ogl.i cRieess etatnledm pernotc Aedctuiroens Polann E(RnvAiPro)n, Rmeesnetttalle manedn tS ocial |  |  | 
 | Policy Framework (RPF), IndigeSnaofuegs uPaerodps l(eEsS PS)l.a n (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Description of |  |  | 
 | report/disclosure on |  | N/A | 
 | accredited entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Explanation on language |  | N/A | 
 | Link to disclosure |  | N/A | 
 | Other link(s) N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
Date
Place |  |  | Friday, May 28, 2021
Office and website of the NDAs of Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and
Panama.
Costa Rica:
https://minae.go.cr/noticias-minae/documentos/153-
marco-de-gestion-ambiental-y-social
Dominican Republic:
https://ambiente.gob.do/transparencia/informes-de-
seguimientos-a-los-programas-y-proyectos/#1017-wpfd-
marco-de-gestion-ambiental-y-social-mgas
El Salvador:
https://marn.gob.sv/programas/adaptacion-basada-en-el-
ecosistema-para-aumentar-la-resiliencia-climatica-en-el-
corredor-seco-centroamericano-y-las-zonas-aridas-de-la-
republica-dominicana/
Guatemala:
https://www.marn.gob.gt/paginas/Programa_del_Corredo
r_Seco_Centroamericano
Honduras:
http://www.miambiente.gob.hn/static/documentos/MAR
CODEGESTIONAMBIENTALYSOCIALMGAS.pdf
Nicaragua:
http://www.hacienda.gob.ni/documentos/documentos-
mhcp/documentos-despacho-del-
ministro/publicaciones/Annex%206-
Marco%20de%20Gestio301n%20Ambiental%20y%20Soci
al-MGAS.pdf/view | 

=== PAGE 114 ===
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of accredited entity’s
TBC
Board meeting
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, October 4, 2021
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
 | Date of accredited entity’s |  | TBC | 

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 115
Secretariat’s assessment of FP174
Proposal name: Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in
the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the
Dominican Republic
Accredited entity: Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)
Country/(ies): Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Panama and Dominican Republic
Programme/programme size: Large
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The implementation arrangements include
The programme design, featuring three different
several different entities and therefore result in
financing facilities (loan facility, grant facility and
complex contractual obligations and higher
guarantee facility), will encourage participation of
project management costs.
the private sector in ecosystem-based adaptation
(EbA) type of investments and diversify financial
systems in the Central American region to create
an enabling environment for investment in EbA
and water/energy-efficient technologies at scale.
GCF and CABEI will be lending to different entities
The technical assistance facility is tailored to
and therefore GCF will be taking higher risks.
increase technical capacities of local governments,
Checks and balances will be further defined in the
farmers and non-regulated financial institutions
term sheet.
to monitor and assess the results of the
implementation of EbA and water/energy-
efficient investments as well as document the
economic and ecosystem benefits of these
investments.
Target catchments were selected following a The programme is heavy on grant financing for
rigorous vulnerability assessment that included capacity-building and technical assistance, and
hydrological modelling of the three watersheds the accredited entity (AE) administration costs
and extensive consultations with key are higher.
stakeholders in each country.
The comprehensive feasibility study, detailed
methodology of catchment development; two of
the seven catchment analyses developed based on
the methodology as well as further
documentation submitted with the second re-
submission following non-endorsement by the
independent Technical Advisory Panel provided
sufficient evidence on the strong climate rationale
of this project.

--- Table 1 on Page 115 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
The programme design, featuring three different
financing facilities (loan facility, grant facility and
guarantee facility), will encourage participation of
the private sector in ecosystem-based adaptation
(EbA) type of investments and diversify financial
systems in the Central American region to create
an enabling environment for investment in EbA |  |  | The implementation arrangements include
several different entities and therefore result in
complex contractual obligations and higher
project management costs. |  | 
and water/energy-efficient technologies at scale.
The technical assistance facility is tailored to
increase technical capacities of local governments,
farmers and non-regulated financial institutions
to monitor and assess the results of the
implementation of EbA and water/energy-
efficient investments as well as document the
economic and ecosystem benefits of these |  |  | GCF and CABEI will be lending to different entities
and therefore GCF will be taking higher risks.
Checks and balances will be further defined in the
term sheet. |  | 
investments.
Target catchments were selected following a
rigorous vulnerability assessment that included
hydrological modelling of the three watersheds
and extensive consultations with key
stakeholders in each country.
The comprehensive feasibility study, detailed
methodology of catchment development; two of
the seven catchment analyses developed based on
the methodology as well as further
documentation submitted with the second re-
submission following non-endorsement by the
independent Technical Advisory Panel provided
sufficient evidence on the strong climate rationale |  |  | The programme is heavy on grant financing for
capacity-building and technical assistance, and
the accredited entity (AE) administration costs
are higher. |  | 

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 116
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed conditions and
recommendations”, respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2 .1 BParcokggrraomunmd/eh ibsatocrkyg orfo thuen pdr ogramme to inform assessment of the funding
proposal
3.
: The term "Dry Corridor" emerged in the last three decades to describe the increasing
frequency and intensity of droughts in the region. With more than one million families in the
Central American Dry Corridor and the arid zones of the Dominican Republic reliant on
agriculture for their livelihoods, the impacts of increasingly severe droughts over the past five
years have resulted in the need for considerable increase in climate finance in the region. In
2014 alone, intense drought resulted in an estimated USD 465 million worth of agricultural
losses across the region, with more than 2.5 million people experiencing food insecurity. From
2015 to 2018, food insecurity has increased annually in the region, with indigenous populations,
women and rural communities the most likely to suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition.
By the last quarter of 2018, 2.2 million people had experienced crop losses that year, with 1.4
million urgently needing food assistance. These impacts are expected to continue to worsen
un der future climate scenarios.
4.
EbA measures, such as forest conservation, reforestation, planting of agroforestry
systems, improved irrigation systems and instalment of vegetative barriers, result in substantial
improvements for all key hydrological variables in watershed areas where such agriculture
activities take place. Furthermore, EbA measures result in soil humidity improvements and
benefits for water availability for both agriculture and forests. The changes in water production
(surface water) and percolation (water recharge) show even greater benefits from the
implementation of a combination of EbA measures. The Dry Corridor and arid zones experience
significant water shortages, and EbA is seen as key to ensuring water availability throughout the
year. Lastly, the implementation of this combination of EbA measures also shows very positive
im pacts on soil erosion rates.
5.
The programme will address the following barriers: i) access to credit for adaptation
interventions among vulnerable populations; ii) access to financial resources for the
implementation of EbA, water- and energy-efficient technologies among the private sector; iii)
knowledge and understanding of climate change impacts as well as appropriate adaptation
measures among decision-makers, communities and commercial farmers; iv) limited
integration of EbA and other adaptation measures into sectoral policies; v) technical capacity
within governments and local communities to implement EbA and other adaptation measures;
and vi) development of economic incentives for investment in sustainable natural resource
m anagement and EbA.
6.
Without comprehensive adaptation interventions, agricultural losses will continue to
increase, along with ecosystem loss, water shortages, poverty and food insecurity. These
impacts will ultimately increase the exposure and sensitivity of communities in the Dry Corridor
an d arid
C
z
li
o
m
ne
a
s
t e
w
o
h
b
o
j e
a
c
re
ti
a
v
l
e
ready extremely vulnerable to climate change.
7.
: The Central American Dry Corridor and the arid zones of the
Dominican Republic are among the world's most vulnerable tropical regions to the impacts of
climate change, with the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua
recognized as being among the 16 most vulnerable countries in the world to extreme climate
events for the period 1998–2017. Currently, the Dry Corridor encompasses ~64 per cent of the
municipalities in Central America and is expected to extend to ~85 per cent by 2050. Climate

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 117
projections in the region indicate that, by the end of the century, temperatures will increase by
3–3.5 °C under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 and by 6–7 °C under Representative
Concentration Pathway 8.5. At the same time, mean annual rainfall is programmed to decrease
by 11 per cent on average. These changes will be compounded by further changes in the El
Niño-La Niña cycle, which will result in prolonged droughts as well as more frequent and
extreme rainfall events across the region. If average global temperatures reach 1.5 °C above pre-
industrial levels, extreme El Niño events are likely to happen twice as often, approximately
every 10 years as opposed to every 20 years, and have severe consequences for agriculture and
fo od security in the region.
8.
The hydrological modelling undertaken for the programme areas has demonstrated that
a combination of adaptation interventions, such as forest conservation, reforestation, transition
to agroforestry systems, introduction of irrigation systems and vegetative barriers, would result
in substantial improvements for all key hydrological variables in the selected catchment areas.
In response to the above-described climate risks, GCF financing will be used to create a
paradigm shift in the way EbA investments are deployed at a regional level in the Dry Corridor
and arid zones. This shift will see governments of the seven participating countries—Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama—promoting
large-scale EbA initiatives. In addition, smallholder farme rs and commercial farmers, as well as
entrepreneurs in rural communities, will have increased access to the financial resources and
te chnical skills required to implement EbA interventions.
9.
Together, these interventions will catalyse the autonomous upscaling of EbA and water-
and energy-efficient technologies by combining technical capacity-building, policy instruments
and accessible financial mechanisms. This approach will transform the financial landscape in
the region to enable vulnerable groups to access climate finance and implement climate-
resilient measures to strengthen their adaptive capacity. The proposed programme will directly
benefit ~522,200 people across the target catchments through on-the-groun d interventions,
with ~286,000 of these people also able to access loans for the implementation of adaptation
me asure
F
s
i n
th
a
r
n
o
c
u
in
gh
g
f
i
i
n
n
f
a
o
n
r
c
m
ia
a
l
t
m
io
e
n
c h
a
a
n
n
d
i s
e
m
n
s
v i
e
r
s
o
ta
n
b
m
li
e
sh
n
e
t
d
al
u
a
n
n
d
d
e r
s o
th
c
e
ia
p
l
r
s
o
a
g
f
r
e
a
g
m
ua
m
r
e
d
.
s (ESS) category:
10.
A
combination of GCF loan and grant finance, a guarantee, and a senior loan provided as co-
finance will be used to establish three financial facilities at the regional level, namely: i) a grant
facility to support bottom-up selection and promotion of local EbA activities through non-
reimbursable financing (USD 28 million); ii) an EbA lending facility for small- and large-scale
EbA investments at farm-, enterprise- and household-level (USD 102 million); and iii) a
guarantee facility that will provide an additional layer of security to financial institutions in
order to promote EbA finance (USD 30 million). The facilities will be managed by CABEI with a
blended financing structure, where funds in the form of senior loans are channelled via CABEI
and intermediary financial institutions (IFIs) to partner financial institutions (PFIs) towards
end beneficiaries. The loan facility is structured for GCF to assume the credit risk of the PFIs
using a limited recourse loan. By taking this additional risk compared to CABEI which is lending
to larger IFIs, GCF will lower the interest rate to the PFIs and ultimately the end borrowers,
improving access to affordable finance for smallholders in the target catchments. The guarantee
facility will encourage the IFIs and PFIs to mobilize more of their own resources, while also
allowing them to lend to more vulnerable borrowers who would not otherwise be able to meet
their collateral requirements. Total GCF financing is USD 84.2 million in the form of grants and
USD 60 million in the form of loans, with co-financing from countries of USD 51.2 million in the
form of in-kind and USD 42.8million in the form of senior loan, thus bringing the co-financing
ratio to 1:0.51. The programme environm ental and social safeguards category is IS-2. The entity
has submitted relevant documentation (an environmental and social management framework)
as part of the funding proposal package.

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 118
2. 2 Component-by-component analysis
11.
The programme will target seven catchments for programme interventions, one in each
of the participating countries (except for the Dominican Republic, which will target two
catchment areas). The programme's regional approach will create an enabling environment for
scalable and sustainable catchment and water demand management, facilitating large-scale
investment in and implementation of EbA and water-efficient technologies. The total grant
request of US$84.3 million will be used in the following ways: i) US$10.0 million will be used to
strengthen the technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to
implement EbA and other adaptation measures through the activities comprised in output 1; ii)
US$ 28.8 million will be used to implement large-scale adaptation interventions — including
EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies — in rural communities across the region
throughout output 2; iii) US$28 million will form the grant facility through which vulnerable
communities can access on-grants to foster the creation of a business ecosystem around EbA
available technologies as per activity 1.2.; iv) US$6.3 million will be used to generate and share
information on climate change adaptation and finance across the region, and mainstream it into
local and national policies within the output 3; v) US$6.4 million will be used to set up the
financial mechanisms and strengthen the technical capacity of CABEI accredited and non-
regulated financial institutions to access and channel funds through them throughout output 4;
vi) US$3.8 million will be used for overall management and monitoring of programme activities
(Independent evaluations and PMC costs); and vii) US$0.7 million is requested for contingency.
The EbA lending facility (EbA credit line) will be established and operationalised with the GCF
senior loan provision of US$60 million and CABEI US$42.8 million co- finance together being
offered to PFIs as blended finance mechanism at below-market conditions for small- and large-
Component 1: Mainstreaming of EbA, water-efficient technologies and natural resource-based
scale EbA investments at the farm-, enterprise- and household-level.
businesses into selected catchments (total cost: USD 121 million; GCF cost: USD 72.6 million, or 60
per cent)
12.
The component includes the mainstreaming of EbA and water- and energy-efficient
technologies through further strengthening of technical capacities of local governments,
farmers and rural communities. A community-based approach will be adopted to identify site-
specific interventions in each of the 36 municipalities targeted by the programme during its first
year. This will be supported by the establishment of community-level monitoring and
evaluation committees, which will promote country ownership and sustainability of programme
interventions. The technical capacity of these committees will be strengthened to enable the
monitoring of biophysical, social and economic conditions in their local catchment areas, as well
as to assess the level of climate vulnerability, risks and opportunities.
13.
Technical assistance will also be provided to farmers and rural communities in the 36
municipalities for the implementation of on-the-ground EbA practices, including silvopasture,
1
agroforestry and sustainable land management . It will support the establishment of natural
resource-based businesses (NRBs), which will support the implementation of tree nurseries and
the manufacturing, distribution or repair of water-efficient technologies as well as the non-
destructive use of ecosystem goods and services provided through EbA, such as businesses
de veloped around the ecotourism industry or non-timber forest products.
14.
The technical assistance under this component will also support the integration of EbA
in policy and regulatory frameworks at the local level focusing mainly on water management
regulations and water managem ent community structures as well as local land-use planning
1
Technical assistance will not be limited to farmers accessing the financial mechanisms from output 1; it will be
available to farmers in the target municipalities that are open to adopting improved practices but lack the technical
knowledge to do so.

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 119
instruments. Country-specific implementation protocols will be developed for: i) the
implementation of sustainable EbA practices; ii) the adoption of water-efficient technologies;
an d iii) the adoption of energy-efficient technologies that reduce fuel wood demand.
15.
A USD 28 million grant facility will be established to support site-specific EbA and
water-/energy-efficient technologies for the most vulnerable communities, which are unable to
access loan finance. Based on approved emligainbciolimtyu cnriidteardieas, ,a selected set of interventions will be
financed through this facility. On-the-ground EbA-oriented grant support will benefit
2
community-based institutions including municipal associations, farmers’
cooperatives, solution providers and/or civil society organizations. Eligible programmes will
include community-level investments, the establishment of water funds, seed funding for
payment for ecosystem services and support for the adoption of selected EbA practices and/or
wa ter- and energy-efficient technologies.
16.
Under component 1, a regional knowledge hub will also be established. The knowledge
hub will act as a repository for EbA information, including, but not limited to, all protocols
developed by the programme as well as the best practices and lessons learned collected through
the programme's monitoring and evaluation processes and previous and ongoing
complementary programmes. This will include guidance on how to access opportunities for
accessing finance provided through the programme, with specific focus on women's economic
empowerment. Researchers will be hired in every country to assist with the synthesis of
findings from catchments, programme advances, impacts and experiences learned for
dis semination across the region.
17.
Lastly, this component will support the preparation of a methodology for the valuation
of ecosystem services and development of accounting profiles for natural capital for integration
into development plans in the Dry Corridor and arid zones. The methodology will draw on best
practices and lessons learned from ongoing initiatives, including the: i) "incentivo forestal" in
Guatemala; ii) payment for environmental services in Costa Rica and Panama; iii) Water Fund of
the city of Quito in Ecuador; and iv) water funds established in cities in Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic and Guatemala. Ultimately, the valuation of ecosystem services will be used
to promote the establishment of economic incentives for EbA investments such as water funds
an d payments for environmental services.
18.
The final activity under this component includes large scale EbA landscape interventions
financing through grant support. Financing will be provided to the most vulnerable
3
communities in the 36 municipalities that lack the capacity to access financing and equipment
to implement adaptation interventions and cannot receive loans through the loan or grant
facilities. Such landscape interventions include: i) establishing one tree nursery per municipality
focusing on native species and fuelwood trees (36 total); ii) establishing 4,160 ha of forest
protection zones across the seven catchment areas; iii) protecting 1,820 ha of natural forest in
major recharge areas and riparian zones, including assisted regeneration; iv) restoring 5,170 ha
of natural forest areas across the seven catchments; v) restoring 820 ha of native pine forests in
Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua; vi) establishing 1,293 km of agroforestry systems using
diversified living fence arrangements in basic grain crops; vii) establishing 612 ha of
agroforestry systems for natural shade in coffee plantations; viii) establishing 1,280 km of
silvopasture systems using diversified living fence arrangements; ix) establishing 1,280 ha of
silvopasture systems across the 36 target municipalities; x) establishing 5,305 ha of sustainable
fuelwood and timber plantations across the 36 target municipalities; xi) establishing 129 km of
firebreaks for forests and plantations; xii) constructing 118 km of living barriers for soil
conservation around agricultural plots; and xiii) constructing 118 km of superficial drainage for
3
A description of the target municipalities and catchments is provided in section 12 of annex 2: feasibility study.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 120
soil conservation xiv) and establishing 109 rainwater harvesting systems, 156 community-level
Component 2: Financing and implementation for EbA as well as water- and energy-efficient
rainwater reservoirs, etc.
technologies (total cost: USD 139 million; GCF cost: USD 96.4 million, or 70 per cent)
19.
Under this component the proposed programme will establish and operationalize
financial mechanisms to facilitate investment in EbA practices, as well as the adoption of water-
and energy-efficient technologies. This component will focus on providing grants and blended
finance for EbA investments as well as water- and energy-efficient technologies. Such
mechanisms will promote bottom-up identification of adaptation interventions and at the same
tim e de-risk financial mechanisms available for financing adaptation.
20.
Under this component, the EbA lending facility will be established and operationalized
with the GCF senior loan provision of USD 60 million and the CABEI USD 42.8 million co-finance
offered to PFIs as a blended finance mechanism at below-market conditions for small- and
large-scale EbA investments at the farm-, enterprise- and household-level. By providing a
blended financing mechanism composed of concessional finance from GCF in combination with
a market rate senior debt as co-financing from CABEI, incentives are created for financial
institutions on different levels to engage in EbA finance. IFIs in CABEI's established network will
4
manage the EbA lending facility via the establishment of trusts for direct on-lending to local
PFIs such as cooperatives, small banks, NGOs and rural community banks, among others. PFIs in
turn will on-lend to end beneficiaries. Investments will be targeted towards community-level
investment, rural micro, small and medium-sized enterprises or other institutions that can
foster EbA, as well as water- and energy-efficient technologies, for end beneficiaries across
dif ferent sectors.
21.
A guarantee facility will be linked to the EbA lending facility to secure IFIs' on-lending of
CABEI’s co-financing funds as well as mobilize additional lending from IFIs’ own resources and
additional public and private investors’ resources by mitigating against credit risks associated
with commercial EbA finance. CABEI will manage the guarantee facility as a window in its
recently established Guarantee Fund. The guarantee facility will cover end beneficiary loans
which lack real guarantee means; where end beneficiaries are unable to provide full coverage,
for example via real estate or movable assets, the guarantee facility will cover the missing
participation and cover up to 75 per cent of the resulting loss in case of non-payment. Hence, it
enables more end beneficiaries to access EbA finance as well as increases security of collateral
pr ovided from PFIs to IFIs in the form of generated EbA lending portfolio.
22.
Lastly, to facilitate access to and operation of the facilities, these will be accompanied by
a technical assistance facility that will develop capacity within municipalities and PFIs to
monitor and assess the implementation of EbA and water/resource-efficient investment
projects. Technical assistance will be a mandatory condition for PFIs to access the EbA lending
facility. This will ensure that capacities, especially for adequate monitoring, reporting and
verification systems, are in place to manage the EbA finance. Such technical assistance will focus
on developing capacity within municipalities and PFIs to monitor and assess the
implementation of EbA and water/energy-efficient investment programmes as well as to
monitor and document the respective economic and ecosystem benefits. Where possible,
information and communication technologies will be introduced to provide data analytics and
satellite data insights into the EbA lending portfolio and climate impacts on the portfolio.
4
"On-lending" in this context refers to the process whereby selected PFIs will receive money via two mechanisms:
from CABEI co-financing through a senior loan as well as from IFI trust structures at below-market rates. They will
then lend this money with its associated rates (on-lend) to farms, enterprises and households for implementation of
EbA and other adaptation measures.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 121
Component 3: Programme management (total cost: USD 6.1 million; GCF cost: USD 3.8 million, or
61% per cent).
23.
Programme managements costs equal to USD 6.1 million and will be used for the
supervision and monitoring of the implementation of programme activities.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
24.
The programme will combine investments in water supply and irrigation, agroforestry,
silvopastoral and forestry systems, and farmer and institutional capacity-building for climate
resilience.
Scale: Medium to high
3. 1 Impact potential
25.
The proposed programme's contribution to climate-resilient sustainable development
will directly benefit 1,084,441 people (50 per cent women) across seven catchment areas. While
USD 84.3 million in grants are geared towards concrete and tangible benefits for an estimated
total of 949,747 beneficiaries via the strengthening of stakeholders’ capacities to better
understand, develop and implement EbA solutions, a further USD 102.8 million in debt finance
will build upon such created capacities, with an estimated number of 766,634 direct
beneficiaries and 475,556 indirect beneficiaries (total of 1,084,441).The programme will also
indirectly benefit 1,368,044 people across the region by facilitating increased access to finance
for NRBs, mainstreaming EbA and other adaptation practices into national policies and building
the capacity of governments to implement EbA.
26.
The programme will reduce climate change vulnerability for farmers and producers’
organizations by improving ecosystem services, primarily water regulation. Impacts of climate
change have been described in the proposal based on the existing information of regional
climate projections and downscaled through hydrological models at the basin level for three
catchments in Costa Rica, Honduras and the Dominican Republic. The results of the hydrological
modelling developed show a consistent trend in the impacts of climate change in substantially
decrease of precipitation that leads to reduced water yield, reduced water infiltration,
groundwater storage and increased erosion risk. Models used for the simulation of various
climate change impacts in the target locations and suggested adaptation interventions provide
for positive impacts over these variables when applied over climate change scenarios showing
the capacity of these interventions to dramatically reduce the potential impacts of climate
ch ange.
27.
Furthermore, the programme includes the development of site-specific intervention
plans through activity 1.1. (sub-activity 1.1.3) for each of the seven catchment areas as a first
step in the implementation of the programme. Two draft sample site-specific intervention plans
were developed for Costa Rica and Honduras, and a methodology to develop site-specific
adaptation plans was also clearly elaborated in the funding proposal. Those site plans will be
validated during the initial stages of implementation in consultation with key actors in both
co untries.
28.
The allocation of grants will be based on the impact and activities identified in the site
specific adaptation plans, and will follow a clear set of principles set out in the funding proposal,
which will ensure that activities to be funded contribute to a cohesive catchment approach
targeting actions and reflect the principles that reduce pressure on ecosystems and the services
they provide, as well as protecting, restoring or using biodiversity and ecosystems in a
su stainable manner.
29.
With the financial support under this programme it is estimated that the following will
be the impact on the ecosystems and ecosystem services in the region: i)~142,500 ha of

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 122
degraded agricultural land restored through the implementation of sustainable land use
practices; ii) ~7,800 ha of forested areas restored; iii) ~4,100 ha of forest protected; iv) 36 tree
nurseries established; v) ~1,900 ha of agroforestry systems established; vi) ~100 km of
firebreaks, living barriers and superficial drainage solutions established; and vii) ~5,300 ha of
sustainable fuelwood sources developed. Finally, at least 100 community buildings will be
equipped with rainwater harvesting systems, 156 community-level rainwater reservoirs will be
installed, 43 half-orange kilns will be made communally available, and 38 community-level
solar-powered water pumping stations will be installed.
Scale: High
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
30.
The proposed programme will catalyse a paradigm shift in the regional approach to
catchment and water demand management in the Dry Corridor of Central America and the arid
zones of the Dominican Republic. This shift will see governments promoting large-scale EbA
investments as well as increased private sector participation, including commercial farmers and
entrepreneurs in rural communities who would now have access to the financial resources and
technical skills required to implement impactful adaptation interventions. The transformative
effects of the programme will be achieved through several innovative approaches anchored into
the programme design.
31.
The programme has been specifically designed to create an enabling environment that
capitalizes on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support: financial, policy
and technical. The programme will diversify financial systems in the region to create an
enabling environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies. This will be based
on the establishment of several financial instruments with varying entry points to make climate
finance more accessible to vulnerable communities. The enabling environment for investment
will be further enhanced by building the technical and institutional capacity of PFIs and non-
regulated financial institutions to finance and re-finance EbA and water-efficient technologies
thr ough all three of the proposed financial instruments.
32.
The enhanced local evidence base for EbA that will be created through the knowledge
hub and the monitoring and evaluation of programme activities will support national and local-
level decision-makers to implement policies and incentives for EbA, in particular through
im proved valuation of natural capital.
33.
Lastly, the programme will catalyse the autonomous upscaling of EbA interventions and
water-efficient technologies by combining policy instruments (e.g. economic incentives such as
payments for environmental services) with accessible financial mechanisms (e.g. commercial
loans, trust funds, microfinance and guarantee funds). These mechanisms will transform the
financial landscape in the region to enable vulnerable groups to access climate finance.
Furthermore, the programme will promote the development of climate-resilient NRBs and
alternative livelihoods at the community level.
Scale: High
3. 3 Sustainable development potential
34.
The programme will have significant sustainable development potential, with
environmental, social and economic benefits. Some of the environmental co-benefits include
conservation and/or restoration of forests and agroforestry systems that will act as natural
buffers, controlling and mitigating the impact of floods, droughts, extreme temperatures and
wildfires on ecosystems in the selected sites. Conserved and restored ecosystems will provide
ha bitats for a range of terrestrial species, thereby improving biodiversity in programme sites.
35.
Social co-benefits will mostly contribute to social development by improving the water
and food security of vulnerable communities in the region. This includes improvement of the

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 123
targeted communities' health by reducing the risk of water-borne diseases, increased
productivity of agricultural systems, and reduced inequality and poverty through increased
financial inclusion of those participating in the proposed financing schemes. The programme
will provide opportunities to develop sustainable NRBs and alternative livelihoods in
ecotourism and in the collection of non-timber forest products.
Scale: Medium to high
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
36.
In the last decade, the Latin America and Caribbean region—under which the seven
beneficiary countries fall—has achieved an average annual economic growth rate of 3.2 per
cent. This economic insecurity is compounded by climate change impacts, including extreme
rainfall and droughts. Economically insecure households, including vulnerable rural
communities, are often slow to recover effectively from climate impacts. Rural communities
have little or no access to adaptation finance, which limits their adaptive capacity. By improving
access to financial resources for adaptation interventions, the adaptive capacity of rural
communities in the Dry Corridor will be increased. With increased financial and technical
cap acity, communities will be able to withstand the negative impacts of severe droughts.
37.
The national budgets of Dry Corridor countries are limited, and poverty eradication and
sustainable development have been prioritized for funding over CCA. There is a high
dependency on non-reimbursable international support to meet CCA goals across the Latin
America and Caribbean region where the finance available for CCA is far below what is required
to meet adaptation needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economies of
these countries will leave even less funds available for CCA in the participating countries. The
proposed programme will provide access to technical and financial resources, knowledge
products and government support structures that will enable rural communities to adapt
effectively to climate change in the Dry Corridor.
Scale: Medium to high
3. 5 Country ownership
38.
CCA is recognized as a priority in the Central American region and has been integrated
into several regional and national policies and strategies, including the Regional Climate Change
Strategy (2010), Regional Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in
Mesoamerica, Regional Strategic Program for Forest Ecosystems Management, and Regional
Ag ro-environmental and Health Strategy of Central America, among others.
39.
In addition to this regional alignment, the programme contributes to achieving national
priorities and aligns with numerous policies in each of the seven target countries. A summary of
how it meets each country’s national priorities is provided in table 3 of the funding proposal. Of
the seven participating countries, three have submitted draft country programmes to GCF as
part of readiness grant deliverables to date, and two of these countries (Guatemala and
Honduras) feature the current proposal in their country programme. The funding proposal is
als o part of the entity work programme of the AE, CABEI.
40.
All no-objection letters in support of this proposal have been provided.
Scale: Medium to high
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
41.
The AE provided a comprehensive demand and supply analysis to justify the loan
request as well as the programme’s financial models, which foresee direct financial and indirect
economic benefits resulting from implementation of the programme’s activities. The demand
and supply analysis includes details on the absorption capacity at the country level and
establishes a comparison with the numbers of expected loans and financial entities through this

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 124
programme, which provides sufficient evidence that there is growing interest to engage in green
finance by the financial institutions and that the financial infrastructure to serve the expected
demand for EbA finance does exist, but could be strengthened. The financial internal rate of
return of the programme stands at 10.3 per cent, net present value (NPV) at USD 491,083,311
and an economic internal rate of return at 17.3 per cent, with an NPV of USD 2,255,887,065
(bo th NPV discounted at an average of issued public bond rates as alternative investment).
42.
While the grant solutions provide the basis for the establishment and expansion of a
body of knowledge in target regions, the debt solutions will be fully self-sustained on a
commercial basis, targeting potential further investment into the mechanisms created. The
senior loans that make up the debt finance will be supported by a guarantee fund, which will de-
risk the loans, creating incentives for financial institutions to engage in EbA finance, for which
the re exists no or only limited offerings as of today.
43.
The deployment of the loan facility will follow a phased approach along the project
implementation period to ensure the cohesive and meaningful impact of the financed activities
as well as proper vulnerability assessments and identification of priorities for other vulnerable
regions within the Dry Corridor where the intervention could be scaled up. This phased
approach will also allow for more time to strengthen capacities of the financial institutions and
to promote the financial mechanism with communities and producers. The first phase will be
the launching of the facility, the second will be the replicating phase and the third one will be
the scale-up of the facility. Each of these phases will have eligibility criteria for beneficiaries and
predefined areas of loan coverage that will also be guided by a number of milestones that will
ne ed to be met in order to release the amount for the following phase.
44.
The programme has a co-financing ratio of 1:0.54. The target countries will make in-
kind contributions and CABEI will contribute grants and loans. Although the co-financing ratio
is not high, the programme expects to leverage significant funding from IFIs and PFIs primarily
from the USD 30 million guarantee provided by GCF that will cover the credit risk of 25–75 per
cent of PFI loan portfolios. It should also be noted that GCF is lending to the PFIs, and the PFIs
will in turn lend to the end beneficiaries. Therefore, the PFIs will take the end beneficiary credit
ris k for the full programme loan amount.
45.
The programme will reach 1,084,441 direct beneficiaries and 1,364,044 indirect
beneficiaries for a total of 2,4448,485 beneficiaries. This equates to USD 120/beneficiary for the
programme and USD 79/beneficiary for GCF.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 EPrnovgirraomnmmee bnatcaklg raonudn dsocial safeguards
46.
. The programme aims to overcome the barriers to the
adoption of climate adaptive approaches by strengthening the capacity of vulnerable people,
including smallholder and commercial farmers, as well as entrepreneurs in the rural
communities of the target areas. The programme aims to contribute to the conservation and
restoration of the degraded landscapes by introducing EbA approaches and other adaptation
measures. It also aims to unlock financing for the adoption of sustainable resilient practices. The
environmental co-benefits of the programme include the reduction of adverse impacts of floods,
droughts, extreme temperatures and wildfires on the ecological habitats due to the buffering
effect of the EbA interventions that could result in an overall increase in terrestrial biodiversity.
Improvements in soil fertility, water infiltration and soil moisture retention are also expected to
reduce erosion and enhance water quality and availability. The promotion of natural resource-
based activities and alternative livelihoods, including the adoption of water-efficient

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 125
technologies, have expected social co-benefits of increased access to clean water, reduced
ex posur
E
e
n
t
v
o
i
w
ro
a
n
te
m
rb
e
o
n
r
t
n
a
e
l a
d
n
is
d
e a
s
s
o
e
c
s
i a
a
l
n
r
d
i s
im
k
p
ca
ro
te
v
g
e
o
d
r
f
y
o o
a
d
n d
se
s
c
a
u
f
r
e
it
g
y
u
.
ards instrument.
47.
The
programme is classified as Category B or Medium Risk by the AE. The Secretariat confirms the
environmental and social risk categorization since the potential risks and impacts are generally
avoidable and can be mitigated effectively through the implementation of appropriate
management measures. The AE has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) which contains the relevant legal and institutional frameworks, general
environmental and social baseline in the target countries, and provisions for stakeholder
en gagem
Co
en
m
t
p
a
l
n
i
d
a n
a
c
g
e
r
w
iev
it
a
h
n
G
ce
C
r
F
e
e
d
n
re
v
s
i
s
r o
m
n
e
m
ch
e
a
n
n
t
i
a
s
l
m
a n
(G
d
R
s
M
oc
)
i
.
al safeguards (ESS) standards.
48.
Subparagraphs (a)–(h) below summarize the programme’s compliance with GCF ESS standards
an d requ
E
i
S
r
S
e m
1:
e
A
n
s
ts
s
:
e ssment and management of environmental and social risks and
impacts.
(a)
An ESMF has been prepared for the programme where the potential
environmental and social impacts have been identified, assessed and ranked on their
significance. The ESMF has also defined feasible mitigating measures that can be used to
avoid and manage the environmental and social impacts posed by the programme. The
ESMF also contains a detailed plan for the monitoring of critical environmental and
s
E
o
S
c
S
i a
2
l
:
i
L
m
a
p
b
a
o
c
u
ts
r
a
a
n
n
d
d
r
w
isk
o
s
r k
d
i
u
n
r
g
in
c
g
o
t
n
h
d
e
i t
im
io
p
n
l
s
e
.
mentation of the programme;
(b)
The programme will provide employment
opportunities for the local populations and indigenous communities with a number of
labourers involved in the implementation phase of the programme. The ESMF
considered the potential risks and impacts of the activities on working conditions, terms
of employment, workers’ organization, non-discrimination, equal opportunities, child
labour, and forced labour of direct, contracted and third-party workers. The ESMF
provided for the development of a Labor Management Guide and a GRM to address
labour and working condition concerns of workers from the local population and of
E
co
S
n
S
t
3
ra
:
c
R
to
e
r
s
s
o
;
u rce efficiency and pollution prevention.
(c)
Through promotion of the EbA
options and water-efficient technologies, the programme encourages sustainable
restoration and management of forests, wetlands and agroforestry landscapes including
ensuring sustainability of available water. Nevertheless, the programme may result in
the use of pesticides and fertilizers that may pollute land and water resources. The
programme aims to address these impacts with the dissemination of specific guidelines
on the use of pesticides and fertilizers. The ESMF also indicates the development of an
integrated pest management and agrochemicals use guidelines for the programme
including the establishment of an efficient solid and liquid waste management module
E
fo
S
r
S
t h
4
e
: C
p
o
ro
m
g
m
ra
u
m
n
m
it
e
y
;
health, safety and security.
(d)
The inadequate handling of pesticides
and fertilizers may likely expose communities to hazardous materials which can be
harmful to their health and safety. However, as the ESMF indicates that an integrated
pest management and agrochemicals use guidelines will be developed, the probability of
the community being exposed to these risks is low. The ESMF also makes proposals for
mitigating public health risks from potential contamination of water in collection
systems and the development of an Emergency Response Plan should there be a need to
E
de
S
v
S
e
5
lo
:
p
L a
o
n
n
d
e a
a
s
c q
a
u
ss
i
e
s
s
it
s
i
e
o
d
n
d
a
u
n
r
d
in
i
g
n
p
v
r
o
o
lu
gr
n
a
t
m
ar
m
y
e
r e
ex
s
e
e
c
tt
u
l
t
e
io
m
n
e
;
n t.
(e)
The programme does not
envision the acquisition of land in the implementation of its activities. Nevertheless, the
programme identifies the possibility for land use restrictions in implementing

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 126
conservation and restoration of the forest areas in the target basins. The programme
may also lead to modification of current livelihood sources and/or reduction of income
as a result of adopting sustainable practices and proposed EbA protocols. To mitigate
this, the programme will implement inclusive consultation and decision-making
processes such that affected communities will be kept well informed with the view to
them being agreeable on the proposed interventions. Further, the programme will
d
E
e
S
v
S
e
6
lo
:
p
B i
a
o
n
d
e
i
c
v
o
e
n
rs
o
i
m
ty
ic
c
c
o
o
n
m
se
p
r
e
v
n
a
s
t
a
i
t
o
io
n
n
a
s
n
t
d
ra
s
t
u
eg
s
y
ta
s
i
h
n
o
a
u
b
l
l
d
e
t
m
he
a
n
n
e
a
e
g
d
e m
ar
e
is
n
e
t
;
of living natural
resources.
(f)
The programme activities are expected to enhance biodiversity through
restoration, reforestation and adoption of sustainable EbA interventions. Nevertheless,
the establishment of new mixed plantations of native species and agroforestry systems
including the development of sustainable sources of firewood can potentially negatively
affect the ecosystem if improperly managed and implemented. For instance, mixed
species plantations and restoration of the agroforestry systems may induce increased
use of agrochemicals. Uncontrolled sourcing of firewood for charcoal may also
exacerbate deforestation and expansion of agricultural lands instead of increasing
reforestation. To mitigate these unwanted outcomes, trainings related to biodiversity
conservation, efficient resource management and pollution prevention will be
implemented. Technical support on sustainable practices such as on the use of organic
fertilizers, vermicomposting, soil conditioning and other agrosilvopastoral management
practices will be encouraged. Further, should significant risks and impacts related to
biodiversity be identified, the ESMF provides for a Biodiversity Management Plan that
G
ca
C
n
F
b
I
e
n d
pr
ig
e
e
p
n
ar
o
e
u
d
s
a
P
n
e
d
o
i
p
m
le
p
s
le
P
m
o
e
li
n
c
t
y
e d
a
;
n d ESS 7: Indigenous peoples.
(g)
The programme will
affect indigenous peoples in some of the countries in the Dry Corridor and arid zones
where the programme is to be implemented. The AE recognizes that there is a risk of
non-recognition or alteration of indigenous people's livelihood strategies, cultural
practices, religious beliefs or governance structures, increased restrictions on land use
for indigenous peoples and unequal opportunities for indigenous peoples. Where
indigenous peoples are potentially affected by the project, the AE has indicated that it
will require an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to be developed that will mitigate
potential adverse effects on indigenous peoples and to improve positive impacts. The
guidelines contained in the ESMF for these IPPs importantly describe the process of
continuous free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) consultations and the participation
of indigenous peoples (including both men and women) in the project implementation
and operation processes and emphasizes that FPIC will be used in all cases, even where
the legislation refers only to "consultation". Also, any IPP must develop a culturally
appropriate strategy that clearly describes measures to enable indigenous peoples to
take advantage of the opportunities generated by the project and sustainably preserve
and manage the use of natural resources on which they depend. The GCF Independent
Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples’ focal point will be
available for assistance at all stages, including before a claim has been made, as required
b
E
y
S S
p a
8
r
:
a
C
g
u
r
l
a
t
p
u
h
r a
7
l
0
h
o
e
f
r
t
i
h
ta
e
g
G
e
C
.
F Indigenous Peoples Policy; and
(h)
Some of the regions where the programme will be
implemented may have cultural value and may be implemented in communities that
have various cultural practices. Therefore, the programme ensures that this tangible and
intangible cultural heritage is adequately assessed and will not be adversely affected.
The ESMF provides for continued access to any cultural heritage that may be affected by
the programme including continued access to these sites and the use of cultural
practices and religious beliefs during implementation.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 127
Implementation arrangements.
49.
CABEI as the AE will be responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the programme. A Regional Project Management Unit (RPMU) will be based
at one of the executing entity’s (EE) regional headquarters in Panama and will be responsible
for the daily project administration, execution and regional technical coordination of project
activities. Various technical specialists will be based at the RPMU including a Regional
Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer. Each country is expected to have a national officer
on Gender, Social Engagement and Safeguards, who will have the responsibility of ensuring that
the ESM
S
F
t a
is
k
p
e
u
h
t
o
i
l
n
d e
p
r
la
e
c
n
e
g
in
a
-
g
c
e
o
m
un
e
t
n
r
t
y
.
.
50.
The programme has conducted an extensive community
engagement with various stakeholders that enabled them to opine on the various components
of the programme and how the programme is going to affect them from all perspectives during
programme development. It has also developed a stakeholder engagement plan which serves as
the programme’s participation strategy and guidance for stakeholder participation and
co nsulta
G
t
r
io
ie
n
v
t
a
h
n
ro
c
u
e
g
r
h
e
o
d
u
r
t
e
t
s
h
s
e
m
li
e
fe
c h
of
a
t
n
h
i
e
s m
pr
(
o
G
g
R
ra
M
m
)
m
.
e.
51.
The AE has an established a GRM which
provides for avenues where stakeholders and potentially affected communities can provide
feedback or grievances, and receive responses, with regard to the implementation of the
programme. The ESMF also provides for the establishment of a four-tier activity level GRM to
receive complaints and claims, collect, store and distribute information, resolve issues with
corresponding follow-up, monitoring and reporting and finally inform and communicate to
concerned stakeholders.
4. 2 Gender policy
52.
The AE has submitted a gender assessment and gender action plan; therefore, it
complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. The gender assessment was
completed based on a desk review, primary data collection and stakeholder consultation at
va rious levels including women and other vulnerable groups.
53.
Cultural practices, patriarchal values and existing customary and statutory laws on
marriage, divorce, inheritance, custody and land tenure have significant implications on access,
use and control of resources by women and men. Feminization of poverty, sociocultural and
traditional beliefs, inadequate basic social services, low representation of women in politics and
violence against women, among others, are existing barriers to achieving gender equality and
women’s empowerment throughout the Dry Corridor. Social and cultural norms in Dry Corridor
countries play a key role in creating greater vulnerability and gaps in the realization of women's
and girls' human rights and especially in rural and indigenous contexts. Women and girls
especially continue to assume primary responsibility for unpaid family care and domestic work,
and climate change is increasing the workload of women and girls as they are responsible
mainly for the search for food, water and biomass for energy on a daily basis. About 60 per cent
of the population of the Dry Corridor lives in extreme poverty and women are
disproportionately represented in the poorest of the poor. The most severe poverty is located in
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua and has an amplified impact in rural areas. The
feminization of poverty is very significant and is exacerbated by the lack of access to services
including health, education, water and transportation This limits entrepreneurship
opportunities for women and is being exacerbated by the impacts of climate change on
agriculture, livestock and fisheries. Women face discrimination in access to resources and
control of land and property and this limits access to financing, training programs, and
membership in farmers' cooperatives and local development organizations and their role in
decision-making. The participation of women producers at the local level within producer
associations, irrigation organizations, neighbouring boards and water committees is limited and
their presence in positions of social and political leadership is still clearly a minority.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 128
54.
Women and girls are migrating to escape the extreme poverty derived from drought,
loss of crops and livestock and, above all, lack of access to food. Sex disaggregated data is
limited, including information on land tenure, participation in decision-making, the level and
characteristics of the types of agricultural and livestock activities they carry out, their
participation in activities and their access to credits or other financial activities, among other
important aspects. There is a worrying increase and sharpening of violence against women,
including slavery and sexual torture, throughout the Dry Corridor region amid a culture that
tolerates and normalizes violence against women. In general, there are few institutions that
offer protection to women and girls in situations of gender-based violence (GBV). Forced
pregnancies of adolescent girls and forced and early marriages and unions are also common in
many areas within the Dry Corridor. There is a migration crisis stemming from poverty,
vio lence and the impacts of climate change.
55.
The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement
of the Gender Policy of GCF. The gender action plan provides activities that address the
challenges faced by women and includes baseline data, indicators, targets, timelines and
budgets. The programme will include seven full-time national gender experts and one regional
gender expert to ensure gender issues are integrated throughout the project, including gender
expertise in decision-making bodies. Activities in the gender action plan are designed to address
gender gaps in a number of areas. One focal area is designed to generate enabling conditions for
women´s access to financial schemes, which facilitates access to credit for women producers
and women's cooperatives to help strengthen women's entrepreneurship initiatives at the local
level and with CCA and mitigation activities. This is complemented by building the capacity and
awareness of public officials in the municipalities involved in the programme on the importance
of the gender approach and how to incorporate it into agricultural public policies and take
specific actions to strengthen the capacities of municipality technicians on social and
environmental resilience and gender issues. Protocols will be developed to address the specific
barriers women face in the adoption of efficient water technologies and ensure the inclusion of
measures to ensure effective involvement of women in water committees. The programme will
also develop actions with municipalities to facilitate the legalization of property cooperatives
and women's community organizations and strengthen the technical capacities of women's
organizations at the local level. Measures will be taken to ensure the active participation of
women in producers' organizations. In general the programme will generate spaces of
empowerment for women producers that ensure the inclusion of their priorities into decision-
making. The programme will promote quota systems for the representation of women in
community and producer organizations related to the programme. To complement these
actions, the programme will generate community dialogue spaces, which will include
discussions among men about positive masculinities. Finally, the programme will mainstream
gender and sex disaggregated data into monitoring systems and decision-making. The
programme will be conducting more country and programme-specific needs assessments to
collect more information and incorporate these into country and programme-level gender
an alyses and action plans.
56.
Since GBV has been identified as a critical challenge, the programme is strongly
encouraged to take measures to minimize the risk of increased GBV as a result of project
intervention and develop measures to ensure that women have equal access to the grievance
mechanism that will provide all female beneficiaries with a clear and safe process for reporting
incidents of GBV. The AE is also encouraged to conduct a full analysis of the enabling
environment (including international conventions ratified, legal, policy and institutional
support framework, national strategic development plans, etc.) that demonstrates the
co mmitment to the pursuit of gender equality of the countries involved in this programme.
57.
In general, the gender action plan includes measures designed to address barriers to
gender equality through addressing biased norms, increase women’s engagement in decision-
making, reduce gender gaps and support progress towards a more gender-equal society.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 129
(This section of the assessment has been redacted and full assessment shared with
the Board on limited distribution basis)
4.3 Risks
4. 4 Fiduciary
58.
The EEs in the project are FAO, the Central-American Commission for Environment and
De velopment (CCAD) and CABEI, which will also perform the role of AE in the project.
59.
As an EE of the project, FAO will play a role in the execution of capacity-building,
technical assistance and implementation of the EbA demonstration sites throughout the region
for outputs 2 and 4 of the programme. CCAD, on the other hand, will be involved in the political
coordination among participant countries through the direct execution of output 3, which is
focused on gathering and disseminating key results and analyses derived from the execution of
the project with the aim of generating evidence to inform and mainstream adaptation into key
national policies and regional strategies. Additionally, the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) will provide technical advice to CCAD for the development of technical
knowledge products on financial mechanisms for EbA, methodologies for ecosystem services
va luation and technical guidelines for EbA implementation.
60.
In its role as AE, CABEI will be responsible for overseeing the implementation, financial
management, evaluation, reporting and closure of the project. As an EE, CABEI will be
responsible for the set-up and management of the three financial facilities of the project under
component 1, with FAO as EE for the technical assistance facility supported by UNEP as
tec hnical advisor.
61.
The programme will have a Regional Project Steering Committee (RPSC) comprising of
representatives from FAO, CCAD, CABEI and UNEP and the regional project manager (PM). The
RPSC will primarily be responsible for providing technical, oversight and advisory support at
the regional level, which will include: i) overseeing project implementation; ii) review and
validation of annual regional workplans and project reports; iii) review and validation of the
project's fulfilment of environmental and financial objectives; and iv) approval of changes to the
project's targets, activities or timelines. In addition, the RPSC will be informed about the final
selection of PFIs, which will be done by CABEI following internal regulations and criteria, as
well as make a recommendation on the final selection of recipients of grants through the grant
facility. In its central role, the RPSC will ensure consistent project progress across all seven
countries. The RPSC will also be responsible for overseeing the Regional Project Management
Un it (RPMU).
62.
The RPMU will be based in FAO’s regional headquarters in Panama and will be
responsible for the day-to-day project administration and execution and the regional technical
coordination of project activities. It will ensure that project execution proceeds through clear
workplans, terms of reference and carefully designed administrative arrangements that meet
CABEI and GCF requirements. For the duration of the project, a PM will head the RPMU and will
be responsible for the daily on-the-ground implementation and management of the project. The
PM will be responsible for ensuring the project achieves the targets set out in the Results
Framework to the required standards of CABEI and GCF and within the specified time and
budget allocations. The PM will: i) report directly to the RPSC on project management-related
matters; ii) manage the project in accordance with the specified workplans and allocated
budget; iii) ensure that all project interventions are implemented according to CABEI and GCF
guidelines; iv) work closely with Project Execution Units (PEUs) and national institutions and
authorities to ensure that the project is managed effectively and that the needs of all beneficiary
groups are considered; and v) oversee the efficient and effective information and knowledge
transfer to relevant project partners.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 130
63.
National PEUs will be established in the target catchments of each of the participating
countries and will be responsible for the daily execution of the project in the respective target
catchments, as well as communication and capacity-building activities with participating local
governments, financial institutions, civil society organisations, farmers and communities. They
will provide monitoring, reporting and evaluation services as well as technical assistance and
execution services. The PEUs will also be responsible for the identification of eligible projects
for grant financing through the grant facility. They will engage with local stakeholders at
co mmunity, association, cooperative and municipal levels to formulate finance applications.
64.
CABEI will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the project and will be accountable
for all financial and investment activities. Through its Credit Supervision Department—which
oversees the destination and use of funds disbursed to PFIs—CABEI will monitor the project's
compliance with policies and procedures as well as the alignment between implementation and
pr oject objectives.
65.
CABEI will provide to GCF annual progress reports on the status of project
implementation, including the disbursements made during the relevant period and an annual
audited financial statement of the specific account prepared by an independent auditor or
ev aluation body.
66.
The PM will be responsible for the overall monitoring of project progress against the
outcome-based indicators during implementation as well reporting project progress to the
RPSC. As per the accreditation master agreement (AMA), CABEI will conduct the mid-term
ev aluation and the terminal evaluation of the project.
67.
It is recommended that as a condition precedent for FAA effectiveness, CABEI submits
country level budget containing the indicative unit costs and quantities of Eligible Expenditures,
in accordance with the Accredited Entity’s policies and procedures that is in form and substance
satisfactory to the Fund.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
68.
The Theory of Change clearly explains how the results chain will cascade from the goal
statement of the project to the proposed activities and properly articulates the relevant
interlinkages among logic levels, barriers and risks. The "if, then, because" logic is clearly
formulated i n the diagram provided in the funding proposal, and the stated results and
outcomes are defined in a manner that are adequately supportive of meeting the ultimate
pr oject goal.
69.
As an adaptation project, the intervention expects to benefit 1,084,441 direct and
1,364,044 indirect beneficiaries, of which women comprise 30 per cent of the direct and 40 per
cent of the indirect beneficiaries as per the gender-disaggregated metrics for the GCF core
ind icator.
70.
The logical framework is assessed by the Secretariat to have applied results
measurements against the GCF results management framework/performance measurement
framework. Fund-level or project-level indicators provided sufficiently for quality at entry
considerations. Comments and requests for final mi nor revisions have been communicated to
the AE, and the Secretariat expects that there will not be any difficulties from the AE side to
ref lect these suggestions for further improvements.
71.
The implementation timetable has been provided in a format that would enable
progress assessment during the implementation period, with the milestones and deliverables
properly integrated to determine implementation performance in concrete terms.
4.6 Legal assessment

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 131
AMA
72.
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 6
Se ptember 2017 (the “ ”), and it became effective on 8 November 2017.
73.
The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the
programme. It is recommended that, prior to submission of the Funding Proposal to the Board
(a) the Accredited Entity has obtained all its internal approvals and (b) the Fund has received a
certificate or legal opinion from the Accredited Entity in form and substance satisfactory to the
Fund confirming that all final internal approvals by the Accredited Entity have been obtained
an d that it has the authority and capacity to implement the programme.
74.
The proposed programme will be implemented in seven countries, out of which in six
countries GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities, while in one country an
agreement on privileges and immunities has been concluded but has not entered into force yet.
This means that, amongst other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation
in these countries which risks need to be further assessed.
(a)
The Republic of Costa Rica: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with a
background note on privileges and immunities to the NDA in May 2016. The Secretariat
met with AILAC delegations during COP 22 in November 2016. In March 2019, the
Secretariat has sent a formal reply to the ‘Note form costa Rica’, in English and Spanish,
informing that English is the working language for future negotiations. To date, the
negotiations are still ongoing.
(b)
The Dominican Republic: The Secretariat met with the Dominican Republic delegation
during COP 21 in December 2015 after which a draft agreement with background note
on privileges and immunities was sent in January 2016. The Secretariat sent the latest
draft agreement together with background notes on P&Is to the Counsel to the President
and the Ambassador to the United States in October 2017. In December 2020, the
Secretariat sent another latest draft agreement to the Vice Minister of the Ministry of
Environment and proposed having a conference call. However, no formal response has
been received so far.
(c)
The Republic of El Salvador: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with
background notes on P&Is to the NDA in September 2015. The Secretariat met with El
Salvador delegation during COP 21 in December 2015, after which the draft agreement
with background note was resent to the NDA. In October 2018, the Secretariat met with
NDA to provide information about P&I Agreement and the rationale for P&Is and
clarified queries regarding the importance of signing P&I Agreements. However, no
formal response has been received so far.
(d)
The Republic of Honduras: The Secretariat met with the Honduras delegation during
COP 21 in December 2015 and a draft agreement and background note on privileges and
immunities were sent in December 2015. The Agreement on Privileges and Immunities
was concluded and signed on 17 March 2016, but the Agreement is not in force yet. The
Secretariat sent an inquiry regarding the entry in force of the agreement in July 2020.
However, no formal response has been received so far.
(e)
The Republic of Guatemala: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with
background notes on privileges and immunities to the NDA in September 2015. The
Secretariat met with a representative of Guatemala during COP 22 in November 2016.
Latest draft agreement together with background notes on privileges and immunities
were sent to the Foreign Minister in October 2017. However, no formal response has
been received so far.
(f)
The Republic of Panama: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement together with
background notes on privileges and immunities to the Minister of Presidency in

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 132
September 2017. In October 2018, the Secretariat met with the NDA and provided
information about the draft agreement and its rationale. The Secretariat has sent a
follow up email in November 2020; however, no formal response has been received so
far.
(g)
The Republic of Nicaragua: The Secretariat sent a draft agreement on privileges and
immunities together with background notes to the NDA in April 2018. The NDA has
confirmed receipt of the Agreement but indicated that it would need to pass through the
review and approval of the Congress, which is a lengthy process. The NDA requested the
Secretariat to provide a non-official Spanish translation of the document in October
2018 to expedite the process; however, no formal exchanges has occurred so far.
75.
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and
expropriation in the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and
im munities.
76.
The proposed programme envisages the implementation of a lending facility to be
financed by a portion of the GCF funding and by the Accredited Entity’s co-financing, with such
resources channelled through intermediary financial institutions (IFIs) in the host countries
that will provide downstream loans to smaller partner financial institutions (PFIs), which in
turn will provide sub-loans to the final borrowers. In respect to its own co-financing, the
Accredited Entity will enter into (full recourse) loan agreements with the IFIs. However, with
respect to the GCF funding, a limited recourse loan instrument is proposed between CABEI and
the IFIs for purposes of conserving and passing down the GCF concessionality to the PFIs and
the final sub-borrowers. However, since the Accredited Entity has not used a limited recourse
loan in its prior operations, the applicable terms and conditions for such on-lending to the PFIs
may be subject to further changes or revisions prior to the execution of the FAA (and thus be
subject to the completion of the legal due diligence by the Secretariat).
4. 7 List of proposals conditions (including legal)
77.
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is
ma de subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval,
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed programme;
(b)
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval , or the date the
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has
obtained all final internal approvals whichever is later; and
( c)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 133
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP174
Proposal name: Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience
in the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of
the Dominican Republic
Accredited entity: Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)
Country/(ies): Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Panama and Dominican Republic
Programme/programme size: Large
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.
Earlier versions of this funding proposal were submitted for review at the twenty-eighth
and twenty-ninth meetings of the Board (B.28 and B.29), and did not receive the endorsement
of the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP). In its assessments, the independent TAP
rai sed various concerns and provided specific actionable feedback, including:
(a)
Completion of a catchment-specific climate rationale for each of the seven catchments
where the Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) demonstration interventions and grant
facility will be applied, sourcing historical observed data for each catchment, and using
these data to validate the choice of model that is used to make future projections about
key climate parameters;
(b)
Completion of a catchment-specific EbA plan for each of these seven catchments;
(c)
Clear articulation of the adaptation impact of the project as per the GCF investment
criteria indicators; and
(d)
Clear articulation of the relationship between the grant portion of the project, to be
implemented in the seven target catchments of the participating countries, and the loan
and guarantee portion of the project, to be implemented across the entire Dry Corridor
of the seven countries.
2.
The core concern raised by the independent TAP in its previous assessments was that
the funding proposal did not provide sufficient site-specific data to support the series of grant-
based EbA interventions proposed. The current funding proposal provides some additional
information around the availability of climate data and proposes an ex-ante validation process
for interventions, which is intended to address the concerns of the independent TAP. The
validation process, if implemented robustly, could ensure that proposed EbA interventions are
supported by the scientifically determined adaptation needs of the impacted communities,
among other things. This solution is not the indepneontdent TAP’s preferred outcome as made
clear in previous assessments, but it may suffice to meet a minimum standard for endorsement
in this case. However, the funding proposal does provide enough information on how this
validation process will be implemented and how it can assure GCF that grant funding will only
be disbursed for interventions that are supported by the evidence-based needs of the
catchments. For that reason, an endorsement here must be conditional on greater clarity
regarding the proposed validation process and satisfaction that it is fit-for-purpose.
1.1 Funding proposal overview

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 134
3.
The term “Dry Corridor” describes arid zones in parts of Central America and the
Caribbean (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama and Dominican
Republic). The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI), the accredited entity
(AE), states in the funding proposal that these zones are experiencing increasing frequency and
intensity of agricultural droughts and heatwaves, as well as an increase in the frequency and
severity of extreme rainfall events and hurricanes in the wet season, causing storm damage and
flash floods (in turn causing reductions in aquifer recharge) – because of climate change. The
funding proposal reports that more than one million families in the Dry Corridor are reliant on
agriculture for their livelihoods and are susceptible to the impacts of increasingly severe
droughts. In 2014 alone, intense drought resulted in an estimated USD 465 million worth of
agricultural losses across the relevant region, with more than 2.5 million people experiencing
food insecurity. From 2015 to 2018 food insecurity has increased annually in the region. By the
last quarter of 2018, 2.2 million people had experienced crop losses that year, with 1.4 million
urgently needing food assistance. According to the AE, these impacts are expected to continue to
w orsen under future climate scenarios.
4.
The funding proposal aims to use a mix of implementation grants, capacity-building
grants, financial guarantees and on-lending to further EbA measures such as forest
conservation, reforestation, planting of agroforestry systems, improved irrigation systems and
installation of vegetative barriers. These interventions are expected to mitigate the impacts of
climate change in the Dry Corridor. The total financing scale of the proposed programme is USD
26 8.4 with GCF funding expected to make up 65 per cent of this amount (USD 174.3).
5.
The funding proposal seeks to address the above-described climate threats by focusing,
in part, on seven targeted catchment areas (one in each of the countries in the Dry Corridor) and
using a mix of grant and capacity-building approaches to promote EbA interventions in those
catchments. Additionally, the funding proposal aims to deploy loans and guarantees (along with
capacity grants) across the entire region to finance interventions that would improve water
demand management in the Dry Corridor, among other potential adaptation benefits. The goal,
as laid out in the funding proposal, is to provide smallholder and commercial farmers, as well as
entrepreneurs in rural communities across the seven countries, with increased access to the
financial resources and technical skills required to implement adaptation interventions. The
sp ecific financial interventions proposed are as follows:
(a)
The total grant request of USD 84.3 million will be used in the following ways according
to the AE: (i) USD 6.4 million will be used to set up the financial mechanisms and
strengthen the technical capacity of CABEI-accredited and non-regulated financial
institutions to access and channel funds through them; (ii) USD 28 million will form the
grant facility through which vulnerable communities can access on-grants channelled
through financial institutions; (iii) USD 10 million will be used to strengthen the
technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to implement
EbA and other adaptation measures; (iv) USD 6.3 million will be used to generate and
share information on climate change adaptation and finance across the region, and
mainstream it into local and national policies; (v) USD 28.8 million will be used to
implement large-scale demonstration interventions, including EbA, water- and energy-
efficient technologies in rural communities across the region. These interventions
represent a list of specific interventions previously agreed between the AE and each of
the seven countries in the funding proposal; and (vi) USD 3.8 million will be used for
overall management and monitoring of programme activities with an additional USD 0.7
million for contingency;
(b)
An EbA lending facility would be established and operationalized with a GCF
concessional loan of USD 60 million and approximately USD 43 million in market rate
co-finance from CABEI. The financing is intended for small- and large-scale EbA
investments at the farm, enterprise and household level. The GCF funds would be

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 135
channelled through intermediary finance institutions (IFIs) with at least one located in
each of the seven Dry Corridor countries. In turn, the IFIs would on-lend to partner
financial institutions (PFIs) in the relevant country who would then directly on-lend to
end beneficiaries; and
(c)
A GCF-funded guarantee facility intended to provide an additional layer of security to
financial institutions to promote EbA finance (USD 30 million). The guarantee facility
would be made available to de-risk CABEI’s co-finance as well as that from other
providers of non-concessional finance. The main aim is to increase the appetite of IFIs to
take on further financing to channel to PFIs by guaranteeing the PFI EbA finance
performance.
Scale: Medium
1 .2 Impact potential
6.
There is evidence that the Central American Dry Corridor and the arid zones of the
Dominican Republic are among the world’s tropical regions most vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change, with Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, the Dominican Republic and El Salvador
recognized as being among the 16 most vulnerable countries in the world to extreme climate
events for 1998–2017. Currently, the Dry Corridor encompasses approximately 64 per cent of
the municipalities in Central America and is expected to extend to around 85 per cent by 2050.
Climate projections for the region indicate that, by the end of the century, temperatures will
increase by 3–3.5°C under RCP4.5. These changes could be compounded by further changes in
the El Niño–La Niña cycle, which could result in prolonged droughts as well as more frequent
an d intense extreme rainfall events across the region.
7.
The independent TAP recognizes that targeted and catchment-specific EbA
interventions could reduce hydrological vulnerability associated with increased droughts and
periods of aridity. However, the key is for these interventions to be part of an EbA plan that is
tailored to the relevant catchment. The impact potential of EbA interventions is dependent on
the specific climate challenges of each catchment and whether such interventions are part of a
re inforcing suite of actions that, in suitable local combinations, best mitigate those impacts.
8.
The original funding proposal submitted in B.28 did not contain actionable catchment-
specific EbA plans for the seven catchments where the demonstration interventions and the
EbA grant facility would be applied. In the amended funding proposal for B.29, the AE clarified
its intention to develop site-specific intervention plans for each of the seven catchment areas as
a critical first phase to ensuring that activities to be funded contribute to a cohesive catchment-
specific plan and landscape approach. The AE proposed that part of the grant funding request
would first be used to develop the catchment-specific EbA plans. In support of this approach, the
AE further explained that some work has already commenced in some of the catchments,
including using existing information on regional climate projections and downscaling through
hydrological models at the basin level for three catchments. Two draft sample site-specific
intervention plans were developed – for Costa Rica and Honduras – and these were provided to
th e independent TAP to illustrate the approach the AE intends to take.
9.
In its previous assessments, the independent TAP expressed its preference for first
completing the climate rationale at the catchment scale for each country’s target catchment,
followed by the development of a bespoke EbA catchment plan. The independent TAP
appreciated that the amended funding proposal built in a sequencing as part of the programme
whereby the catchment plans would be completed first, prior to most interventions being
funded. However, the independent TAP remained concerned because of (i) the gaps in the data
and approaches proposed to validate interventions, and (ii) the request for grant funding for
pre-selected demonstration projects without a persuasive case that these interventions will
generate catchment-wide adaptation benefits or that they are critical elements of a catchment-
specific EbA plan.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 136
10.
The current funding proposal provides some additional information in support of the
climate needs of the region and clarifies where the AE believes that a lack of historical climate
data has constrained its ability to fill in analytical gaps in support of its climate assertions. The
AE stated that it encountered limited availability of site-specific climate information needed to
generate more accurate and informative analyses of climate risks and vulnerabilities for
resilient development. The independent TAP’s clear preference is that the use of climate models
must be validated against observed historical data sets from meteorological stations, wherever
these are available, and not against computer-generated data sets. However, the independent
TAP understands that in some circumstances this preferred approach may be difficult to achieve
due to the lack of historical data. The AE asserts that the availability of historical observed
meteorological data and site-specific climate change projections in this case are very limited.
CABEI observes in the funding proposal that there are only 24 meteorological stations within
the vast territory of the Dry Corridor and notes that “only for three of the countries, there were
stations within the prioritized pilot sites and just one of them (Honduras) had complete
observed rainfall and temperature data for a period of over 30 years with less than 15% of
dis continuity.”
11.
The funding proposal also re-states that the catchment-specific plans will be completed
first as part of the programme’s initial phase and has now made clear that no grant-funded
interventions will be approved prior to the finalization of the relevant catchment plan. The AE
further asserts that no intervention will be funded until it has been through a validation process
whereby a proposed intervention is confirmed to meet the needs of the specific region in line
with the catchment plans. The validation of actual site-specific interventions is to take place
during the initial stages of implementation and EbA interventions will be validated from a wide
range of identified EbA interventions that are adjusted to the specific climate risks and socio-
environmental context of the catchment. According to the AE, “the validation of these indicative
pre-selected interventions will be based on the development of the site-specific plans that will
include both a scientific analysis of specific climate projections through the hydrological models,
as well as sound stakeholder consultations that will allow to identify the most appropriate
interventions.” The funding proposal also provides a list of specific criteria that will be applied
for the selection and validation of these EbA interventions, including:
(a)
Relevance to site-specific climate risks;
(b)
Positive impact potential over climate risks;
(c)
Familiarity and acceptance by stakeholders;
(d)
Positive impact potential over most vulnerable sectors of the community;
(e)
Positive impact potential on gender balance;
(f)
Technical feasibility of the intervention;
(g)
Compliance with social and environmental safeguards;
(h)
Po tential co-benefits of the intervention;
(i)
Minimal level of risks and constraints for implementation;
(ii)
Potential for self-sustainability; and
(iii)
Potential for sustained monitoring capacity.
12.
The independent TAP notes that the list of validation criteria appears to be a reasonable
starting point, but the effectiveness of a validation process will depend on (i) the quality of the
catchment plans themselves and (ii) the manner and rigour by which these criteria will be
applied. The funding proposal does not provide a clear sense or example of how the ex-ante
validation of interventions will occur. The independent TAP could endorse a phased programme
whereby complete and data-driven catchment plans are first developed and subsequently EbA

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 137
interventions are selected, but only if these are subject to rigorous validation, through a known
process, against those plans. It is also critical that the process would prevent funding of
proposed interventions that are not supported by the needs of the catchment. The funding
proposal does not provide enough information as to the operation of the validation process for
the independent TAP to make a determination of adequacy. Developing a detailed process for
validation that is fit-for-purpose is thus a necessary first step and is included as a condition for
the independent TAP’s endorsement of the proposal.
13.
With respect to the USD 28.4 million grant request for the “pre-identified EbA
demonstration interventions”, the concerns of the independent TAP were acute. Under this
component of the B.29 funding proposal, grants would be provided to communities in 36
municipalities across the selected catchments that the AE believes cannot receive funding
1
thr ough the loan or grant facilities.
not
14.
Although the activities listed in the B.29 funding proposal may offer localized
environmental benefits, they were selected based on a clear nexus to catchment-specific
EbA plans, and no site-specific argument was made for how they will specifically reduce the
vulnerability of communities to climate change impacts. The current B.30 version of the funding
proposal has been amended so that these interventions are now deemed to be solely
“indicative” of the type of large-scale demonstration projects that the AE proposes to fund
through grants. According to the AE, “the selected interventions remain as indicative and are
subject to validation during the inception phase and in consultation with the specific
communities.” The independent TAP appreciates that the demonstration interventions listed in
the funding proposal are no longer formally considered pre-selected and certain. The
independent TAP agrees that any intervention should first be validated against a site-specific
catchment plan that, for each catchment, explains its specific climate challenges; how the
challenges are affecting ecosystem service provision; how this makes communities vulnerable;
how these vulnerabilities to hazards can be mapped spatially; and what interventions are
needed to maintain or restore these specific ecosystem services, to reduce vulnerability. The
validation of the demonstration interventions should confirm the expected adaptation impact,
underpinned by a climate rationale for each catchment, and accompanied by a clear EbA plan
for each catchment. Only by having a robust validation process can the independent TAP be
cer tain o
E
f
b
t
A
h e
lo
t
a
ru
n
l y
p r
“i
o
n
g
d
r
i
a
ca
m
ti
m
ve
e
” nature of these interventions.
15.
– The funding proposal envisages that GCF funding would also
support a lending mechanism for EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient technologies in all
seven countries. This would be accomplished by providing a blended financing mechanism
composed of concessional finance from GCF in combination with market rate debt as co-
financing from CABEI. The blended rate is intended to create incentives for regional and local
financial institutions to engage in EbA finance. IFIs in CABEI’s established network would
manage the EbA lending facility via direct on-lending to local PFIs such as cooperatives, small
banks, non-government organizations, rural community banks, among others. PFIs in turn
would on-lend to end beneficiaries. The goal is for investments to be targeted across the entire
Dry Corridor/Arid Zone regions of the seven countries (not just the seven catchments receiving
1
Such landscape interventions include (i) establishing one tree nursery per municipality focusing on native species
and fuelwood trees (36 municipalities in total); (ii) establishing 4,160 ha of forest protection zones across the seven
catchment areas; (iii) protecting 1,820 ha of natural forest in major recharge areas and riparian zones, including
assisted regeneration; (iv) restoring 5,170 ha of natural forest areas across seven catchments; (v) restoring 820 ha
of native pine forests in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua; (vi) establishing 1,293 km of agroforestry systems
using diversified living fence arrangements in basic grain crops; (vii) establishing 612 ha of agroforestry systems for
natural shade in coffee plantations; (viii) establishing 1,280 km of silvopasture systems using diversified living fence
arrangements; (ix) establishing 1,280 ha of silvopasture systems across the 36 target municipalities; (x) establishing
5,305 ha of sustainable fuelwood and timber plantations across the 36 target municipalities; (xi) establishing 129
km of firebreaks for forests and plantations; (xii) constructing 118 km of living barriers for soil conservation around
agricultural plots; and (xiii) constructing 118 km of superficial drainage for soil conservation, establishing 109
rainwater harvesting systems, 156 community-level rainwater reservoirs, and so on.

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 138
grant support) towards community-level investment, rural micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises or other institutions that can foster EbA, as well as water- and energy-efficient
technologies, for end beneficiaries across different sectors. The loan programme is not limited
to the catchment areas in the grant portion of the funding proposal and does not rely on the
grant-funded interventions for its success. In response to a question from the independent TAP
on the link between the catchment-specific grants and the wider loans, the AE noted that the
deployment of the loan facility will follow a phased approach starting first in a select group of
five municipalities in the identified catchments and expanding from there geographically to
cover additional municipalities. According to the AE, this phased approach will also allow for
more time to strengthen capacities of the participating financial institutions during the initial
stages and to promote the financial mechanism with communities and producers. The
additional municipalities for the loan expansion are to be selected based on proper vulnerability
assessments and climate impact projections as well as the analysis of demand and the potential
for replication with the participating financial institutions to ensure economies of scale in the
lea rning process and the internal processes already developed in the initial municipalities.
16.
The phased nature of the loan programme is critical from an efficiency and impact
standpoint. To that end, the independent TAP has been informed by the GCF Secretariat that the
specific performance thresholds for the loan facility described in the funding proposal will also
be reflected as conditions for GCF disbursement to be set in the funded activity agreement
(FAA). The FAA will include a disbursement schedule with milestones to be met, hence ensuring
that GCF proceeds are disbursed in accordance with pre-agreed terms. The independent TAP
co ncurs with this approach and views this as a condition to endorsement.
17.
The loan programme would operate alongside a GCF-funded guarantee facility intended
to secure on-lending by IFIs of CABEI’s co-financing funds and mobilize additional lending from
IFI resources, as well as additional resources from public and private investors, by mitigating
ag ainst credit risks associated with commercial EbA finance.
18.
Technical assistance would be provided for PFIs to access the EbA lending facility. This
is meant to ensure that capacities, especially for adequate monitoring, reporting and verification
systems, are in place to manage the EbA finance and to determine whether would-be borrowers
are eligible for such loans.
19.
The independent TAP notes that the loan and guarantee component of the project seeks
to re-orient existing financial sectors to funding activities that would lead to climate benefits
and ultimately prove to be financially sustainable, contributing to impact potential. This
typically requires a mix of initial concessionality, knowledge sharing and improved institutional
capacity. This funding proposal aims to do that at scale and across seven countries. However,
the independent TAP notes that the investment objectives of the loan facility are broad: (i)
implementing integrated catchment management and restoring catchments; (ii) improving
hydrological flow and filtration of rainwater into groundwater reserves through forest and
ecosystem restoration; and (iii) reducing demand for scarce water resources by implementing
water-efficient technologies at the farm and household level. The funding proposal does not
include investment eligibility criteria to ensure climate impacts are achieved. According to the
AE these criteria will be defined by the Regional Project Steering Committee, and will be used by
the project executive units, the national coordination units and regional lending committees
when reviewing eligibility. However, the independent TAP considers that the absence of the
criteria makes it difficult to assess the overall impacts of EbA interventions. Scattered
interventions might not add to the overall objectives of the lending operation in the catchment
areas, particularly regarding objectives 1 and 2. The independent TAP will require as a
co ndition to disbursement that the investment eligibility criteria be finalized.
20.
In the amended funding proposals presented for B.29 and B.30, the AE has provided
improved data on the market size and potential demand for the loan and guarantee products. In
the original independent TAP assessment at B.28, the independent TAP questioned market

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 139
study proxy data assumptions regarding the numbers of smallholder farming units, rural
community projects and commercial farms that were expected to access loans to promote EbA
in their regions. A completely new section on the demand analysis was added to the B.29
funding proposal with details provided to facilitate understanding of the absorption capacity at
the country level and establishing a comparison with the numbers of expected loans and
financial entities through this programme. The new information provides a more convincing
de monstration of the potential uptake of the proposed products.
21.
Information from the Microfinance Network of Central America and the Caribbean
(REDCAMIF) was used to analyse the supply capacity for EbA finance and the feasibility of the
proposed lending facility. According to latest statistics from the REDCAMIF MIF Index for June
2020, the microfinance institutions that belong to the network manage a total inclusive
agricultural portfolio of USD 324 million across all seven countries for 221,477 clients. This
represents more than three times the total size of the targeted lending facility’s volume of USD
102.8 million (GCF plus CABEI co-financing). The microfinance sector’s involvement in inclusive
agricultural finance is a useful proxy for its ability to serve EbA finance, which will primarily be
tar geted at small-scale farmers.
22.
Moreover, the amended funding proposal has introduced a clearer process for phasing
disbursements against milestones, although the details were yet to be finalized at the time of
this assessment, and no draft term sheet had been shared with the independent TAP. The
amended funding proposal also reduces the overall size of the loan facility in response to a
suggestion by the independent TAP to consider scaling down the loan facility both in volume
and possibly in geographic and intervention focus. The adjustment in size helps slightly to
mitigate the risk of deployment failure, which could be damaging to the perception of
bankability of EbA solutions across the region, including among government partners, IFIs and
PFIs. This concern is relevant considering the experience of comparative efforts such as
Microfinance for Ecosystem-Based Adaptation (MEbA) and the Productive Investment Initiative
for Adaptation to Climate Change (CAMBio II), where loan disbursement rates have been very
slow – partly because of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but also possibly because of
capacity constraints in partner institutions. In addition to these reasons, the independent TAP
has a real concern that the slow uptake may also relate to limited absorptive capacity by the
market. The Secretariat informed the independent TAP that the specific performance thresholds
for the loan programme described by the AE in the amended funding proposal will be reflected
as conditions for GCF disbursement to be set in the FAA, which will include a disbursement
schedule with milestones to be met to ensure that GCF proceeds are disbursed in accordance
wi th pre-agreed terms.
23.
It is the view of the independent TAP that, with the phasing safeguards not just included
in principle, but as a covenant in the FAA and the relevant governing agreements for the
programme, the loan and guarantee component of the funding proposal could be useful in
testing and educating the market for EbA demand. This is in fact a core role for GCF finance. Of
course, the effectiveness of the phasing approach will hinge on the ability and willingness of the
GCF to monitor disbursement rates and adjust loan amounts as necessary to adjust to actual
capacity constraints of partner institutions and demand. For this reason, the independent TAP is
endorsing the project subject to the inclusion of a covenant determining this phased approach.
The impact of the loan and guarantee component could thus be positive, but, as with the grant
component, must be underpinned by a clear adaptation rationale, so that the theory of change
for how precisely these loans will reduce vulnerability to climate change is clear. In the case of
these loans, the sheer diversity of interventions under consideration and the region-wide
application makes this more challenging. The independent TAP notes that, unlike the grant
components which are focused on the target catchments, the loan programme is intended to
eventually allocate funds to the entirety of the Dry Corridor region across the seven countries.

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 140
24.
The overall rating for the impact potential criterion for the project is Medium, on the
assumptions that (i) a covenant on the phased disbursement of the loan funding is included;( ii)
greater clarity and certainty around the investment eligibility criteria and validation process are
provided; and (iii) a condition that no grant monies would be disbursed for any given
intervention until such times as the relevant catchment plan has been approved (supported by
site-specific climate rationale) and the intervention has been successfully validated.
Scale: Medium
1. 3 Paradigm shift potential
25.
Corporate or large agricultural producers in the Dry Corridor region, where they exist,
usually apply climate risk management strategies. According to the funding proposal, PFIs
across the region already have lending programmes for more sophisticated customers,
including funding for interventions that the funding proposal categorizes as EbA. However, this
is regularly not the case for small and medium-sized farming units. Increased resilience of such
farming units could play a role in mitigating agricultural losses due to climate impacts, along
wi th biodiversity loss, water shortages, poverty and food insecurity.
26.
The proposed programme intends to catalyse a paradigm shift in the regional approach
to catchment and water demand management, as well as managing climate change-intensified
hazards such as drought, heatwaves, flood and hurricanes, in the Dry Corridor of Central
America and the arid zones of the Dominican Republic. This shift will see governments
promoting large-scale EbA investments as well as increased private sector participation,
including by commercial farmers and entrepreneurs in rural communities who would then have
access to the financial resources and technical skills required to implement impactful
ad aptation interventions.
27.
It is the view of the independent TAP that a lending programme could offer a building
block for future expansion if (i) new and additional demand for EbA finance can be confirmed;
(ii) there is a path to financial sustainability for this expanded lending sector; and (iii) the links
between the interventions financed through the lending programme and the proposed EbA
interventions and the expected climate impacts are clear. The paradigm shift nature of the
proposal is further enhanced by building the technical and institutional capacity of PFIs and
non-regulated financial institutions to finance and re-finance EbA and water-efficient
tec hnologies by the proposed financial instruments.
28.
In the view of the independent TAP, the highest potential for paradigm shift comes from
the ability to contribute to improving the regulatory framework and policies that could catalyse
EbA demand and acceptance. The funding proposal envisages enhancing the local evidence base
for EbA through the creation of a regional knowledge hub, through which tailored knowledge
products will be created and disseminated. Additionally, the monitoring and evaluation of
project activities will support national and local level decision-makers to implement policies
and incentives for EbA. Decision-makers within local government institutions will be trained to
assess and update existing regulatory frameworks and policies to facilitate the mainstreaming
of EbA, including making provision for incentives programmes targeting the adoption of EbA
practices. By providing technical support to local governments for the adoption and
implementation of climate-resilient land management practices, the project will help to
ma instr
C
ea
o
m
m p
cl
r
i
e
m
h
a
e
t
n
e
s
a
iv
d
e
a
n
p
e
ta
s
t
s
i
:
on into local-level development planning.
29.
The funding proposal intends to create an enabling environment
that capitalizes on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support: financial,
policy and technical. If successful, the programme will diversify financial systems in the region
to create an enabling environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies. This
will be based on the establishment of several financial instruments with various entry points to
make climate finance more accessible to vulnerable communities. The enabling environment for
investment will be further enhanced by building the technical and institutional capacity of PFIs

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 141
and non-regulated financial institutions to finance and re-finance EbA and water-efficient
tec hnologies through all three of the proposed financial instruments.
30.
The independent TAP is of the opinion that the overall approach of the programme is
comprehensive in marrying capacity-building, technical support and finance. However, in the
absence of further preparatory work, the paradigm shift potential would be significantly limited
for the grant facility by the large degree of uncertainty remaining about whether the grants and
loans will in fact reduce the vulnerability of Dry Corridor farming communities to climate
change impacts, given the gaps in the climate rationale and EbA plans for catchments. For this
reason, the endorsement of the grant facility by the independent TAP is contingent upon the
review and acceptance of the condition around the completion of a validation process, and
binding agreement that any intervention should first be validated against a site-specific
catchment plan prior to funding. For the loan facility, which is applied beyond the seven
catchments, in the wider Dry Corridor/Arid Zone in the seven countries, it is even more difficult
to show that the disparate loans covering a wide range of interventions in varying geographies
add up to effective climate change adaptation. This is offset, however, by the paradigm shift
involved in developing the capacity of the IFIs and PFIs to tailor their loan portfolio to
effectively managing climate risk. For this reason, the independent TAP considers the paradigm
shift potential to be Medium.
Scale: High
1. 4 Sustainable development potential
31.
Notwithstanding questions around the climate-specific impacts of the funding proposal
mentioned in previous paragraphs, the proposed programme will result in environmental co-
benefits. Some of the environmental co-benefits include conservation and/or restoration of
forests and agroforestry systems which will act as natural buffers, controlling and mitigating the
impact of floods, droughts, extreme temperatures, and wildfires on ecosystems in selected sites.
The programme will also increase access to finance for underserved populations, which should
support economic development generally and improve the financial sustainability of
a 1. g 4 r .1 i . c ultAurliagl nlimveelinhto woditsh. SDGs
32.
According to information presented in the funding proposal, if adequately planned and
implemented, the proposed project will contribute to the achievement of nine of the 17 United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The main contributions of the project will be to
SDG 6 – Clean water and sanitation; SDG 11 – Sustainable cities and communities; SDG 13 –
Climate action; and SDG 15 – Life on land. In addition, the project will contribute to SDG 1 –
Poverty reduction; SDG 7 – Affordable and clean energy; SDG 8 – Decent work and economic
g
1.
r
4
o
.2
w
.
th;E ScDoGn o9m – iIcn dcou-sbtreyn, einfintos v ation and infrastructure; and SDG 10 – Reduced inequalities.
33.
The programme is intended to increase access to credit which in turn should further
reduce financial barriers to implementing adaptation measures for the targeted rural
c 1. o 4 m .3. munSiotcieisa.l co-benefits
34.
The proposed project is expected to yield substantial social co-benefits, mostly
contributing to social development by improving the water and food security of vulnerable
c 1. o 4 m .4. munEintiveisr oinn tmhee nretagilo cno. - benefits

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 142
35.
The conservation and restoration of some degraded and climate-vulnerable ecosystems
– through reforestation, forest management, agroforestry systems and sustainable fuelwood
practices – as well as the use of water- and energy-efficient technologies will result in several
e 1. n 4. v 5 i . ronGmeenndtaelr c-ore-blaetneedfi tcso. - benefits
36.
Women in Central America tend to hold traditional, unpaid gender roles associated with
domestic responsibilities such as motherhood, child- and elder-care as well as household
management. These roles generally also include water management and collection. During
times of water scarcity, the burden of finding, collecting and storing water increases, with
women bearing most of this additional responsibility. Mitigation of climate impacts should
alleviate water-related challenges for women in the region. The funding proposal describes
how, by building on this understanding of water-related challenges among women using
gender-sensitive learning methods for adaptation, the proposed project will not only empower
women within their communities and promote gender equality but will also ensure the
eff ectiveness of the project interventions.
37.
Taking all these co-benefits into account, the independent TAP considers the sustainable
development potential to be High.
Scale: High
1. 5 Needs of the recipient
38.
From an overall perspective, the Latin America and the Caribbean region — under
which the seven beneficiary countries fall — has achieved an average annual economic growth
rate of 3.2 per cent over the last ten years. However, this growth rate varies substantially
between the countries and even within countries between urban and rural communities. Rural
communities have little or no access to adaptation finance, which limits their adaptive capacity.
By improving access to financial resources for adaptation interventions, the adaptive capacity of
rural communities in the Dry Corridor will be increased. With increased financial and technical
capacity, communities will be able to withstand the negative impacts of severe droughts, flood
an d severe storms.
39.
Owing to the different socioeconomic, development and environmental contexts of the
different participating countries, their respective needs for climate finance differ. With regards
to the loan and guarantee financial mechanisms being proposed by the AE, the participating
countries will likely have different existing capacities for the uptake of EbA finance, meaning
that some will be able to utilize higher levels of finance than others. There will also be different
levels of demand for EbA finance in each country. To that end, the on-the-ground interventions
to be implemented in the target municipalities in each country were selected on the basis of
extensive stakeholder engagement, availability of area for implementation and appropriateness
of interventions.
40.
At the local level, vulnerable rural communities do not have the financial resources,
knowledge base or technical capacity to (i) develop, implement and maintain EbA and other
adaptation measures; (ii) co-ordinate the frequent, cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder
engagement that is necessary for EbA and other adaptation interventions; and (iii) capitalize on
EbA interventions by generating new private income streams from the ecosystem goods and
ser vices produced by restored climate-resilient ecosystems.
41.
The national budgets of Dry Corridor countries are limited, and poverty eradication and
sustainable development have been prioritized for funding over climate change action. There is
a high dependency on non-reimbursable international support to meet climate change goals
across the region where the finance available is far below what is required to meet adaptation
needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economies of these countries will

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 143
leave even fewer funds available for climate action in the participating countries. The proposed
programme will provide access to technical and financial resources, knowledge products and
government support structures that will enable rural communities to adapt effectively to
climate change in the Dry Corridor. For all these reasons, the independent TAP considers the
needs of the recipient to be High.
Scale: High
1. 6 CReoluevnatnrcye o tow nnaetirosnhailp p olicie s and o bjective s –
42.
Climate change adaptation is
recognized as a priority in the Central American region and has been integrated into several
regional and national policies and strategies. In addition to this regional alignment, the project
contribute s to achieving national priorities and aligns with numerous policies in each of the
seven target countries as well detailed in the Feasibility Study provided with the funding
pr oposal.
43.
The development of this funding proposal was initiated by the Council of Ministers of
the Central American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD), which includes
members from each of the seven target countries. In addition to engaging with CCAD, regional
and national stakeholder consultations have been conducted commencing in 2016. Through
these national workshops, priorities and focus areas for the project were identified. The draft
concept note was circulated, and further consultations were conducted in October–November
2017 with representatives from each country. A regional workshop was also held in October
2017 to obtain input on the draft concept note from representatives of governmen ts and non-
governmental organizations in the region. These inputs contributed to refining the project
co ncept and incorporating lessons learned from previous initiatives in the region.
44.
The funding proposal also includes no-objection letters from each of the seven relevant
co untries.
45.
Importantly, the funding proposal includes USD 51.3 million in aggregate grant funding
from the countries and in-kind contributions. As for co-financing (USD 40.1 million), each
country will identify additional investment sources from their national budgets to increase the
interventions of this output. At the moment there is limited clarity as to the timing of this co-
fin ance and its application.
46.
Based on the above analysis, the independent TAP considers that the country ownership
of the project may be high if the project is successfully implemented as proposed (i.e. country
co -finan
C
c
a
in
p
g
a
)
c
.
i ty of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver
47.
- The project
implementation arrangements involve several entities and layers of actors at the regional,
national and local level. CABEI will oversee the project implementation and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and CCAD will jointly act as executing
entities. UN Environment will play a technical advisory role. Moreover, there will be several
fin ancial institutions involved.
48.
The independent TAP believes that the overall project governance structure is complex
and that it is critical that all the relevant actors have clear and common objectives in order to
achieve the expected climate change impacts of the project. This involves clear investment
cri teria (based on climate change rationale) and EbA plans.
49.
As reflected above, the independent TAP remains concern around the implementation
by CABEI of similar projects, such as the GCF approved project CAMBIO II which, after 3 years
since approval, has not started to disburse loans. During a due diligence call with the
independent TAP, CABEI explained that only very recently has it been able to deliver some
consultations in the countries to start delivering the loans.

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 144
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant actors
50.
- The project
proposal presents some references (in annex 7) of the consultations delivered in the Council of
Ministers up to November 2019 and some stakeholder consultations at the country level up
until the same year. Much has happened in the region since 2019, and further consultations
need to be developed to ensure that the project contemplates the current economic situation of
the targeted beneficiaries, their current needs and willingness to take part of the project.
Scale: Medium
1. 7 Efficiency and effectiveness
51.
Efficiency and effectiveness of the grant portion of this funding proposal would be Low–
Medium, if the uncertainties around the expected adaptation impact, given the absence of
completed EbA plans for the target catchments, were not addressed. However, the independent
TAP is of the view that, considering the additional climate data clarifications provided, the clear
regional impact of climate change and the proposed validation process, this programme could
rate Medium on the GCF assessment scale, providing the conditions (elaborated below) are
fulfilled. Ultimately this will depend on the robustness of the validation process that requires
fur ther elaboration and demonstration.
52.
Efficiency and effectiveness of the loan and guarantee element of the funding proposal is
considered to be medium. The independent TAP remains concerned about the ability of the
project partners to disburse loan funding at such a large scale within the project
implementation period. The loan and guarantee portion of the project draws from the
experiences of the MEbA project which, according to the funding proposal, informed the
selection of appropriate EbA solutions for the proposed project. Phase one of the project (MEbA
I) was implemented in Colombia and Peru, while activities were expanded to Benin, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador and Senegal during phase two (MEbA II). EbA
solutions drawn from MEbA will include implementing locally appropriate water- and energy-
efficient technologies, such as rainwater harvesting systems and half-orange kilns, for adapting
to the increasing impacts of climate change. Furthermore, effective methods for inc reasing
commercial and smallholder farmers’ access to financial resources for adaptation were drawn
fro m the MEbA project as well as CAMBio II projects, approved by the GCF at B.21.
53.
The independent TAP notes that the MEbA programme has only been able to issue USD
30 million in loans since 2014 across five countries. The MEbA loans represent just over 17,000
projects. Moreover, the majority of the MEbA lo ans are focused on a single intervention (solar
dehydrators). The outcomes of the MEbA programme are substantially more modest than those
pr oposed by the AE in the Dry Corridor region.
54.
The CAMBio II programme was approved at B.21 (2018) and is substantially smaller
(USD 15.5 million GCF contribution) than the funding proposal under consideration. To date,
CAMBio II has faced deployment issues and has not been able to generate the expected results.
According to the AE, some of this lack of performance is related to the difficult year 2020, in
which the Central American region has been affected by various climatic, health and economic
crises. The AE informed the independent TAP that it expected the execution of the CAMBio II
programme to accelerate in 2021; however, the independent TAP understands that progress so
far in 2021 has been below expectations.
55.
Notwithstanding the above concerns, the independent TAP notes that the overall
efficiency and effectiveness of the funding proposal has been improved by incorporating a
phased approached to the deployment of the loan facility. If a phased or tranched approach is
appropriately structured through appropriate covenants in the FAA and other governing
agreements, this should allow funding disbursements to be better tailored to actual demand
over time, to increase use of the guarantee product over time, and allow greater time for
vulnerability assessments and identification of priorities for other regions within the Dry
Corridor where the intervention could be scaled up. This phased approach will also allow for

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 145
more time to strengthen the capacities of the financial institutions and to promote the financial
me chanism with communities and producers.
56.
The funding proposal projects a co-financing ratio of 1:0.51 and a private source
leverage ratio of 1:0.67. The programme’s leverage primarily results from the USD 30 million
guarantee provided by GCF that is expected to cover the credit risk of 25–75 per cent of PFI loan
portfolios. The inclusion and use of a guarantee product is a positive feature of the proposal, as
is the loan structure whereby the GCF is lending to the PFIs via a trust structure, and the PFIs
will in turn lend to the end beneficiaries. Therefore , the PFIs will take the end beneficiary credit
risk for the full programme loan amount even though they are not required to contribute their
ow n resources beyond the GCF and AE resources.
57.
Based on the above, the overall rat ing for efficiency and effectiveness for both the grant
and loan portion of the funding proposal is thus considered as Medium, subject and dependent
on the fulfilment of the conditions herein.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
58.
The AE states that the Dry Corridor suffers and would continue to suffer from the effects
of climate change. The funding proposal seeks to ameliorate these impacts by focusing on
specific catchment areas (grant-funded interventions) and by providing a region-wide loan and
guarantee facility. At the catchment level, a successful EbA approach must be part of a cohesive
catchment-specific plan and landscape approach, underpinned by a clear climate rationale for
each catchment. The B.30 funding proposal provides some additional information to
demonstrate how climate change may impact the areas of intervention in the future as well as
its explanation of the limits of data and climate information availability in the selected zones of
the programme, and the scarcity of meteorological stations in these zones.
59.
In this amended funding proposal, the AE further proposes a sequencing process by
which the programme includes the development of site-specific intervention plans for each of
the seven catchment areas as a first step in the implementation of the programme. As set out in
the funding proposal, the first year of the project would be focused on developing the site-
specific intervention plans, establishing the community monitoring committees and initial
activities to ensure stakeholder engagement and identification of priority interventions. The
independent TAP’s preference, as expressed in relation to the funding proposal presented for
B.29, was that this effort should occur before endorsement, so that the proposed interventions
(particularly the demonstration interventions) can be clearly shown as part of a cohesive
approach that, in aggregate, produces the desired adaptation impacts to justify the GCF
inv estment.
all
60.
The B.30 funding proposal alleviates some of these concerns by making the
demonstration projects indicative and by subjecting interventions (including the
demonstration projects) to an ex-ante validation process. According to the funding proposal, the
selection/validation of the specific EbA interventions will be based on scientific climate risk
assessments and sound stakeholder consultations. The funding proposal further provides a list
of criteria that would be examined in such a validation process; however, the funding proposal
is thin on the mechanics of the process and the standards to be applied, and the endorsement of
the independent TAP is conditional on the firming up and detailed specification of the validation
process. Considering the broad evidence of climate adaptation needs of the subject region, as
described in the funding proposal, and the potential for a robust validation process to ensure
that interventions are aligned with the actual climate needs of specific catchments, the
independent TAP can endorse this funding proposal subject to the conditions below. The
independent TAP notes that even with these conditions, the funding proposal only minimally
satisfies the GCF investment criteria and the independent TAP urges the Secretariat to devote
sufficient time and resources to ensure the conditions are thoroughly met.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 146
61.
The independent TAP maintains its preference for the completion of a catchment-
specific EbA plan for each of these seven catchments based on catchment level climate rationale
as discussed herein and in previous assessments. However, the independent TAP is endorsing
this proposal subject to certain conditions which, if performed adequately, could minimally
address its concerns. From the independent TAP’s perspective, the conditions listed below are
necessary to meet the GCF investment criteria, otherwise the impact potential and efficiency
and effectiveness of the grant component of the funding proposal do not suffice for
en dorsement.
62.
Pursuant to the above, the Programme is endorsed for approval with the following
Conditions precedent to the execution of the FAA:
conditions to be included in the relevant funded activity agreement (FAA):
(a)
The AE shall submit to the Fund, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF
Secretariat, an ex-ante EbA Intervention Validation Process that will be utilized to
ensure that no EbA intervention under the Programme can receive any grant funding
until such time as the proposed intervention has been successfully validated by the AE,
an d that shall contain the following:
(i)
A step-by-step description of the EbA Intervention Validation Process that
co vers each of the validation criteria provided in the funding proposal, including:
(1)
Sufficient detail on each proposed intervention including site
determination, duration, cost, and expected EbA impact among other
relevant information so as to permit analysis and evaluation of the
proposed intervention in the context of the validation criteria and the
relevant catchment plan;
(2)
For each intervention, a clear articulation of the adaptation impact of the
proposed EbA intervention to be grant funded as per the GCF investment
2
criteria indicators;
(3)
For each validation criterion, a clearly articulated and objective standard
by which each intervention will be measured against and scored against.
A scoring system shall also be designed that can help select amongst
interventions. The standard and scoring system to be devised must be
deeply rooted in the relevant EbA site specific catchment plan to be
endorsed by the Secretariat; and
(4)
The process description shall include information on the data and
materials to be collected and presented for each criterion as part of the
validation process;
(ii)
A third-party audit process/external assessment for the demonstration EbA site
specificinterventions; and
(iii)
A sample intervention validation document and supporting information as a
Covenants for inclusion in the FAA:
template.
(a)
The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the provision of grant funding to any EbA
interventions (including demonstration projects) under the Programme is subject to a
requirement that proposed interventions be first successfully validated under the EbA
Intervention Validation Process prior to funding;
2
The criteria state that “Project proposals should describe the expected change in loss of lives, value of physical
assets, livelihoods, and/or environmental or social losses due to the impact of extreme climate-related disasters and
climate change in the geographical area of the GCF intervention.”

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 147
(b)
The Accredited Entity shall ensure that GCF funds intended for grant funding of EbA
interventions (including demonstration projects) in a select catchment shall only be
disbursed to the ExeEcbuAti nPgl aEnntities or Final Recipients (as applicable) after the
completion and submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a catchment specific
EbA plan (each, an “ ”) for that area, in form and substance acceptable to the
GCF Secretariat.
(c)
P rior to approving the EbA plans, the Accredited Entity shall:
(i)
Deliver such plans to the Fund for its review and no-objection. The EbA plans
shall include an independent external assessment of the plan and its underlying
climate rationale analysis. This external assessment shall (1) be in writing and
utilized by the GCF Secretariat to determine whether to non-objecting to a given
plan; (2) be conducted by a person or entity previously approved by the GCF
Secretariat and funded by the Accredited Entity; (3) confirm the level of
availability of site-specific climate information and whether the plan makes use
of such data to generate accurate and informative climate risks and vulnerability
analysis for resilient development. The Accredited Entity shall incorporate the
GCF Secretariat’s comments, if any, in the finalization of such EbA Plans, and
(ii)
Deliver the final copy of the EbA Plans within five (5) days of their approval by
the Accredited Entity:
(d)
Th e Accredited Entity shall approve the EbA plans only if they contain the following:
(i)
The catchment EbA plan includes a catchment specific climate rationale,
sourcing available historical observed data for the catchment, and utilizes this
data to validate the choice of a model that is used to make future projections
about key climate parameters related to drought and other hazards such as flood
and storms, as the case may be; and
(ii)
A validated site-specific catchment plan which shall include spatial mapping of
the hazard vulnerability of the catchment, and proposed interventions for the
catchment that will maintain or restore ecosystem services that reduce the
vulnerability of communities to the expected impacts of specific climate hazards.
(e)
The FAA shall provide for a phased structure of the loan facility as described in the
funding proposal, including a disbursement schedule for loan proceeds from GCF to the
Accredited Entity subject to milestones, to ensure that the relevant GCF proceeds are
disbursed in accordance with pre-agreed terms. In case such milestones are not
satisfied in volume, timing or other material condition, GCF shall have the right to
Condition precedent to first disbursement of GCF Proceeds under the FAA:
suspend or alter the disbursements for the loan facility to the Accredited Entity.
(a)
The AE shall submit to the Fund of an updated investment eligibility criteria for the loan
facility (Activity 4.1), in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, taking
into consideration all recommendations from the independent TAP. In particular, the
referred criteria shall be specific and transparent to provide greater substance to the
broad investment objectives currently in the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 148
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP174)
Proposal name: Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in
the Central American Dry Corridor and the Arid Zones of the
Dominican Republic
Accredited entity: Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI)
Country/(ies): Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Panama and Dominican Republic
Programme/programme size: Large
Impact potential
More detailed climate projections to 2050 and 2100 have been included in the revised version
that confirm the trends of increased aridity in the Dry Corridor region, strengthening the
argument that the selected measures are appropriate to the selected catchments. As a response
to iTAPs concerns, CABEI has included a set of criteria for the validation of the selected EbA
landscape interventions of the programme to be financed through the grant component.
In terms of observed data, these are very limited in the region, and it will be necessary to agree
on alternative methods to evaluate climate impacts and the potential for adaptation of the
proposed interventions when observed data are not available
The pre-defined pilot interventions have been selected through a site-specific consultative
process (annex 7) to understand site-specific modelled (when possible) and perceived climate
risks as well as other relevant aspects that determine the relevance of the selected
interventions. The positive impacts of these interventions have also been estimated through
the hydrological model showing consistence on positive trends (section 13 of FS) for water
availability, groundwater recharge and erosion and are therefore relevant to the needs of the
catchments.
Also, in response to iTAP´s concerns, CABEI has introduced a phased approach for the loan
facility to ensure better alignment with climate risks, actual demand over time and stronger
capacities of the key stakeholders.
Paradigm shift potential
As the iTAP points out, the real paradigm shift potential lies on the potential of the enabling
environment that capitalizes on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support:
financial, policy and technical.
For the financial sector, technical capacities will be built within PFIs and non-regulated
financial institutions to assess risk, provide advice to local producers and steer investments
into more resilient practices. In addition, the programme foresees also the development of
capacities of vulnerable communities to better integrate climate risk and risk management
options into policy and regulatory mechanisms that will increase this transformation also from
the land use, agriculture and water management perspective at different administrative levels.

--- Table 1 on Page 148 ---
Impact potential
More detailed climate projections to 2050 and 2100 have been included in the revised version
that confirm the trends of increased aridity in the Dry Corridor region, strengthening the
argument that the selected measures are appropriate to the selected catchments. As a response
to iTAPs concerns, CABEI has included a set of criteria for the validation of the selected EbA
landscape interventions of the programme to be financed through the grant component.
In terms of observed data, these are very limited in the region, and it will be necessary to agree
on alternative methods to evaluate climate impacts and the potential for adaptation of the
proposed interventions when observed data are not available
The pre-defined pilot interventions have been selected through a site-specific consultative
process (annex 7) to understand site-specific modelled (when possible) and perceived climate
risks as well as other relevant aspects that determine the relevance of the selected
interventions. The positive impacts of these interventions have also been estimated through
the hydrological model showing consistence on positive trends (section 13 of FS) for water
availability, groundwater recharge and erosion and are therefore relevant to the needs of the
catchments.
Also, in response to iTAP´s concerns, CABEI has introduced a phased approach for the loan
facility to ensure better alignment with climate risks, actual demand over time and stronger
capacities of the key stakeholders.
Paradigm shift potential
As the iTAP points out, the real paradigm shift potential lies on the potential of the enabling
environment that capitalizes on the scalability of EbA, focusing on three core areas of support:
financial, policy and technical.
For the financial sector, technical capacities will be built within PFIs and non-regulated
financial institutions to assess risk, provide advice to local producers and steer investments
into more resilient practices. In addition, the programme foresees also the development of
capacities of vulnerable communities to better integrate climate risk and risk management

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 149
The need for adaptation funding in the region is far larger than the actual size of this
programme and continues to increase rapidly with local communities facing years of severe
droughts followed by years of extreme rainfall events. This programme has the potential to
create a sustainable funding mechanism unlocking the private sector participation to
implement adaptation measures at scale.
Sustainable development potential
iTAP´s evaluation under this criterion is appreciated and highlights how the EbA interventions
included in the proposal are no-regret options that provide not only climate resilience benefits,
but other environmental, social, and economic co-benefits.
Needs of the recipient
iTAP´s evaluation under this criterion is appreciated and highlights how the on-the-ground
interventions to be implemented in the target catchments in each country were selected based
on extensive stakeholder engagement, availability of area for implementation and
appropriateness of interventions.
The assessment also highlights how the region is highly dependent on international support to
meet climate change goals across the region where the finance available is far below what is
required to meet adaptation needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
hurricanes in late 2020 on the economies of these countries will leave even fewer funds
available for climate action in the participating countries.
Country ownership
Country ownership is indeed very high for this programme. It was initiated by the Council of
Ministers of the Central American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD) and
there is a key opportunity at the moment to align and inform the development of the National
Adaptation Plans that are currently under development for at least 5 of the 7 participating
countries.
The strong consortium that will be leading the execution of this programme will ensure an
integrated approach between political, financial, and technical aspects that will favour an
enabling environment for the scalability of EbA.
Efficiency and effectiveness
CABEI considers that this criterion could be assessed at least as Medium High, since the value
for money to create impact is high compared to other similar projects. As a matter of fact, this
programme is proposing a comprehensive approach addressing all key elements in an
integrated manner: capacity, policy and include a strong consortium of leading political and
technical institutions and a sustainable financial mechanism unlocking the private sector
participation to implement adaptation measures at scale.

--- Table 1 on Page 149 ---
The need for adaptation funding in the region is far larger than the actual size of this
programme and continues to increase rapidly with local communities facing years of severe
droughts followed by years of extreme rainfall events. This programme has the potential to
create a sustainable funding mechanism unlocking the private sector participation to
implement adaptation measures at scale.
Sustainable development potential
iTAP´s evaluation under this criterion is appreciated and highlights how the EbA interventions
included in the proposal are no-regret options that provide not only climate resilience benefits,
but other environmental, social, and economic co-benefits.
Needs of the recipient
iTAP´s evaluation under this criterion is appreciated and highlights how the on-the-ground
interventions to be implemented in the target catchments in each country were selected based
on extensive stakeholder engagement, availability of area for implementation and
appropriateness of interventions.
The assessment also highlights how the region is highly dependent on international support to
meet climate change goals across the region where the finance available is far below what is
required to meet adaptation needs. The added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
hurricanes in late 2020 on the economies of these countries will leave even fewer funds
available for climate action in the participating countries.
Country ownership
Country ownership is indeed very high for this programme. It was initiated by the Council of
Ministers of the Central American Commission for Environment and Development (CCAD) and
there is a key opportunity at the moment to align and inform the development of the National
Adaptation Plans that are currently under development for at least 5 of the 7 participating
countries.
The strong consortium that will be leading the execution of this programme will ensure an
integrated approach between political, financial, and technical aspects that will favour an
enabling environment for the scalability of EbA.
Efficiency and effectiveness
CABEI considers that this criterion could be assessed at least as Medium High, since the value
for money to create impact is high compared to other similar projects. As a matter of fact, this
programme is proposing a comprehensive approach addressing all key elements in an
integrated manner: capacity, policy and include a strong consortium of leading political and
technical institutions and a sustainable financial mechanism unlocking the private sector
participation to implement adaptation measures at scale.

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.30/02/Add.06
Page 150
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
CABEI believes this proposal is well aligned with the recently communicated investment
priorities from the GCF and its core role in adaptation finance testing and educating the market
for EbA demand. This programme provides a unique opportunity to build more sustainable and
actual demand driven funding mechanisms to scale adaptation investments in the region.
Responding to iTAP's recommendations in its previous assessments, CABEI made adjustments
and improvements to the proposal, including more detailed information on the climate
rationale for all programme sites, developing the first site specific intervention plans for 2
countries in the region (Costa Rica and Honduras) and strengthening the demand analysis for
the credit and guarantee components of the program. In addition, phased structures for the
grant and the loan facilities have been introduced to ensure a stronger alignment with the
climate rationale and market adjustments of the interventions.
CABEI takes note of the established conditions from iTAP to the endorsement of the proposal
and will coordinate the necessary arrangements with the GCF Secretariat in order to fulfil these
conditions.

=== PAGE 151 ===
Gender documentation for FP174
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Gender Analysis/Assessment
Part I: Gender Analysis/Assessment:
1) CONTEXT OF THE DRY CORRIDOR
The social, political, economic and environmental conditions of the countries occupying the dry
corridor, especially the countries of Central America, remain a trigger for the extreme poverty
experienced by a part of their population, especially the rural and indigenous population. Economic
factors include the economic model that deepens poverty, violence and social exclusion, as a result of
lack of opportunities and employment; among the political factors we find an institutionality
historically weakened by economic and political elites who defend sectarian interests, justify and
sustain acts of corruption and impunity; Social factors mainly include common and organized violence,
domestic violence, among others 1.These conditions set up a scenario that systematically pushes many
people and increasingly women to have to migrate forcefully.
Most violence in these countries is generated by organized crime and especially gang groups and
leaves "visible impacts" such as injuries and assaults on physical health, disabilities, neglect, dispute
areas deterioration of public infrastructure, limitations in services in hospitals, health centers and
schools, presence of massive security forces, threats, forced displacement, killings, use of women and
girls as an object of extortion and others, but also "less visible consequences" such as family
disintegration, extreme devaluation of women and girls, loss of physical and economic capital,
breakdown of social fabric, mistrust among the population, the loss of public spaces and the loss of
freedom of mobilization in the territory that slowly and devastatingly contributes to the loss of
leadership and community organization, to the deterioration of the quality of life 2.
According to the Central American Dry Corridor Characterization Study3, in Central American
countries, the percentage of rural population varies from 38% in El Salvador to 52% in Honduras and
Guatemala. Of the total rural families, the percentage of families producing basic grains ranges from
54% in El Salvador and Honduras to 67% in Guatemala, with an average of 62%. The rest of the rural
population (38%) engaged in salaried work and other agricultural and non-agricultural activities.
In Guatemala 61% of the producers of basic grains are belonging to the indigenous peoples of the
highlands. Producers of basic grains, especially maize and beans, from Guatemala to Nicaragua,
produce on an average, small area: 1.3 ha in Guatemala and El Salvador, 2.4 ha in Honduras and 2.8
ha in Nicaragua. The local population grows for food purposes for family consumption and only trade
when there are surpluses or no urgent non-food needs
Understanding that climate change affects men and women farmers differently is a critical factor in
the development of new practical and sustainable climate-adapted technologies that help producers
cope with the impacts of change Climate.
Better understanding of the vulnerabilities of men and women to climate change and how they differ
and what actions should be taken into account to reduce these vulnerabilities is key. To do this, it is
1
Childhood Without Borders. Magazine No. 1. Apr/18. Regional Observatory on Child Migration/OREMI. Year 2, No. 2, Jul-Dec/17. Pp3
2 Current situation of humanitarian access, March2018. ACAPS
3 According to the Central American Dry Corridor Characterization Study. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
1

=== PAGE 152 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
necessary to understand the differentiated uses that give to forests and trees among others, to
support the development of sustainable practices adapted to the climate that are sensitive to the
gender. In this sense, the perspective of gender equality is critical when it comes to decision-making,
policy-making and adaptation and mitigation strategies. Women are not only victims of the
.
phenomenon, they are agents of change that bring knowledge and solutions. While women have
important abilities as agents of transformation, they also have specific vulnerabilities that tend to be
exacerbated in the presence of extreme weather events because they typically have fewer
opportunities access and control of resources. On the one hand, climate change exacerbate gender
inequalities, but gender inequalities also contribute to greater negative impacts from climate change.
In this way understanding the differentiated risks and impacts of climate change in men and women
help to ensure a greater impact on the programme’s response.
A large majority of women live in conditions of social exclusion that are expressed in limitations to
mobilize outside the domestic space, Less access to information in the event of a threat, Less access
to early warning systems and forecasts of climate variability, as well as difficulties in participating in
training processes.
Women should be included, not because they are more vulnerable, but because they have different
perspectives and experiences with which they can contribute; they are nonetheless under-
represented in decision-making on relevant aspects of change climate change: reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions, as well as adaptation and mitigation strategies.
2) HELD BELIEFS, PERCEPTIONS, AND STEREOTYPES RELATED TO GENDER IN THE PROGRAM
FOOTPRINT COUNTRIES OF INTERVENTION
2.1 Dominant masculinities
Traditional gender roles and stereotypes attributed to men and women, as well as asymmetrical
power differences between men and women are some of the factors contributing to the definition of
a sexist social fabric in the areas of intervention of the dry corridor. In this context, gender inequality
is rooted in a social construction of masculinity, whereas boys learn to exercise power over girls and
women. Which means not listening to the voices of women and girls, subordinating their desires and
decisions to men, considering the bodies of women and girls as an object of man who has no rights.
Social and cultural norms are sexist in dry corridor countries. Gender roles, norms and stereotypes
are marked by strong inequalities in social relations and patriarchal cultural constructs. Which set
expectations about women's femininity, reproductive role and sexuality and play a key role in creating
greater vulnerability to violations and gaps in the realization of women's and girls' human rights and
especially in rural and indigenous contexts.
Children are socialized based on a hegemonic model of masculinity that defines them as strong,
dominant, providers and that they must adhere to a rigid code of honor that forces them to compete
or use violence to verify that they are "male." They are also socialized with the expectation that they
will be well informed and powerful in terms of productivity activity. Being a "male" in these countries
often means demonstrating your virility (through multiple heterosexual relationships), discussing your
conquests with your male peers, and verifying your fertility by having children. In addition, in most
communities children are raised so as not to worry about their own health and not to seek help when
they feel stressed. As a result they believe they cannot express doubts or concerns about their bodies,
sexuality or reproductive health, or seek help. Nor are they prepared to take responsibility for the
exercise of their sexuality so they do not commit to the care of themselves and their partner for the
2

=== PAGE 153 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
prevention of STIs, unwanted pregnancies, etc. These conditions have differential consequences for
them and for them.
There is a growing recognition in dry corridor countries, which the hegemonic model of masculinity
puts women at risk of being victims of gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health
problems, such as the infection of Daddy virus human hill - which is one of the agents of cervical cancer
- Meanwhile, men suffer higher mortality rates from external causes (accidents, homicide, suicide);
higher rates of alcohol and drug abuse; violence and exclusion when they do not meet the expected
male model; worrying STI rates and very low opportunities for participation in the upbringing of their
sons and daughters.
2.2 The situation of rural and peasant women
In the social and political context where the dry corridor communities identified for intervention are
located. There are certain setbacks of human rights, they form systems of discrimination and privileges
that feed, the intersection between gender inequality and other forms of exclusion, such as class,
ethnicity, race, age, the place of residency and disabilities. In this sense, the multiple discriminations
faced by women in terms of the benefits of state initiatives, access to decision-making spaces and
participation in policy-making processes is a constant . 4And it is very important that this situation of
inequality that women live, is not detached from the analysis of the impact on life of populations by
climate change
a) Feminization of Poverty
The Dry Corridor is the most densely populated region in Central America, with a population of
approximately 10.5 million people. About 60% of the population of the Dry Corridor lives in extreme
poverty. The most severe poverty is located in Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala and
has a special impact in rural areas. The effects of extreme events such as drought and flooding
particularly affect women who in general are in the situation of greater poverty. It is caused by the
loss of crops, productive activities, problems with livestock and fishing.
b) Gender-based violence
The dry corridor region faces a crisis of violence and systematic human rights violations. Large national
territories controlled by organized crime or criminal gangs, economic policies that deepen inequality
and favor private interests, meddling in public affairs of religious hierarchies, militarization, stripping
of territories and natural goods to native communities and peoples, as well as policies and laws that
restrict and criminalize social protest or that violate fundamental rights, are some of the expressions
of this crisis that is presented to varying degrees and nuances according to the country.
Impunity is present throughout the region to alarming degrees. At the world's level Nicaragua,
Honduras and El Salvador rank sixth, seventh and eighth respectively in the impunity index5. Impunity
affects women in particular, especially those living in remote rural areas. The InterAmerican
commission of Human Rights (ICHR) has recognized that in several countries there is a pattern of
systematic impunity in prosecution and actions around cases of violence against women.
In this context, there is a worrying increase and sharpening of violence against women. Increasingly
cruel forms of violence, including slavery and sexual torture, are present throughout the dry corridor
region amid a culture that tolerates and normalizes violence against women. There is also an increase
4 Central American Commission on Environment and Development (CCAD),
5 Center for Studies on Impunity and Justice (CESIJ) of the University of the Americas Puebla. http://www.
udlap.mx/cesij/resultadosigi2015.aspx
3

--- Table 1 on Page 153 ---
effects of extreme events such as drought and flooding | 
 | It is caused by the

--- Table 2 on Page 153 ---
particularly affect women who in general are in the situation of greater poverty.
loss of crops, productive activities, problems with livestock and fishing.

=== PAGE 154 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
in femicide/femicide rates aggravated by cruelty in the mode of death, the planning of the death and
its execution in the presence of sons and daughters.
Violence against women is an extreme form of gender inequality and affects one in three women in
the Americas, who have been victims at some point in their lives of violence by their partner or
stranger. It takes many forms, but sexual, physical and emotional violence by a male partner are the
most prevalent forms6. Violence against women has lasting consequences that profoundly affect their
physical and mental health, the health and psychosocial development of their children, the well-being
of families and communities, and the budget and economic development of nations 7 and can have
profound and lasting consequences for survivors' health, such as physical injury, unwanted pregnancy,
abortion, sexually transmitted infections (including HIV/AIDS infection) and various negative
outcomes in mental health matters.
This context of violence in which women live must be taken into account within the framework of the
areas of intervention, as it also affects women in the selected communities. In the areas of
intervention, the house or the home that are considered as private space where women and girls live,
is not the safest place for them. The sphere of private space is built around the belief that from doors
to the inside what happens is a family-only theme. Even when they may be in violation of women's
right to a life free from violence. Under this paradigm, multiple forms of violence towards women and
girls are justified and undefeated in rural communities. In turn, physical violence is the most visible
expression of the exercise of power by the husband or partner with the woman. It highlights the
asymmetry in power relations between men and women, which perpetuates the subordination of
women to men in the private space.
In the areas of intervention of the program, the family nuclei are structured around the male gender
at all decision levels. From the domination and power of the husband that clearly affects the
relationship with women and the role that they have socially assigned to suppress, dependence and
accept physical violence. Psychological violence has a profound impact on the assessment of
themselves and self-esteem and their mental health. Which has a direct impact on the physical and
psychological health of your sons and daughters. Rural women and women belonging to indigenous
peoples may be at greater risk of violence than other women.
c) Access to services
Living in rural areas of the dry corridor and being a peasant woman increases socioeconomic
disadvantages due to lack of access to services including health, education, water, health and
transportation conditions.
The lack of services for reproductive health care, childbirth care, as well as access to contraceptive
methods is a challenge for rural women. The limited access to maternal and child health services, the
absence of doctors and health providers causes lack of care for women and early childhood. Lack of
services prevents pregnant women from checking their pregnancies. During pregnancy they do not
have access to care centers, since they are concentrated in the urban areas of the main cities and have
no resources to pay for transportation. In turn, the roads to move are in very poor condition and low
transport. Often when they go to the controls is at the end of pregnancy or when they are in labor and
have no more alternatives. Many decide with no more options to give birth in their own homes and
some give birth on the roads, when they are on their way to being treated.
6 Multi-country study on healthof women and domestic violence against woman: WHO; 2005. http://www.who.int/gender/
violence/who_multicountry_study/en/.
7 Global and regional estimates of violence against women: Prevalence and effects of conjugal violence and non-conjugal sexual violence in
health OMS; 2013. 51 p.
4

--- Table 1 on Page 154 ---
Living in rural areas of the dry corridor and being a peasant woman increases socioeconomic
disadvantages due to lack of access to services including health, education, water, health and
transportation conditions.

=== PAGE 155 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
d) Femicide
The problem of femicides in dry corridor countries is particularly complex, as it is often linked to other
challenges pointed out in the backlines; violence in the couple or family members; organized crime;
public insecurity; trafficking in people and girls; migration of women and girls in unsafe conditions;
and discrimination, exclusion and structural racism against rural women and girls and indigenous
women. These challenges are more likely to be present in countries with persistent inequality and
discrimination against women and girls who replicate violent and non-cohesive societies
Of the 25 most critical countries in the world, 14 are in Latin America and the Caribbean. According to
the gender observatory of Latin America and the Caribbean. In absolute terms, if you compare the
rate per 100,000 women, the phenomenon reaches an extent in El Salvador that is not parallel in
another country in the region: 10.2 femicides per 100,000 women. In 2016, Honduras registered 5.8
femicides per 100,000 women. In Guatemala, the Dominican Republic also saw high rates in 2017,
equal to or greater than 2 cases per 100,000 women.
The path to the end of gender-based violence is arduous. According to the agency UN Women, 30%
of Latin American women suffer from this phenomenon including women from dry corridor countries.
This figure, coupled with the number of victims of femicide daily, achieves the criteria that the World
Health Organization establishes as an epidemic.
e) Violence against women environmental defenders in the dry corridor territories, derived
from the presence of extractive companies projects
In some territories they have been denounced by the organizations of rural women, that some
extractive projects of transnational companies have promoted a context of violence, stigmatization
and criminalization against community leaderships especially towards women who promote the rights
of rural women. Reference is made that human rights violations are committed and that this is
accompanied in some cases by the persecution of women and young defenders of the environment
There are large tracts of territory that have been granted to commercial companies for mining,
hydroelectric, monocultures and/or oil. These large projects that are causing an impact on the
ecosystems of the area also coexist with the smaller territories for family production.
According to the report of the Mesoamerican Initiative of Women Human Rights Defenders8, in El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, it shows that in 2015 and 2016 there were a
total of 2,197 assaults on human rights defenders in the region, an increase of 30% compared to the
previous period, which reported a total of 1,688 assaults. In Guatemala, Mexico and Honduras, most
of the aggressions were concentrated, which doubled from 2015 to 2016 in these three countries.
Following the trend of previous reports, land, territory and natural property defenders continue to be
the most assaulted. All of this has a considerable impact on women producers in communities who
protect their territories and work to mitigate the effects of climate change for years.
The situation of helplessness in which some communities and their leaders are placed pose scenarios
of impunity that contribute to strengthening the factors of discrimination and violence against
8 Violence against women human rights defenders in Mesoamerica 2012-2014 repport.
Mesoamerican Initiative for Women Human Rights Defenders
5

=== PAGE 156 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
women, and thus to fostering unsafe environments, hostile and exclusionary, unfavorable to the
defense of rights and their participation as agents of change
f) Feminization of migration
In this context of climate change, the migration of adolescent women and girls has ceased to be an
invisible phenomenon, where the woman perceived herself as a passive actor accompanying the
husband or waiting for the husband to emigrate. The current situation shows the active role that
women producers play in the migration process. They have a role from decision-making to migrating,
decision-making family networks support the destination countries. As well as in the shipment and
administration of remittances from the destination country.
The trigger to start the journey is the crisis stemming from the serious effects of climate change and
women and girls undertake migrant projects voluntarily or forcefully, to escape the extreme poverty
derived from drought , loss of crops, livestock and above all lack of access to food. In the country of
origin, irrigation also exists when women should look for alternatives to agricultural work. As
precarious jobs that also puts them at risk of labour exploitation, for example in maquilas or even
sexual exploitation.
Women who migrate due to climate change also live a great vulnerability in their status as migrants.
And during the journey they go through situations of isolation, lack of social and affective networks,
precariousness in their economic, employment living conditions, their ignorance about their rights in
the country of arrival. In this context of crisis, the migration project has also led to the increase of
new forms of slavery through the recruitment of women through trafficking and trafficking networks
for commercial exploitation purposes. Most of the time, they are tricked through advertisements in
local newspapers social media or even on the streets.
A 2017 study published by9 the World Food Program analyzed data on migrants from El Salvador,
Guatemala, and Honduras that were rejected by Mexican immigration authorities when they tried to
reach the United States. The study found that 50 percent of them had been working in the agricultural
sector before leaving. Contrary to the common perception that migration in these countries is driven
mainly by violence and insecurity, 65% cited unemployment or economic hardship due to the loss of
agriculture, and 19 % said low incomes and poor working conditions were reasons to leave.
The document also notes that 47% of the families interviewed suffered from food insecurity. Such
levels of food insecurity had not previously been recorded in the region in assessments carried out
over the past three years in the Dry Corridor.
About 72% of the families interviewed10 from dry corridor countries said they were resorting to
"emergency" measures to deal with their situation, such as selling their land, animals and tools to buy
food. Meanwhile, 78% of family members who remain in their countries receive a consignment on a
monthly basis, and in fact 42% of the families surveyed report that remittances were their only source
of fixed income, as they did not have access to the agricultural work due to climate change. More than
half of the money sent by migrants is used by families to buy food, followed by agricultural
investments – land and animal purchases – and investment in small businesses
9 “Food Security and Emigration: Why People Flee and The Impact This Has on Families Who Remain in El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras"
10 Op. Cit
6

--- Table 1 on Page 156 ---
A 2017 study published by9 |  |  |  |  | analyzed data on migrants from El Salvador, |  | 
Guatemala, and Honduras that were rejected by Mexican immigration authorities when they tried to |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
reach the United States. The study found that 50 percent of them had been working in the agricultural |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
sector before leaving. Contrary to the common perception that migration in these countries is driven |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
mainly by violence and insecurity, 65% |  |  |  | cited unemployment or economic hardship |  | due to | the loss of
agriculture, | and 19 | % | said low incomes and poor working conditions were reasons to leave. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 157 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
g) the situation of girls in rural areas of intervention
the analysis of the situation of women in dry corridor countries, it is very important to contemplate
women throughout their life cycle. Girls and adolescents also have a very important role in the
intervention areas of the proposal. Their living conditions are often the most disadvantaged and suffer
multiple forms of violation of their rights as girls. Among the most visible problems in rural
communities that are closely linked to the extreme poverty that families experience due to the effects
of climate change are: Forced pregnancies of adolescent girls and forced and early marriages and
unions. These problems are often invisible and normalized by the communities themselves and have
a decisive impact on the lives of the girls in the communities. Since they cause a disruption to your life
project and have an impact on the local development of the community.
Girls and adolescents work the land with their families and have a very important role in caring for
families. However, your opinion and participation in decisions is often devalued.
• Forced pregnancy
The list of the 50 countries with the highest fertility rates in adolescents in the world includes almost
all countries in the region; Nicaragua, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, countries with
particularly high rates (Rico and Trucco, 2014). Pregnancy and motherhood are spoken of as an
inevitable consequence of the lives of girls and adolescents in the situation of poverty and
precariousness to which they are exposed in communities. By implying that girls and adolescents have
no choice but about their lives. And in turn, it would be a natural condition closely linked to becoming
a woman.
Pregnancies among teenage girls in communities are often unplanned and the couple is rarely found
to be of the same age. They report with a large majority of 15-year-old pregnancies considered to be
the result of sexual violence and coercion. The age of onset of sexual intercourse was dropping and is
often not with peers of the same age. The age of the first pregnancy is evident in community areas in
girls under the age of 14.
• Forced and early child marriage and unions
In Latin America and the Caribbean in 2017, 23% of women aged 20 to 24 married at age 18 and 5%
married 15.11 The countries in the region with the highest prevalence of women aged 20 to 24 who
were married or entered a union before the age of 18 are the Dominican Republic with 36%, Nicaragua
with 35%, Honduras with 34%, Guatemala with 30% and El Salvador with a 26%.12 There are significant
age differences between girls who marry in childhood and their partners, but here too, data is scarce;
a 2005 UNFPA report estimated that this difference would be between 6 and 7 years, although the
figure may have changed significantly since then.13
The poverty generated by the effects of climate change puts producing families in a complex situation
to feed their daughters. Delivering a girl in marriage or union with a man who is often older, is thought
to be a way out of the lack of food for the upbringing of girls. However, the consequences on girls'
lives are devastating as it disrupts their life project.
11 Unicef. 2017. State of the World's Children 2017. New York: UNICEF.
12 Op cit.
13 UNFPA, 2017
7

--- Table 1 on Page 157 ---
The list of the 50 countries with the highest fertility rates in adolescents in the world includes almost
all countries in the region; Nicaragua, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, countries with
particularly high rates (Rico and Trucco, 2014).

--- Table 2 on Page 157 ---
Pregnancies among teenage girls in communities are often unplanned and the couple is rarely found
to be of the same age. They report with a large majority of 15-year-old pregnancies considered to be
the result of sexual violence and coercion. The

=== PAGE 158 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
2. 3 Roles And Responsibilities
Gender analysis in statistics shows that the information available is still limited; Women are still not
represented in statistics that collect central information on land tenure, participation in decision-
making, the level and characteristics of the types of agricultural and livestock activities they carry out,
their participation in activities and their access to credits or other financial activities, among other
important aspects.
The social dimension in which people, their homes, families, organization, from the different positions
they occupy and opportunities that men and women have in society. It is also one of the areas that is
poorly documented in agricultural censuses and surveys.
In general, smallholder families grow basic grains for their livelihoods in all zones. In addition, they
have a yard for poultry and one or more pigs (depending on the amount of food available); and for
the cultivation of fruits, vegetables and herbs. Other forms of land use depend on circumstances and
opportunities. First, it depends on the size of the property.
The average age of central American basic grains producers is 49 years, 14 years older than the
average age of the economically active rural population which is 35 years; the difference may indicate
the lack of generational takeover in the field. The presence of other opportunities, cultural changes,
ambitions, capacities to meet basic needs, etc. mean that there is a loss of interest among young
people in continuing the traditions of their parents.
Gender roles are very marked:
The woman is assigned a reproductive and family care role. She raises children and cares for the sick
and the elderly. Their tasks often focus on the private space of the home. They are responsible for
preparing basic food for consumption at home and are the ones who manage the smaller and family
plots and domestic use. They have their central work in growing food and rearing poultry and livestock.
Because of this, they are responsible for food production for the family, resulting in significant
workload and stress of ensuring that food is not lacking. In general, it alternates these activities with
informal work in precarious conditions, with low wages and with seasonal value. In addition, a large
part of women and even girls participate in unpaid family-worked economic activities that do not have
a decision-making power over the profits collected. Women in rural areas of dry corridor countries
spend many hours of the day working and do not have free time.
Caring for minor species care is one of the works that is basically designated to women, as they are
the ones who care about seeing how they can have poultry and if possible some pigs, since these
species provide food to the family.
Women in their role as caregivers manage to meet the needs of their families through extensive
knowledge of natural goods. For the treatment of diseases they are highly dependent on their
ancestral knowledge as they resort to the use of medicinal plants and herbs to treat the symptoms of
the sick, although the shortage of plants has affected the care for the sick and adds work and
investment of money for women in their role as caregivers. To this we add that most plant collectors,
seed preservatives are women however their medicinal knowledge is often ignored and
underestimated.
Traditionally they remain in their properties during planting times, however, in the context they live
by the impact on land of climate change, they seek other economic options outside of agricultural
production to generate resources.
8

=== PAGE 159 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
This situation has a very big impact on women who must constantly 'solve' in order to meet the needs
of the family nucleus and often the extended family. This creates an additional strain for women who
in a situation of so much instability this does not allow them to plan.
Men have a productive role and is the one that occupies its time in the crops aimed at the market.
they are characterized by being directly involved in production, providing physical work and
productive management, with the male who makes decisions about the production and marketing of
income crops, re-presenting to the family, taking the decisions and participating economic
organizations
Because of the effects of climate change they sometimes have to move away from their place of origin
in order to find alternative jobs. There are isolated livelihoods where the farm's income is low and
labour is cheap; obviously these are areas of high vulnerability. This phenomenon reaches a maximum
when it becomes permanent migration abroad of certain family members to support their family
nucleus with the sending of remittances.
2.4 Control and Access To Resources
Most small and medium-sized producers grow for self-consumption and local markets, which suffer
from low productivity, as their plots are usually located in mountainous areas with little access to
irrigation water, road infrastructure to take out its production, credit, modern production technology,
improved seeds, tools and basic supplies. abnormal weather conditions contribute to crop loss in
addition to the diseases that attack the plantations have caused severe havoc.
Underemployment of wealthy farm owners for part of the year in most livelihoods. It has provided
labour to well-off agricultural producers, rural enterprises, coffee companies, agribusiness, domestic
employment, hotels and, more recently, maquilas. It also causes migration to urban centers, other
countries in the region, the United States (USA) and Spain.
There are factors that make it difficult for women to engage in paid work. From a livelihood approach,
these factors are related to women often having neither access nor control over natural resources:
land and water.
Water is one of the goods of which women are in the largest percentage in charge of providing in the
home in which they invest hours to get the resource, however they are not the ones who have control
of births or ecosystems , which visibly affects them
Not having land ownership is very difficult for women to apply for and obtain credits or even save the
resources generated. It also has major challenges in accessing social resources such as their
participation in the community structures that take definitions. This makes it difficult to engage
politically in community decision-making.
Other resources such as energy, technology and transport also limit their options for production and
therefore their opportunities for access to paid work. Men often have control and access to resources,
as well as decision-making within the family, even if resources are provided by women.
2.5 Participation
The participation of women producers is reduced at the local level within producer associations,
irrigation organization, neighboring boards, water committees. And also their presence in positions of
9

=== PAGE 160 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
social and political leadership is still clearly a minority. In community spaces they have a weak
participation also because their voices are not heard or taken into account
2.6 Women And Girls Vulnerability And Adaptive Capacity To Climate Change
Holistic analysis is required to talk about climate change, in a complex context such as the dry corridor
region with territories with high environmental and climate vulnerability. In turn, in addition to the
adverse environmental conditions, as mentioned lines ago, they also present a political, social context
and with a strong inequality of gender. That make populations and ecosystems more or less vulnerable
to the impacts of climate change
Among the most recent and important impacts of extreme events, the El Niño phenomenon that
began in 2015 has been one of the most harmful and its impact to this day is still evident. As a result,
some 3.5 million people need humanitarian aid with 1.6 million in moderate or severe food insecurity
in the countries most affected: El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras14
Several climate change-related phenomena are becoming stronger according to local consultations
with women. Droughts have increased causing a decrease in crop yields. This has fostered the
presence of pests and diseases, and also contributes to the spread of devastating fires. In turn, access
to water has been decreased and its quality has deteriorated. On the other hand, extreme rains, hail
waves and cyclones have also contributed to the damage of crops.
The few studies that exist, complaints from women's environmental organizations and conversations
with women during local consultations show that environmental devastation and the effects of
climate change have a major impact on women and girls. The effects of climate change live with more
challenges, especially those associated with access to water and biodiversity and care of livestock.
Identifying and taking into account the differentiated impacts of climate change on women is key,
taking into account the central role that women play in the processes of adaptation and mitigation of
this phenomenon. Among the effects highlighted during consultations of the different dry corridor
countries are the following:
 Multiplication of the reproductive day, with health concerns, generating greater poverty.
Women have more work because they need to mobilize to address food shortages. The
workload is increased by the need to travel large routes for water and wood harvesting.
On the other hand, the consultations indicated that women's work is also increased due to
flooding, which forces women to ensure that livestock survive and take them to safer places.
In addition, reconstruction work on lost infrastructure, such as fences or pens, also adds
additional work to women.
 Negative impacts on agriculture and fishing, for smallholder families especially for women.
Family farming as the main livelihood for women is at risk.
Most of the causes of environmental vulnerability mentioned in local consultations and
mentioned by women are interconnected. Indiscriminate deforestation causes soil erosion
14
1http://www.fao.org/news/story/es/item/422220/icode/
10

=== PAGE 161 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
and degradation, increased intermittent flows, flooding, landslides, river sedimentation, loss
of waterways, loss of water sources, drying of rivers during part of the year, deterioration of
roads and roads.
Soil degradation has led to loss of fertility and loss of crop yield. In addition, they highlight the
inappropriate use of fertilizers and chemical pesticides favors health problems of the
population, as well as pests, decreases the use of production system's own resources,
increases costs and creates more poverty among producing families.
This results in financial loss for the family. They lower family income from corn and bean sales.
Women clams and fish fishermen of livestock production also expressed concern about the
absence of income.
Another element of concern is that genetic diversity has been lost because people buy
certified seed in some cases even transgenic and have lost their heirloom variety seeds.
All of these are mentioned as threats that are affecting families, and losses in this sector are
forcing rural populations to migrate to find work for the family's livelihood or payment of
credits or expenses made by the crops that have been lost.
This has a social impact due to the disintegration of families and often leaving children in the
care of others in the family or neighbors, which can create various risks for them. When
women are not the ones migrating, they take care of the family and try to cover the financial
expenses of the house and the credits obtained, through the sale of food, jobs in local shops
or domestic services.
 Migration and displacement by the risk of natural disasters. The World Disaster 15 Report
shows that displacement as a result of natural risks or conflict substantially increases the risk
of physical abuse towards women and girls. Women's safety is at risk in addition to other
deprivations they suffer when displaced. The most frequent threats mentioned in the areas
of the dry corridor are: irregularity of rainfall, drought, floods, landslides, environmental
degradation, low crop yields, low prices of products on the market, high costs of inputs and
supplies. transport, access roads in poor condition or lack thereof.
 Decreased forest cover. Women say that with climate change forest cover has been lost
significantly and with it, there has been decreased flows from water sources. The forest has
been lost either by the hand of man or by the attack of the weevil. There is a concern on the
part of women in some countries about illegal logging and marketing
Women use forests to obtain food, fuels (wood or coal for cooking), raw material as inputs of
products they can sell, herbs, medicinal plants. As forest resources decline, they will be devoid
of subsistence supplies.
15 World Disaster Report 2018 © International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2018
11

=== PAGE 162 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
For the treatment of diseases they are highly dependent on their ancestral knowledge as they
resort to the use of medicinal plants and herbs to treat the symptoms of the sick, in recent
years they have observed that some of these species are harder to find, so loss or limited
access to diversity of medicinal plants and herbs is another impact of climate change, which
affects the care of sick people.
 Limited access to formal work through food marketing, many of these informal employment
opportunities depend directly or indirectly on natural assets, for example: water.
For women who make handicrafts as an alternative resource, through the realization of
products such as baskets, dumplings or other products that need raw material that has
disappeared due to drought, the effects are negative and make it difficult to access extra
resources for the family economy.
In some countries, women are not recognized as farmers in their identity document, which
makes it difficult for them to access agricultural aid or grants from governments.
 Limited access to water. The availability and access to water has serious difficulties, with an
impact on health. Lack of access to safe drinking water has also been accompanied by
increased health problems for families, parasites and other diseases of their own by a lack of
water. A situation in the region is the "chocolate rivers" that will flow into the gulf, which is
reflected in pollution on the coast, and increased sedimentation.
The water supply is primarily carried out by women and girls. the child's phenomenon has
caused the water lines to decrease or dry completely, so they have to move to other aspects
that are removed from the community, generating long lines of women waiting to fill their
containers with water to take to their homes. This can lead to conflicts between communities
as before the drought they have had to share the water sources, which has generated disputes
and some local consultations fear even wars. The investment of time for water supply can last
all day. The reversal of this time indicates is because they have to be aware of the moment
when the water will fall and fill the containers that are necessary for daily tasks. The absence
or reduction of girls' schooling for their obligations in the search for water impacting their
potential as a factor of change and reaffirming gender roles. The risk of gender-based violence
increases, the absence of water puts women and girls at risk, as they may be victims of sexual
violence on the routes to water sources.
 Impact on women's health. The impact of women's health is significant and often unvisibilized
as their role as caregivers they have little time for self-care. There is an increase in kidney
disease due to water contamination. Also mentioned in local consultations are the increase in
what they call household diseases that are related to skin diseases arising from mosquito
bites, such as zika, or mites
Chronic tiredness also causes overload that significantly affects their health, making an impact
on their mental health, with stress and anguish.
Lack of food is causing hunger and malnutrition in women and children. Diet change have
been forced because a lack of dairy and protein. Uncertainty of crops yields and livestock
deaths, as well as high costs contribute to malnutrition with serious health impacts.
One phenomenon that is occurring in recent years is what people refer to as "sunstroke"
which is the feeling of higher temperature in the body, due to the increase in temperature.
12

=== PAGE 163 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
This is thought to cause dehydration and hypertension and skin diseases, so it is
recommended that there be no sun exposure during midday.
2. 7 Needs and Priorities
The challenges of mobilizing women in local consultations demonstrate the barriers rural women
experience when participating in consultation spaces for interventions in the areas where they live.
Despite this, some women were able to move some key issues that are evident to them such as needs
and priorities to be taken into account by women
-Generating spaces for economic empowerment and strengthening of women's technical capacities
to implement Ecosystem-based Adaptation. It is constant that lack of technical capacity in some areas,
and land tenure and lack of territorial ordermake conservation difficult.
-Provide support mechanism for women living violence.
-Increasing the negotiating power of women at home and in the community space. --Strengthening
the role of women as decision-makers.
-Full recognition of women’s rights, legal and social status.
-Generate productive economic development opportunities for women producers. Support in
facilitating access to credit. Legal accompanying for access to land titling
-Financial mechanisms: Necessary for the implementation of the programme and ensure
sustainability. Currently, financial mechanisms benefit agriculture before than afforestation. There are
no loans to plant trees, but for activities that promote deforestation.
-Incorporation of Ecosystem-based Adaptation and knowledge management: Very important. But
governance issues (land ownership, agricultural incentives/deforestation) must be resolved for the
programme to continue over time (sustainability).
-Water boards/committees define leadership roles for women: community-level bodies responsible
for ensuring the basins and water projects that supply each community. It is mentioned that for
women the protection of the forest as a key factor for the generation of water for the territory.
-Funds invested in municipalities considering the needs of women and that really contribute to
improving resilience.
Adaptation measurement Needs and priorities
Restoration of forest cover/water • Accessibility to the water resource.
resource. • Generation of employment opportunities.
• Family wellbeing (clean air and water)
• Water retention and distribution: Time savings for women, when
there is more water
Sustainable production of wood and • Improvement in the exploitation of the natural forest.
firewood • Protection and conservation of natural habitats
• Opportunity to improve income.
• Increased job opportunity.
• Improves family quality of life.
Rainwater collection
• Generating jobs during dry season women through
entrepreneurship
13

--- Table 1 on Page 163 ---
Adaptation measurement | Needs and priorities
Restoration of forest cover/water
resource. | • Accessibility to the water resource.
• Generation of employment opportunities.
• Family wellbeing (clean air and water)
• Water retention and distribution: Time savings for women, when
there is more water
Sustainable production of wood and
firewood | • Improvement in the exploitation of the natural forest.
• Protection and conservation of natural habitats
• Opportunity to improve income.
• Increased job opportunity.
• Improves family quality of life.
Rainwater collection | • Generating jobs during dry season women through
entrepreneurship

=== PAGE 164 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Efficient irrigation technology. • Food safety.
• Availability of resources for other investments.
• Time savings, physical effort and economic savings.
Implementation of agrosilvopastoral • Increased availability of time to dedicate to the family.
systems. • Reduction of migration.
Implementation of agroforestry • Its products improve food safety (e.g. fruits from shaded
systems. systems). Some are sold.
• Healthy environment (shade and lower temperature) during the
agricultural labor.
Ancestral seed banks and improved • Reduced production costs, accessibility to buy other type of foods
seed for adaptation (Drought for the family, to cover other family needs.
resistant) • Improves food, nutrition and women's health
Environmental Education. Formation • Raise the level of education.
of values. • Increased environmental commitment and awareness taking into
account the knowledge of women producers
Implementation of home adaptation • Decreased workload.
resources (efficient stoves, ovens) • Economic savings.
3) CONCLUSIONS
The high poverty caused by the negative effects of climate change in which women and girls live in
the context of dry corridors has a profound impact on the living conditions of women and their
families. The feminization of poverty is very significant and is exacerbated by the lack of access to
family entrepreneurship initiatives as an alternative to the problems that climate change has
generated in agriculture, livestock and fisheries.
Women face discrimination in access to resources and control of land and property. Owning the land
is important to women for the economic value that this represents, but also to be able to use it as a
means of production and generated additional income16. It is a way of being able to access training
programs, linking to women's farmers' cooperatives or local development organizations. When the
woman does not own the land she also causes the different tasks she performs in the territory to be
invisibized and makes it more difficult to participate in community development spaces. As for their
participation in decision-making, it is generally limited and when it is done in a shared way with men,
it happens that women seek the legitimization of their decisions in the male figures of the family.
Women and girls especially continue to assume primary responsibility for unpaid family care and
domestic work. In this scenario, the serious situation caused by the impact of climate change has
increased the workload of women and girls, as they are responsible mainly for the search for food and
water on a daily basis. The burden falls disproportionately on girls and women, perpetuating gender
inequality and violence against them.
The root of the violence that is rooted in the imbalances of power and structural inequality between
men and women is manifested as a social mechanism of people's social relations. And it is
16 Measurement of women's contribution in agricultural activities in the Dominican Republic. National Bureau of Statistics 2018
14

--- Table 1 on Page 164 ---
Efficient irrigation technology. | • Food safety.
• Availability of resources for other investments.
• Time savings, physical effort and economic savings.
Implementation of agrosilvopastoral
systems. | • Increased availability of time to dedicate to the family.
• Reduction of migration.
Implementation of agroforestry
systems. | • Its products improve food safety (e.g. fruits from shaded
systems). Some are sold.
• Healthy environment (shade and lower temperature) during the
agricultural labor.
Ancestral seed banks and improved
seed for adaptation (Drought
resistant) | • Reduced production costs, accessibility to buy other type of foods
for the family, to cover other family needs.
• Improves food, nutrition and women's health
Environmental Education. Formation
of values. | • Raise the level of education.
• Increased environmental commitment and awareness taking into
account the knowledge of women producers
Implementation of home adaptation
resources (efficient stoves, ovens) | • Decreased workload.
• Economic savings.

--- Table 2 on Page 164 ---
The root of the violence that is rooted in the imbalances of power and structural inequality between
men and women is manifested as a social mechanism of people's social relations. And it is

=== PAGE 165 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
underpinned by entrenched social and cultural norms that normalize gender-based violence in
communities.
Gender violence cannot be detached from the impacts associated with climate change, as it impacts
women's and girls' lives and puts them in situations of extreme vulnerability to their active
contribution to remedy climate change. The different forms of violence against women and girls
expressed in numerous ways are a widespread and deep-rooted practice that is perpetuated by the
poverty generated by climate change, which in turn perpetuates inequality between men and Women.
The lack of available data does not make visible the extent of the problem of gender-based violence
in the selected areas of dry corridor intervention, nor the significant impact on women's and girls'
health. Especially in the mental health, invisibilized, which is causing in all of them, very serious
impacts that affect the self-care and care of their families.
The start of the migration project is carried out by the extreme poverty caused by the effects of climate
change. During the journey, women and girls experience situations of violence, such as new forms of
slavery through the recruitment of women through trafficking and trafficking networks for commercial
exploitation purposes. They are often tricked through advertisements in local newspapers on social
media or even on the streets.
Other forms of violence caused by poverty experienced by families that are increasing by the effects
of climate change are those experienced by girls and adolescents. Girls are undervalued and face
discrimination on the basis of their age, gender and ethnicity. When their families do not have
resources or food for their survival, they often no longer take responsibility for girls by allowing them
to marry or enter unions with much older men who can take care of them. Early child forced marriages
and unions are evidenced as a standardized and invisibilized problem. This violation of girls' human
rights has also increased due to the current situation of extreme vulnerability faced by girls due to
poverty resulting from climate change. And that it is often linked to sexual exploitation and trafficking
in girls in the context of crisis. Early child forced marriages and unions brings together all forms of
violence that can be exerted against a girl and adolescent, as it is closely linked to high levels of
domestic violence in the private space of the home and has devastating effects on the life project girls,
their access to school and their health. It is one of the causes of forced motherhood, putting their
lives at risk from sexual violence and the complications that pregnancy and childbirth cause in the lives
of girls
Lack of access to quality and warm health services, as well as their difficult access because of poor
road conditions, have a very serious impact on women in rural communities. Care for pregnant women
and girls and care for childbirth is precarious. And especially those in the farthest communities such
as indigenous women. In addition, in general there are no institutions that offer protection to women
and girls in situations of gender-based violence, they are in an extremely precarious situation and
without budget for human resource recruitment. Incoordination between the different bodies creates
an additional barrier for women to decide to report and seek legal support.
There is a significant challenge in strengthening health and protection services, in how to respond
adequately to cases of gender-based violence and provide good quality confidential medical and
psychosocial responses to survivors in accordance with national protocols and in accordance with the
basic principles of gender-based violence and the women's and girls' approach.
The constant stress of lack of food is causing serious problems in the health of women and their
children. Women's mental health problems, stress, anxiety, fear and depression have been
exacerbated by a lack of access to food for the children and their children. This represents an
15

--- Table 1 on Page 165 ---
underpinned by entrenched social and cultural norms that normalize gender-based violence in
communities.

=== PAGE 166 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
additional situation of violence towards women, who bear the burden of ensuring the survival of their
families in a context of climate change
There are areas in the Dry Corridor, where agriculture is not feasible, due to the prevailing climate,
which is extremely dry and soil conditions are not adequate, so diversifying production and
complementing traditional sources of through women's entrepreneurship is important. Building
spaces for women's economic empowerment can contribute to greater success in poverty reduction.
A key element for the strengthening of women's capacities is the empowerment and participation in
decision spaces in order to have their demands heard and incorporated, which leads women to make
decisions as well as to the economic empowerment.
Literacy is also necessary, as some women producers often struggle to read, some had been in second
grade. Lack of schooling impacts the degree of participation women can have in decision-making
processes, about their livelihoods and ecosystems. This puts women at a disadvantage because, in the
case of having access to information and documents, they do not have the necessary tool to make this
information affordable.
To promote women's participation in decision-making spaces, individuals surveyed mentioned that it
is necessary to strengthen capacities with a percentage of selection
It is necessary to point out that women form social networks within their communities and are aware
of the structures and capacities within their territories. Therefore, it is important to include women in
the training and decision-making processes related to the management of natural assets. By
incorporating the gender approach into the adaptation process, it will not only benefit women, but
also men in the long term.
The sustainable provision of financial services to low-income households has become an important
tool for combating poverty and especially women who, in these areas, are mostly heads of families.
Savings, leasing, insurance, remittances, as well as business loans, housing, health and education allow
low-income families to increase their household incomes, capitalize on, plan their future, send more
children to school for longer, and reduce their vulnerability to the crises that make up part of their
daily lives. Access to financial services also significantly improves women's safety and self-esteem.
Historically in the Central American region, these benefits have been largely made possible by the
work of micro-financial institutions, which have opted to serve that population that was not credited
for formal banking. As a result, governments, development agencies, international cooperation
agencies and other microfinance practitioners have been actively involved in creating or supporting
mechanisms that encourage microfinance development in different countries around the world, with
a special emphasis on gender.
4) RECOMMENDATIONS
Output 1. Strengthened technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to
implement EbA and other adaptation measures.
16

=== PAGE 167 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
 Capacity building and awareness-raising of public officials in the municipalities involved in the
programme on the importance of the gender approach and how to incorporate it into
agricultural public policies:
• Use, management and equitable control of natural resources.
• Empowering women from disaster risks.
• Equitable participation in decision-making processes.
• Equitable distribution of benefits and public resources for development.
• Equitable access to training and training processes.
• Access to information systems (early warning systems, systems to detect critical places
regarding climate change and risk management).
• Recognition of the needs and interests of men and women of different ethnic groups and of
different ages.
• Recognition of differential impacts and the various vulnerabilities that men and women may
suffer according to their age and ethnicity.
• Promotion of affirmative actions or temporary measures for women, in processes that
promote sustainable development.
 Develop protocols that guarantee the specific needs of women, for the adoption of technologies
efficient in the use of water by households. Ensuring measures for the involvement of
community women in water committees.
 Take specific actions to strengthen the capacities of municipality technicians on social,
environmental resilience and gender. To contribute to the development of public policies for
climate adaptation and mitigation. These policies are to be based on the voice and proposals of
women, who are the majority of the population not in the construction processes, much less are
represented in the proposals for climate change policies and plans.
 Develop actions with municipalities to facilitate the legalization of property cooperatives and
community women's organizations
Output 2: Demosntration adaptation interventions implemented in rural communities across seven
target catchments in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
 Ensure the active participation of women producers and women's organizations in the
programme's decision-making processes, as well as in water committees. Women's participation
in the decision-making spaces of the programmes activities is a priority. One of the main gender
gaps is precisely in decision-making processes. Women have historically been excluded from these
spaces by denying not only their needs, interests and knowledge, but also being invisibilized as
producers (workers) and unaware of their contributions and their ability to influence economic
and social development, local
Women's organizations at the community or municipality level that advocate for gender equality
and women's rights will be important to involve them because they will be able to account for the
different demands and perspectives of rural women. Including representatives of local rural
women's organizations in climate change decision-making processes contributes to the
sustainability of the programme.
Participation must be equitable, this means that the same number of men and women are part of
the workshops and focus groups and that their participation is equally active and meaningful. It is
17

=== PAGE 168 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
essential that training and training initiatives for the active participation of women in decision-
making and consultation spaces for policy-making are essential.
A key element for the strengthening of women's capacities is the empowerment and participation
in decision spaces in order to have their demands heard and incorporated, which leads women to
make decisions as well as to the economic empowerment.
 Generate spaces of empowerment for women producers that ensure the inclusion of topics that
they identify. Some examples: Training women in new technologies and promoting the exchange
of successful experiences in this regard. institutional strengthening of women's community
organizations, through a wide range of trainings: from courses focused on various agricultural
issues, to gender awareness workshops and local leadership promotion.
A community-based child care space will need to be generated during sessions that mobilize
women. In order to give women the opportunity to participate more actively in training spaces
and thus have a more active and productive role in rural economies.
 Promote quota systems for the representation of women in Community and producer
organizations related to the programme. It is a key element in the framework of the strategy for
women's participation. It will increase women's bargaining power and raise its voice to remind the
community and its representatives that women's development is an effective strategy to combat
poverty and improve the livelihoods of rural populations. As well as for women to play an active
role in actions to combat climate change
Women's participation in all social and political processes is a key element in consolidating a
quality democracy. Therefore, to strengthen their capacities, that they know their rights and how
they can claim them.
 Generate community dialogue spaces, which include sessions of discussions between men
about positive masculinities: In the context of rural areas, traditional social norms reinforce
traditional gender roles, limiting access to important productive resources for the family. To
advance gender roles and strengthen capacities on the benefits of gender equality for local
development. It is important that gender equality is not perceived as a threat but as an
opportunity for the community and to work hand in hand in curbing climate change.
 Implementation monitoring strategies. It is important to generate strategies and indicators to
monitor efforts to reduce gender gaps in each rural area or in each particular agricultural
condition. It is recommended that women's organizations linked to the agricultural and business
sector be developed.
 Promote an awareness plan on environmental education that involves women producers Who
say in consultations that a lot of environmental education is needed at all levels to solve the
problems that are being experienced. Promoting the conservation of the environment, flora and
fauna. The population needs to be aware.
 Generate actions that allow women to self-recognize their fundamental role in agriculture and
adapt to variability and climate change. This is because in the rural area there are women who
do not yet have the same rights as men
18

--- Table 1 on Page 168 ---
Generate actions that allow women to self-recognize their fundamental role in agriculture and
adapt to variability and climate change. This is because in the rural area there are women who
do not yet have the same rights as men

=== PAGE 169 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Output 3: Information on climate change adaptation and its financing disseminated across the
region and mainstreamed into local and national policies.
 Strengthen the technical capacities of women's organizations at the local level. This represents
an element of women's empowerment, facilitating access to resources, both financial and training
and support of human resources, certification advice and/or legal persons.
Organizing itself has an impact on their self-esteem and empowerment and generates more
opportunities for all of them. Rural women's participation in cooperatives and associations also
increases their participation in local development spaces.
Output 4. Financial products and services to finance sustainable investments are offered by
Partner Financial Institutions (PFI), including PFI access to on-lending funds and support
mechanisms.
 Generate enabling conditions for women´s access to financial schemes, which facilitates access
to credit for women producers and women's cooperatives. To help strengthen women's
entrepreneurship initiatives at the local level and with climate change adaptation and mitigation
activities.
Women's economic empowerment is potentially significant at the community level, and beyond,
because it increases their visibility as agents of economic growth and as policy decision-makers.
Women's cooperative groups can form the basis of collective action to address gender inequalities in
a community, including issues such as gender-based violence, access to resources, and decision-
making in the local environment. They can be an entry point to promote greater political and social
mobilization of women around gender issues.
In the context of the Dry Corridor, there are some fundamental limiting factors to increase access from
female farmers to financing schemes derived from traditional gender structures and assigned roles.
In this component, activities will focus on addressing some of those limiting factors to increase the
access to financing schemes for female farmers. CABEI has developed and is currently
implementing a programme (Programa Regional de Financiamiento Empresarial para Mujeres -
FEM) that can be used as a reference for the development of methodologies, tools, guidelines and
processes that foster women´s access to the established financial mechanisms.
5) METHODOLOGICAL CLARIFICATION
The gender assessment was developed through a desk review and a consultative process. The desk
evaluation was led by a regional gender specialist with the support of seven local consultants and
implied the review of the existing available data for the selected watersheds, and a regional literature
assessment of common issues. A stakeholders’ mapping was conducted to include the main actors
and identify key women’s organizations. The national consultants elaborated an overview of the
selected municipalities with disaggregated data for men and women for several indicators, including
the education level, life expectancy, school dropout rate, statistics of the labour situation, etc. (See
Annex 26).
Furthermore, an initial socialization activity was conducted with potential end beneficiaries in October
2019, through participative workshops in each of the targeted watersheds: the details of these
consultations can be found in Annex 7. A stakeholder engagement plan was defined with the gender
19

--- Table 1 on Page 169 ---
The gender assessment was developed through a desk review and a consultative process. The desk
evaluation was led by a regional gender specialist with the support of seven local consultants and
implied the review of the existing available data for the selected watersheds, and a regional literature
assessment of common issues. A stakeholders’ mapping was conducted to include the main actors
and identify key women’s organizations. The national consultants elaborated an overview of the
selected municipalities with disaggregated data for men and women for several indicators, including
the education level, life expectancy, school dropout rate, statistics of the labour situation, etc. (See
Annex 26).

--- Table 2 on Page 169 ---
Furthermore, an initial socialization activity was conducted with potential end beneficiaries in October
2019, through participative workshops in each of the targeted watersheds: the details of these
consultations can be found in Annex 7. A stakeholder engagement plan was defined with the gender

=== PAGE 170 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
expert, with a participatory strategy that was designed with gender sensible indicators and activities.
The detailed list can be found in Annex 7, this being the summary table of the participants numbers
(available on page 39):
Country Date Municipalities Attendees
Women Men Total
Honduras 14/10/2019 Choluteca, Marcovia, Duyure, 8 25 33
Morolica, Apacilagua y Orocuina
Nicaragua 14/10/2019 Somoto 13 16 29
El Salvador 16/10/2019 San Miguel 9 21 30
Panama 18/10/2019 Pedasí 12 18 30
Costa Rica 18/10/2019 Nicoya, Guanacaste 11 24 35
Guatemala 22/10/2019 Santa Cruz del Quiché 1 28 29
Dominican 22/10/2019 San Ignacio de Sabaneta, Prov. 8 14 22
Republic Santiago Rodríguez
The information gathered during the workshops fed the initial gender assessment, keeping in mind
this would be complete during the inception phase of the programme – indeed, if the Guatemala
example is taken where only one woman participated, her testimony isn’t representative, although
this singular presence can be considered as an indicator in itself.
This process didn’t cover all necessary information, but it also helped in revealing information gaps
that must be filled during the inception phase of the programme. This analysis contributed to the
definition of recommendations (section 4 above) for the programme development and the
elaboration of the Gender Action Plan (above).
20

--- Table 1 on Page 170 ---
expert, with a participatory strategy that was designed with gender sensible indicators and activities.
The detailed list can be found in Annex 7, this being the summary table of the participants numbers
(available on page 39):

--- Table 2 on Page 170 ---
Country | Date | Municipalities |  | Attendees |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Women |  |  | Men |  |  | Total | 
Honduras | 14/10/2019 | Choluteca, Marcovia, Duyure,
Morolica, Apacilagua y Orocuina | 8 |  |  | 25 |  |  | 33 |  | 
Nicaragua | 14/10/2019 | Somoto | 13 |  |  | 16 |  |  | 29 |  | 
El Salvador | 16/10/2019 | San Miguel | 9 |  |  | 21 |  |  | 30 |  | 
Panama | 18/10/2019 | Pedasí | 12 |  |  | 18 |  |  | 30 |  | 
Costa Rica | 18/10/2019 | Nicoya, Guanacaste | 11 |  |  | 24 |  |  | 35 |  | 
Guatemala | 22/10/2019 | Santa Cruz del Quiché | 1 |  |  | 28 |  |  | 29 |  | 
Dominican
Republic | 22/10/2019 | San Ignacio de Sabaneta, Prov.
Santiago Rodríguez | 8 |  |  | 14 |  |  | 22 |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 170 ---
The information gathered during the workshops fed the initial gender assessment, keeping in mind
this would be complete during the inception phase of the programme – indeed, if the Guatemala
example is taken where only one woman participated, her testimony isn’t representative, although
this singular presence can be considered as an indicator in itself

--- Table 4 on Page 170 ---
This process didn’t cover all necessary information, but it also helped in revealing information gaps
that must be filled during the inception phase of the programme. This analysis contributed to the
definition of recommendations (section 4 above) for the programme development and the
elaboration of the Gender Action Plan (above).

=== PAGE 171 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Part II: Gender Action Plan: Template (Project/Programme Level)
1) Introduction
This Gender Action Plan (GAP) forms the basis for operationalizing the results and recommendations
of the gender analysis section 1. It contains specific gender elements to be considered in the
programme design and during the implementation of programme measures and activities. Moreover,
it helps to monitor implementation of these measures and activities. Hence, the GAP ensures an
effective gender mainstreaming and integration of a consistent gender-perspective in the programme
in order to maximize climate and development co-benefits. The aim is to promote opportunities,
drivers of change and positive gender dynamics as well as to manage and mitigate potential adverse
risks over the duration of the programme. The GAP ensures that the programme is compliant with
GCF’s gender policy (GCF/B.09).
In striving for Ecosystem-Based Adaptation, and strengthening resilience at the community level, the
regional program will take concrete measures to break down barriers to women’s participation and
decision-making at all levels. Transforming gender relations includes building on existing collaborative
gender norms and practices at the household and community levels and implementing
complementary strategies to improve them.
The program will contribute to gender equality through promoting exchanges among women and
men, in both mixed-gender and separate moments for reflection. These findings will be used to
decrease gender forms of discrimination in terms of everyday practices, as well as those that may exist
in legal and normative frameworks or other structures.
Promoting non-violent, equality-promoting masculinities at the household, community and
government levels will contribute to breaking down one of the most important barriers to gender and
other inequalities. Effective partnerships between women and men based on more equal gender
relations is likely to result in higher productivity, increased sources of and amount of household
income, as well as other gains.
2) Impact Statement
The programme’s objective is to increase climate-resilient sustainable development by facilitating
wide-scale investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies across the Dry Corridor of Central
America and Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic.
The programme aims to Increase and strengthen the resilience of vulnerable communities, especially
women and girls, in the Dry Corridor of Central America and Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic to
the negative impact of climate change. Through strengthening the capacities of the population in
adaptation strategies based on Ecosystems (AbE), female heads of household; less time and work
required by women for household chores; Increase in time savings, women economic empowerment
3) Outcome Statement:
21

=== PAGE 172 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Climate-resilient sustainable development by building the adaptive capacity of vulnerable
communities across the Dry Corridor of Central America and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
increased
The programme has been specifically designed to create an enabling environment that capitalises on
the scalability of EbA, focusing on four core areas of support: financial; policy; and technical. The
details of these areas of support are provided below.
Component 1: Mainstreaming of EbA, water- and resource-efficient technologies and natural
resource-based businesses into selected catchments
-Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
-Technical support for the enhancement of regional knowledge and learning
-Upscaling of adaptation
Component 2: Financing and implementation for EbA as well as water- and resource-efficient
technologies across selected catchments
-Creation of an enabling environment for investment in EbA and water-efficient technologies
4) Considered outputs and activities
The program outputs and activities that will contribute to meeting these goals include: equitable
numbers of women as direct and indirect beneficiaries; capacity building for women and men, both
programme personnel as well as producers and organization/community members; technical
accompaniment through extension workers; public awareness; and monitoring and reporting on
formal commitments, among others.
Through these strategies, women and men can contribute equitably to making sound economic and
political decisions on an equal basis, in order to achieve gender equality, women’s empowerment and
strengthened adaptation to climate change and sustainability.
5) Methodology for the elaboration of indicators and targets
The GAP includes a set of indicators and targets for each activity of the programme, as detailed below.
These indicators are additional to the ones included in the Logical Framework. The targets were
defined based on the experience of UNEP, FAO and CCAD in the region17. Main assumptions used for
their elaboration are:
1) The proportion of female-headed farms is below 30% in all Latin-American countries where
data is available:
a. Between 20-30%: Panama, Nicaragua
b. Between 10-20%: Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, El Salvador
2) The access of female farmers to technical assistance can be between 5 and 40% lower than
male farmers. This access is below 20% in the Central American countries where data exists.
17 Please refer to sources::
- FAO 2014. Recomendaciones de políticas de agricultura familiar (pages 104, 110-113)
- FAO 2018. Las políticas públicas aseguran la conquista de derechos para las mujeres.
22

=== PAGE 173 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
3) Between 5 and 13% of rural women have access to productive credit. Up to 50% fewer
women than men have access to agricultural credit.
Based on this, only a number of indicators establish equality between men and women, while most
of them are based on a 30% of women participation. Regardless, all investment criteria elaborated,
communication material and guidelines will include gender considerations.
6) Enabling Women’s Participation in Program Activities
A number of measures will be established by the regional program to enable women’s participation
in activities. Some of them will consist of:
• sessions held at times and locations that are safe and convenient given women’s diverse
activities;
• childcare provided during capacity building sessions;
• holding events in local languages or providing translation/interpretation when needed; and
• Training and other materials mainstream gender by, in part, reflecting women’s needs,
interests, priorities and potentials.
Regarding capacity building, technical assistance and extension services:
• All programme personnel, including RPMU, PEU members, PFIS, and government staff will
receive training in the following topics: 1) mainstreaming gender equality in relevant technical
areas, etc.; 2) a specialized component on gender equality that will address violence against
women, care economy, non-violent and equality-promoting masculinities, etc.
• The public communication and education strategies will emphasize gender equality. The
strategies will be developed using participatory methods.
Among the different products planned during the programme implementation, the RPMU and PEUs
will prioritize the elaboration of a Gender Equality Component or a disaggregated GAP of several of
them, in accordance to the gender equality approach used in the programme. This concerns mainly,
but is not limited to, the following:
• The financial mechanisms and their guidelines,
• the technical facility assistance,
• the site-specific intervention plans for the 7 target catchments,
• the protocols for the implementation of EbA practices as well as water- and energy-efficient
technologies,
• the regional knowledge hub for the dissemination of information on EbA.
Finally, given the sensibility of GBV issues, the programme’s grievance mechanism will engage with
existing UN inter-agency mechanisms in the countries with standard operating procedures to ensure
safety, dignity and confidentiality of potential users, as well as a referral pathway to a UN GBV focal
point for each country. GBV protection will be mainstreamed in the programme implementation
through the following actions to be taken by the programme's teams:
i. the PEUs will be in regular contact with local organizations, and the mapping of actors
elaborated during the initial baseline phase of the programme will include which local entities
can provide relevant information on gender action, including GBV.
ii. Regular dialogue with local authorities will also be ensured, as well as the PEU’s understanding
of local grievance mechanisms for GBV already in place and that might be complementary to
the multiagency mechanism mentioned above.
23

=== PAGE 174 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
iii. Consultative processes will ensure respect of local customs and norms, and enabling actions
are included in the GAP to promote positive integration of women’s participation.
Persons from the affected population will have several avenues available to seek protection. Thus,
dedicated hotlines, email addresses, instant messaging systems or applications, and letters and other
written communication, to the extent possible, will substitute channels that require face-to-face
contact and can jeopardize confidentiality.
7) GAP’s Budget
The programme’s GAP will be executed in all components in the design, implementation, planning,
monitoring and evaluation phases. The budget for the GAP includes a Regional Gender Officer and
National Adviser in gender, social participation and safeguards in each country for the 7 years of
implementation. Gender enabling actions are also included in activities’ budget, as can be found in
the Budget notes’ references included below and in Annex 4.
An estimate budget is included in the GAP, based on the following methodology:
• 100% of regional gender expert’s budget,
• 60% of national advisors on gender, social participation and safeguards experts’ budget,
• 5% of regional manager and national coordinators’ budget,
• 10% of all relevant activities that will develop a focus on gender, as specified in the GAP.
This totals 2.6M, equivalent to 3.1% of total GCF Grant budget for this programme. This estimate will
require further consideration during implementation and is provided for information purposes only.
24

=== PAGE 175 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
A ctivities Enabling gender action Indicators Baseline Target Timeline Budget Responsibi
Notes and lities
Estimate
in USD
Output1.
Strengthened technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to implement EbA and other adaptation measures.
Activity 1.1. The focus of the gender action plan a) 0 a) 100% of site-specific action A1 Accredited
Develop under this activity will be to ensure b) 0 plans include results from By year 2 A7 Entity/Exe
a) Number of site-specific action
site-specific that differentiated opportunities for c) 0 gender needs assessment A11 cuting
intervention climate action and needs are identified plans that include results from d) 0 b) At least 30% of the community- A17 Agency
plans for the and reflected in the site-specific action gender needs assessment e) 0 level monitoring and evaluation A5 Gender
7 target plans for the 36 participating b) % of women in the community- B25 advisor
committee in each municipality
catchments municipalities and to ensure equal level monitoring and evaluation A44
are women
to integrate participation in the capacity building committee in each municipality
c) At least one annual training on
EbA activities. c) number of trainings on gender Estimated
gender equality at community
measures equality at community level at:
level
through a Specific activities will include: d) number of stakeholder workshops $226,998
d) At least 7 community
participatory for site action plans that include
consultations for site action plan
process with
topics on gender equality
validation that include topics on
municipal
a) Gender equality needs e) % of women participating in the
authorities, gender equality
assessment incorporated in the selection process of the sites for
local e) At least 30% of women
site-specific action plans implementation of efficient
communitie participating in the selection
technologies in water and energy
s and other process of the sites for
b) Ensure women membership and
within rural communities in the
stakeholders implementation of efficient
participation in the community-
seven target basins.
. technologies in water and
level monitoring and evaluation
energy within rural communities
committee in each catchment
in the seven target basins.
c) Ensure women’s participation in
the community consultations for
the validation of the
implementation plans
d) Include the participation of
women farmers in the selection
25

--- Table 1 on Page 175 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A ctivities |  |  | Enabling gender action | Indicators | Baseline | Target | Timeline |  | Budget |  | Responsibi
lities
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Notes and |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Estimate |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | in USD |  | 
 | Output1. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Strengthened technical capacity of local government, farmers and rural communities to implement EbA and other adaptation measures. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.1.
Develop
site-specific
intervention
plans for the
7 target
catchments
to integrate
EbA
measures
through a
participatory
process with
municipal
authorities,
local
communitie
s and other
stakeholders
. |  |  | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be to ensure
that differentiated opportunities for
climate action and needs are identified
and reflected in the site-specific action
plans for the 36 participating
municipalities and to ensure equal
participation in the capacity building
activities.
Specific activities will include:
a) Gender equality needs
assessment incorporated in the
site-specific action plans
b) Ensure women membership and
participation in the community-
level monitoring and evaluation
committee in each catchment
c) Ensure women’s participation in
the community consultations for
the validation of the
implementation plans
d) Include the participation of
women farmers in the selection | a) Number of site-specific action
plans that include results from
gender needs assessment
b) % of women in the community-
level monitoring and evaluation
committee in each municipality
c) number of trainings on gender
equality at community level
d) number of stakeholder workshops
for site action plans that include
topics on gender equality
e) % of women participating in the
selection process of the sites for
implementation of efficient
technologies in water and energy
within rural communities in the
seven target basins. | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0
d) 0
e) 0 | a) 100% of site-specific action
plans include results from
gender needs assessment
b) At least 30% of the community-
level monitoring and evaluation
committee in each municipality
are women
c) At least one annual training on
gender equality at community
level
d) At least 7 community
consultations for site action plan
validation that include topics on
gender equality
e) At least 30% of women
participating in the selection
process of the sites for
implementation of efficient
technologies in water and
energy within rural communities
in the seven target basins. | By year 2 | A1
A7
A11
A17
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$226,998 |  |  | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 176 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
process of sites for the
implementation of efficient
technologies in water and energy
within rural communities in the
seven target basins.
Activity 1.2. The focus of the gender action plan a) Number of cooperation a) 0 a) at least 30% of cooperation A19 Accredited
Provide under this activity will be to ensure agreements with women b) 0 agreements with women A, b, d by A21 Entity/Exe
technical that differentiated opportunities for commercial farmers c) 0 commercial farmers year 3 A24 cuting
assistance to action and needs are identified and d) 0 b) at least 7 annual gender equality A28 Agency
municipal reflected in the implementation b) Number of trainings to e) 0 trainings to commercials farmers C by year 5 A31 Gender
authorities, protocols for the EbA interventions commercials farmers that include f) 0 c) 100% of developed protocols A34 advisor
farmers and and to ensure equal participation in gender equality include gender considerations e, f, g by A5
rural the capacity building activities and d) at least 30% of women as lead year 5 B25
communitie training programmes as well as to c) Number of protocols developed trainers A44
s for the ensure that cooperation agreements that guarantee gender equality e) equal participation in training of
implementat are signed with female commercial and women specific needs trainers’ sessions. Estimated
ion of EbA farmers f) At least half of the training at:
practices as d) number of consultations on the programs for trainers per year $268,910
well as Specific activities will include: specific needs of women in includes gender equality and
water- and relation to water and energy positive masculinities
resource- management
a) Guarantee representation of
efficient
commercial women farmers in the
technologies e) Number of men and women as
development of cooperation
lead trainers.
agreements with commercial
farmers
f) Number of men and women
participants in training of trainers’
b) Include gender equality in the
sessions.
capacity building activities to
strengthen the capacities of
g) number of training programs for
commercial farmers in sustainable
trainers per year includes gender
EbA practices that guarantee
equality and positive masculinities
c) Guarantee the needs of women in
the protocols for the adoption of
26

--- Table 1 on Page 176 ---
 | process of sites for the
implementation of efficient
technologies in water and energy
within rural communities in the
seven target basins. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.2.
Provide
technical
assistance to
municipal
authorities,
farmers and
rural
communitie
s for the
implementat
ion of EbA
practices as
well as
water- and
resource-
efficient
technologies | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be to ensure
that differentiated opportunities for
action and needs are identified and
reflected in the implementation
protocols for the EbA interventions
and to ensure equal participation in
the capacity building activities and
training programmes as well as to
ensure that cooperation agreements
are signed with female commercial
farmers
Specific activities will include:
a) Guarantee representation of
commercial women farmers in the
development of cooperation
agreements with commercial
farmers
b) Include gender equality in the
capacity building activities to
strengthen the capacities of
commercial farmers in sustainable
EbA practices that guarantee
c) Guarantee the needs of women in
the protocols for the adoption of | a) Number of cooperation
agreements with women
commercial farmers
b) Number of trainings to
commercials farmers that include
gender equality
c) Number of protocols developed
that guarantee gender equality
and women specific needs
d) number of consultations on the
specific needs of women in
relation to water and energy
management
e) Number of men and women as
lead trainers.
f) Number of men and women
participants in training of trainers’
sessions.
g) number of training programs for
trainers per year includes gender
equality and positive masculinities | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0
d) 0
e) 0
f) 0 | a) at least 30% of cooperation
agreements with women
commercial farmers
b) at least 7 annual gender equality
trainings to commercials farmers
c) 100% of developed protocols
include gender considerations
d) at least 30% of women as lead
trainers
e) equal participation in training of
trainers’ sessions.
f) At least half of the training
programs for trainers per year
includes gender equality and
positive masculinities | A, b, d by
year 3
C by year 5
e, f, g by
year 5 | A19
A21
A24
A28
A31
A34
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$268,910 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 177 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
water efficient technologies,
energy efficiency on firewood,
d) -In the framework of the training
for trainers, include a module on
gender equality and positive
masculinities
e) Ensure participation of women as
trainers in the ToT programme
f) Include women-run farms in the
visits to demonstration sites
during the training workshops in
each municipality.
Activity 1.3. The focus of the gender action plan a) 0 a) 100% of livelihood assessments By 1-3 year A38 Accredited
Provide under this activity will be to ensure a) Number of assessments that b) 0 include gender differentiated A43 Entity/Exe
technical that differentiated opportunities for include gender differentiated c) to be opportunities for action and A5 cuting
assistance to action and needs are identified and opportunities for action and determin needs on climate risks and B25 Agency
farmers and reflected in the livelihood assessment needs on differentiated climate ed at alternative options for resource- A44 Gender
rural within each of the seven target risks and alternative options for inception based business and climate advisor
communitie catchments, focusing on differentiated resource-based business and phase resilient livelihoods Estimated
s for the climate risks and alternative options climate resilient livelihoods d) 0 b) Equal number of women and at:
developmen for resource-based business and b) Number of women participating in men participating in livelihood $207,748
t of natural climate resilient livelihoods ensuring livelihood assessment in each training programs in each
resource- women´s participation municipality municipality
based c) Number of training programs that
businesses Specific activities will include: include gender differentiated c) At least 30% of women demands
and economic empowerment, for technical assistance to create
alternative business plans based on natural business opportunities and
climate- a) Develop assessments that resources integrating the results technical guidelines
resilient
integrate gender differentiated
from the previous assessment
livelihoods.
opportunities for action and needs d) At least 30% of women
d) % of women organizations with
on climate risks and alternative organizations demonstrate
options for resource-based increased technical capacities for increased technical capacities
business and climate resilient EbA business opportunities for EbA business opportunities
livelihoods
27

--- Table 1 on Page 177 ---
 | water efficient technologies,
energy efficiency on firewood,
d) -In the framework of the training
for trainers, include a module on
gender equality and positive
masculinities
e) Ensure participation of women as
trainers in the ToT programme
f) Include women-run farms in the
visits to demonstration sites
during the training workshops in
each municipality. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 1.3.
Provide
technical
assistance to
farmers and
rural
communitie
s for the
developmen
t of natural
resource-
based
businesses
and
alternative
climate-
resilient
livelihoods. | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be to ensure
that differentiated opportunities for
action and needs are identified and
reflected in the livelihood assessment
within each of the seven target
catchments, focusing on differentiated
climate risks and alternative options
for resource-based business and
climate resilient livelihoods ensuring
women´s participation
Specific activities will include:
a) Develop assessments that
integrate gender differentiated
opportunities for action and needs
on climate risks and alternative
options for resource-based
business and climate resilient
livelihoods | a) Number of assessments that
include gender differentiated
opportunities for action and
needs on differentiated climate
risks and alternative options for
resource-based business and
climate resilient livelihoods
b) Number of women participating in
livelihood assessment in each
municipality
c) Number of training programs that
include gender differentiated
economic empowerment,
business plans based on natural
resources integrating the results
from the previous assessment
d) % of women organizations with
increased technical capacities for
EbA business opportunities | a) 0
b) 0
c) to be
determin
ed at
inception
phase
d) 0 | a) 100% of livelihood assessments
include gender differentiated
opportunities for action and
needs on climate risks and
alternative options for resource-
based business and climate
resilient livelihoods
b) Equal number of women and
men participating in livelihood
training programs in each
municipality
c) At least 30% of women demands
for technical assistance to create
business opportunities and
technical guidelines
d) At least 30% of women
organizations demonstrate
increased technical capacities
for EbA business opportunities | By 1-3 year | A38
A43
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$207,748 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 178 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
b) Establish livelihood training e) number of trainings of e) At least 7 trainings of
programs in each municipality for municipality technicians on social, municipality technicians on
communities that include gender environmental resilience and social, environmental resilience
differentiated economic gender equality and gender equality
empowerment; business plans
based on natural resources
integrating the results from the
previous assessment
c) Strengthen the technical
capacities on EBA of women's
organizations at the local level.
d) Strengthen the capacities of
municipality technicians on social,
environmental resilience and
gender equality
Output 2 . Demonstration adaptation interventions implemented in rural communities across seven target catchments in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones.
Activity 2.1. The focus of the gender action plan a) % of women producers, a) 0 a) At least 30% of the B33 Accredited
Implement under this activity will be to ensure representatives or organizations b) 0 participants in the decision- By 1-7 year A5 Entity/Exe
landscape equal participation and needs that participate in the decision- c) 0 making processes for B25 cuting
EbA consideration when implementing EbA making process for selecting d) 0 selecting exact areas of A44 Agency
intervention activities in the rural communities of exact areas of intervention at the intervention at the Gender
s within the target areas. landscape and farm levels. landscape and farm levels Estimated advisor
rural b) % of farms benefited by the are women. at:
communitie Specific activities will include: EbA pilot measures at the b) At least 10% of the farms $221,574
s across the farm level that are owned or benefited by the EbA pilot
seven target managed by women. measures at the farm level
a) At the landscape and farm levels,
catchments. c) % of women that are hired for are owned or managed by
ensure that women specific needs
the on-the-ground women.
are considered in the decision-
making processes for establishing
implementation of EbA pilot c) At least 30% of the work
activities. force hired for the on-the-
the exact areas of intervention.
d) Number of monitoring & ground implementation of
b) At the farm level, ensure that the
evaluation plans that are EbA pilot activities are
beneficiaries of the
drafted considering the needs women.
implementation of EbA measures
expressed by women and that d) Every monitoring &
include farms owned or managed
measure the differentiated evaluation plan that is
by women.
impacts for both women and developed is drafted
men. considering the needs
28

--- Table 1 on Page 178 ---
 | b) Establish livelihood training
programs in each municipality for
communities that include gender
differentiated economic
empowerment; business plans
based on natural resources
integrating the results from the
previous assessment
c) Strengthen the technical
capacities on EBA of women's
organizations at the local level.
d) Strengthen the capacities of
municipality technicians on social,
environmental resilience and
gender equality | e) number of trainings of
municipality technicians on social,
environmental resilience and
gender equality |  | e) At least 7 trainings of
municipality technicians on
social, environmental resilience
and gender equality |  |  | 
Output 2 . Demonstration adaptation interventions implemented in rural communities across seven target catchments in the Dry Corridor and Arid Zones. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 2.1.
Implement
landscape
EbA
intervention
s within
rural
communitie
s across the
seven target
catchments. | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be to ensure
equal participation and needs
consideration when implementing EbA
activities in the rural communities of
the target areas.
Specific activities will include:
a) At the landscape and farm levels,
ensure that women specific needs
are considered in the decision-
making processes for establishing
the exact areas of intervention.
b) At the farm level, ensure that the
beneficiaries of the
implementation of EbA measures
include farms owned or managed
by women. | a) % of women producers,
representatives or organizations
that participate in the decision-
making process for selecting
exact areas of intervention at the
landscape and farm levels.
b) % of farms benefited by the
EbA pilot measures at the
farm level that are owned or
managed by women.
c) % of women that are hired for
the on-the-ground
implementation of EbA pilot
activities.
d) Number of monitoring &
evaluation plans that are
drafted considering the needs
expressed by women and that
measure the differentiated
impacts for both women and
men. | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0
d) 0 | a) At least 30% of the
participants in the decision-
making processes for
selecting exact areas of
intervention at the
landscape and farm levels
are women.
b) At least 10% of the farms
benefited by the EbA pilot
measures at the farm level
are owned or managed by
women.
c) At least 30% of the work
force hired for the on-the-
ground implementation of
EbA pilot activities are
women.
d) Every monitoring &
evaluation plan that is
developed is drafted
considering the needs | By 1-7 year | B33
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$221,574 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 179 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
c) Guarantee that women are hired expressed by women and
for the on-the-ground measures the differentiated
implementation of EbA pilot impacts for both women
measures. and men.
d) Develop a gender-sensitive
monitoring & evaluation plan for
the EbA pilot activities.
Activity 2.2. The focus of the gender action plan a) Number of consultations that a) 0 a) At least one consultation in By 1-7 year B38 Accredited
Implement under this activity will be to ensure collect information on the b) 0 each of the 5-6 A5 Entity/Exe
demosntrati equal participation and needs specific needs of women c) 0 municipalities in the B25 cuting
on water- consideration when implementing related to water and energy- d) 0 targeted catchments where A44 Agency
and water and energy efficient technologies efficient e) 0 the specific needs of women Gender
resource- in the rural communities of the target technologies/activities. related to water and Estimated advisor
efficient areas. b) % of participants in decision- energy-efficient at:
technologies making processes about the technologies/activities are $216,931
within rural Specific activities will include: implementation of water and examined.
communitie energy efficient technologie b) At least 30% of the
s across the a) Guarantee the consultation of who are women. participants in decision-
seven target women to understand their c) % of women participants in making processes about the
catchments. specific needs related to access decision-making processes implementation of water
to water and energy efficient who have key positions at and energy efficient
technologies/activities. water committees and/or technologies are women
b) At the community level, ensure water-related organizations. producers, representatives
women participation in the d) % of variables in decision or organizations.
decision-making processes about criteria for determining exact c) At least 35% of the women
the implementation of water and location of interventions that participants (equivalent to
energy efficient are related to an improved 10% of all participants) in
technologies/activities. access to water for women. decision-making processes
c) Promote opportunities for e) % of community members have key positions at water
women to influence decision- committees and/or water-
trained and that actively work
making about the implementation related organizations.
on the management, use and
of water and energy efficient maintenance of water and d) At least 40% of the variables
technologies/activities. in decision making criteria
energy efficient technologies
d) Ensure that the results from
who are women.
for determining the exact
consultation are considered when location of interventions are
deciding the exact location for related to an improved
installing water and energy access to water for women
efficient technologies/activities. (e.g.: shortened distances to
29

--- Table 1 on Page 179 ---
 | c) Guarantee that women are hired
for the on-the-ground
implementation of EbA pilot
measures.
d) Develop a gender-sensitive
monitoring & evaluation plan for
the EbA pilot activities. |  |  | expressed by women and
measures the differentiated
impacts for both women
and men. |  |  | 
Activity 2.2.
Implement
demosntrati
on water-
and
resource-
efficient
technologies
within rural
communitie
s across the
seven target
catchments. | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be to ensure
equal participation and needs
consideration when implementing
water and energy efficient technologies
in the rural communities of the target
areas.
Specific activities will include:
a) Guarantee the consultation of
women to understand their
specific needs related to access
to water and energy efficient
technologies/activities.
b) At the community level, ensure
women participation in the
decision-making processes about
the implementation of water and
energy efficient
technologies/activities.
c) Promote opportunities for
women to influence decision-
making about the implementation
of water and energy efficient
technologies/activities.
d) Ensure that the results from
consultation are considered when
deciding the exact location for
installing water and energy
efficient technologies/activities. | a) Number of consultations that
collect information on the
specific needs of women
related to water and energy-
efficient
technologies/activities.
b) % of participants in decision-
making processes about the
implementation of water and
energy efficient technologie
who are women.
c) % of women participants in
decision-making processes
who have key positions at
water committees and/or
water-related organizations.
d) % of variables in decision
criteria for determining exact
location of interventions that
are related to an improved
access to water for women.
e) % of community members
trained and that actively work
on the management, use and
maintenance of water and
energy efficient technologies
who are women. | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0
d) 0
e) 0 | a) At least one consultation in
each of the 5-6
municipalities in the
targeted catchments where
the specific needs of women
related to water and
energy-efficient
technologies/activities are
examined.
b) At least 30% of the
participants in decision-
making processes about the
implementation of water
and energy efficient
technologies are women
producers, representatives
or organizations.
c) At least 35% of the women
participants (equivalent to
10% of all participants) in
decision-making processes
have key positions at water
committees and/or water-
related organizations.
d) At least 40% of the variables
in decision making criteria
for determining the exact
location of interventions are
related to an improved
access to water for women
(e.g.: shortened distances to | By 1-7 year | B38
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$216,931 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 180 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
e) Promote women technical wells, time gained for
training and active work on productive work, rest or
management, use and care, etc.).
maintenance of water and energy e) At least 35% of the
efficient technologies. community members
trained and that actively
work on the management,
use and maintenance of
water and energy efficient
technologies are women.
Activity 2.3 The objective under this activity will be a) # of gender considerations a) 0 a) At least 2 gender considerations By year 1 B44 Accredited
Establish the to promote equal access to the grant incorporated in eligibility criteria b) 0 incorporated in the set of eligibility B50 Entity/Exe
grant facility facility for male and female farmers as for the grant facility, in line with eligibility criteria for the grant criteria A5 cuting
to support well as organizations. Specific activities national regulations and CABEI´s facility for each country, in line and B25 Agency
bottom-up will include: gender policy with national regulations and monitoring A44 Gender
selection b) Number of campaign materials CABEI´s gender policy framework experts
and specifically directed to promote b) at least 1 annual campaign Annually Estimated
promotion a) Integration of gender equality women´s requests to the grant focused on gender equality in for at:
of local EbA aspects into the eligibility criteria facility entrepreneurship initiatives awareness $199,350
activities for the grant facility in line with c) Number of gender equality c) At least 2 gender indicators campaigns
through national regulations and CABEI´s indicators integrated in included in the framework for and media
non- gender policy monitoring, reporting and monitoring, reporting and messages
reimbursabl b) Development of campaign verification mechanism verification mechanisms
e financing materials specifically directed to d) Number of specific events and developed in each country
and start promote women´s requests to the media initiatives that integrate d) At least 2 annual messages on
operations grant facility gender equality messages in the gender equality in
c) Integration of gender equality communication of results of the entrepreneurship initiatives
indicators in the monitoring, grant facility socialized by the media
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activity 1.2.3
d) Integrate gender equality
messages in the communication of
results through specific events
and media initiatives
Output 3:
Information on climate change adaptation and its financing disseminated across the region and mainstreamed into local and national policies.
30

--- Table 1 on Page 180 ---
 |  | e) Promote women technical
training and active work on
management, use and
maintenance of water and energy
efficient technologies. |  |  | wells, time gained for
productive work, rest or
care, etc.).
e) At least 35% of the
community members
trained and that actively
work on the management,
use and maintenance of
water and energy efficient
technologies are women. |  |  | 
Activity 2.3
Establish the
grant facility
to support
bottom-up
selection
and
promotion
of local EbA
activities
through
non-
reimbursabl
e financing
and start
operations |  | The objective under this activity will be
to promote equal access to the grant
facility for male and female farmers as
well as organizations. Specific activities
will include:
a) Integration of gender equality
aspects into the eligibility criteria
for the grant facility in line with
national regulations and CABEI´s
gender policy
b) Development of campaign
materials specifically directed to
promote women´s requests to the
grant facility
c) Integration of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring,
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activity 1.2.3
d) Integrate gender equality
messages in the communication of
results through specific events
and media initiatives | a) # of gender considerations
incorporated in eligibility criteria
for the grant facility, in line with
national regulations and CABEI´s
gender policy
b) Number of campaign materials
specifically directed to promote
women´s requests to the grant
facility
c) Number of gender equality
indicators integrated in
monitoring, reporting and
verification mechanism
d) Number of specific events and
media initiatives that integrate
gender equality messages in the
communication of results of the
grant facility | a) 0
b) 0 | a) At least 2 gender considerations
incorporated in the set of
eligibility criteria for the grant
facility for each country, in line
with national regulations and
CABEI´s gender policy
b) at least 1 annual campaign
focused on gender equality in
entrepreneurship initiatives
c) At least 2 gender indicators
included in the framework for
monitoring, reporting and
verification mechanisms
developed in each country
d) At least 2 annual messages on
gender equality in
entrepreneurship initiatives
socialized by the media | By year 1
eligibility
criteria
and
monitoring
framework
Annually
for
awareness
campaigns
and media
messages | B44
B50
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$199,350 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
experts
 | Output 3:
Information on climate change adaptation and its financing disseminated across the region and mainstreamed into local and national policies. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 181 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
Activity 3.1. The objective under this activity will be a) % of knowledge products a) 0 a) at least 50% of knowledge C1 Accredited
Establish to promote equal access to the elaborated include gender-specific b) to be products include gender-specific a, b and c C3 Entity/Exe
regional knowledge hub for both men and issues determin issues between C7 cuting
knowledge women and to ensure the products’ b) Number of research products that ed at b) 1 piece of research deals with years 1 to C8 Agency
hub for the elaborated by the knowledge hub deals with gender and ecosystem- inception gender and EbA 7 A5 Gender
disseminatio include gender-equality issues to phase B25 advisor
based adaptation c) at least 80% of knowledge
n of generate evidence on the c) 0 d and e A44
c) number of knowledge products products are produced following
information differentiated vulnerability to climate d) 0 between
elaborated following gender- gender-neutral language’s
on EbA in change and the opportunities for more e) 0 years 2 Estimated
neutral language’s recommendations
the Dry efficient climate action including the f) 0 and 6 at:
recommendations18 d) at least 7 exchanges of best
Corridor and gender perspective. $392,737
d) number of exchanges of best practices and lessons about
Arid Zones. Specific activities will include:
practices and lessons about gender gender equality and EbA are
equality and EbA published in the published
a) Ensure knowledge products
include a gender-specific focus regional hub e) At least 1 module per training
b) Integration of gender-neutral e) Number of training modules on includes climate change impact
language in the knowledge hub climate change impact on gender on gender inequality
platform and all knowledge inequality f) At least 60% of women’s groups
products elaborated. f) Number of women’s group participate in trainings
participation in training g) At least 1 community champion
c) Ensure the exchange of best g) number of female community per country is female.
practices and lessons learned champions.
include experiences on gender
issues’ integration in the seven
target countries.
d) Include a module on climate
change impact on gender
inequality in annual training for
policy- and decision-makers under
sub-activity 3.1.3
e) Ensure women’s group
participation and representation in
the community champions’
18 Using guidelines such as UN guidebook in Spanish (also available in English): https://www.un.org/es/gender-inclusive-language/guidelines.shtml
31

--- Table 1 on Page 181 ---
Activity 3.1.
Establish
regional
knowledge
hub for the
disseminatio
n of
information
on EbA in
the Dry
Corridor and
Arid Zones. | The objective under this activity will be
to promote equal access to the
knowledge hub for both men and
women and to ensure the products’
elaborated by the knowledge hub
include gender-equality issues to
generate evidence on the
differentiated vulnerability to climate
change and the opportunities for more
efficient climate action including the
gender perspective.
Specific activities will include:
a) Ensure knowledge products
include a gender-specific focus
b) Integration of gender-neutral
language in the knowledge hub
platform and all knowledge
products elaborated.
c) Ensure the exchange of best
practices and lessons learned
include experiences on gender
issues’ integration in the seven
target countries.
d) Include a module on climate
change impact on gender
inequality in annual training for
policy- and decision-makers under
sub-activity 3.1.3
e) Ensure women’s group
participation and representation in
the community champions’ | a) % of knowledge products
elaborated include gender-specific
issues
b) Number of research products that
deals with gender and ecosystem-
based adaptation
c) number of knowledge products
elaborated following gender-
neutral language’s
recommendations18
d) number of exchanges of best
practices and lessons about gender
equality and EbA published in the
regional hub
e) Number of training modules on
climate change impact on gender
inequality
f) Number of women’s group
participation in training
g) number of female community
champions. | a) 0
b) to be
determin
ed at
inception
phase
c) 0
d) 0
e) 0
f) 0 | a) at least 50% of knowledge
products include gender-specific
issues
b) 1 piece of research deals with
gender and EbA
c) at least 80% of knowledge
products are produced following
gender-neutral language’s
recommendations
d) at least 7 exchanges of best
practices and lessons about
gender equality and EbA are
published
e) At least 1 module per training
includes climate change impact
on gender inequality
f) At least 60% of women’s groups
participate in trainings
g) At least 1 community champion
per country is female. | a, b and c
between
years 1 to
7
d and e
between
years 2
and 6 | C1
C3
C7
C8
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$392,737 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 182 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
developed under sub-activity
3.1.4.
Activity 3.2. The objective under this activity is to a) Number of trainings carried a) 0 a) at least 70% of trainings are (a), (b) and C12 Accredited
Raise ensure sensitization of potential clients out with gender b) 0 carried out with gender (c) by C14 Entity/Exe
awareness of the financial mechanisms for EbA considerations (based on c) 0 considerations years 2 to C16 cuting
of financial interventions for both men and schedules, transportations d) 0 7 year A5 Agency
mechanisms women. Specific activities will include and other needs) e) 0 b) 100% of training materials include B25 Gender
for the b) Number of training curriculums key messages for women’s access to (d) and (e) A44 advisor
implementat that include key messages to loans through the EbA credit line. on yeas 1,
ion of a) Ensure women’s participation promote women´s access to the 2, 4 and 6 Estimated
CCA interve in training on loan access financial mechanisms c) 70% of trainings attended by at:
ntions through the EbA credit line. c) Number of training reports that women include disaggregated $227,708
b) Map out the different needs and include disaggregated information information on men and women’s
preferred information channels of on men and women’s need needs for financial access.
both women and men for the regarding financial mechanism
financial mechanism during d) Number of local campaigns that
d) At least 7 local campaigns (one per
trainings under sub-activities 3.2.1 target women to access financial
country) target women specifically
and 3.2.2 mechanisms
regarding access to financial
c) Awareness-raising campaigns e) Number of local campaigns
mechanisms
under sub-activity 3.2.3 include increase awareness on gender
gender equality messages in the equality
e) at least 7 of local campaigns
communication of results through
integrate gender equality messages
specific events and media
initiatives, using results from
assessment realized in (b)
Activity 3.3. The objective under this activity is to a) 0 a) At least 7 women-led initiatives (a), (b) and C22 Accredited
Enhance contribute to the amplification of a) # of women-led initiatives b) 0 in LAC identified, at least 3 of (c) C26 Entity/Exe
capacity of gender-affirmative actions in the identified related to climate them are from the 7 target between C28 cuting
local-level proposed response models to climate change adaptation and countries years 1 to A5 Agency
policy- change. ecosystems’ valuation. 7 B25 Gender
makers to b) At least 3 gender-sensitive (b) A44 advisor
integrate a) Mapping good practices led b) # of gender-sensitive indicators included in the between
climate by women's organizations and indicators included in the methodology under sub-activity years 2
change environmental defenders, 3.3.2 and 3
32

--- Table 1 on Page 182 ---
 | developed under sub-activity
3.1.4. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 3.2.
Raise
awareness
of financial
mechanisms
for the
implementat
ion of
CCA interve
ntions | The objective under this activity is to
ensure sensitization of potential clients
of the financial mechanisms for EbA
interventions for both men and
women. Specific activities will include
a) Ensure women’s participation
in training on loan access
through the EbA credit line.
b) Map out the different needs and
preferred information channels of
both women and men for the
financial mechanism during
trainings under sub-activities 3.2.1
and 3.2.2
c) Awareness-raising campaigns
under sub-activity 3.2.3 include
gender equality messages in the
communication of results through
specific events and media
initiatives, using results from
assessment realized in (b) | a) Number of trainings carried
out with gender
considerations (based on
schedules, transportations
and other needs)
b) Number of training curriculums
that include key messages to
promote women´s access to the
financial mechanisms
c) Number of training reports that
include disaggregated information
on men and women’s need
regarding financial mechanism
d) Number of local campaigns that
target women to access financial
mechanisms
e) Number of local campaigns
increase awareness on gender
equality | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0
d) 0
e) 0 | a) at least 70% of trainings are
carried out with gender
considerations
b) 100% of training materials include
key messages for women’s access to
loans through the EbA credit line.
c) 70% of trainings attended by
women include disaggregated
information on men and women’s
needs for financial access.
d) At least 7 local campaigns (one per
country) target women specifically
regarding access to financial
mechanisms
e) at least 7 of local campaigns
integrate gender equality messages | (a), (b) and
(c) by
years 2 to
7 year
(d) and (e)
on yeas 1,
2, 4 and 6 | C12
C14
C16
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$227,708 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor
Activity 3.3.
Enhance
capacity of
local-level
policy-
makers to
integrate
climate
change | The objective under this activity is to
contribute to the amplification of
gender-affirmative actions in the
proposed response models to climate
change.
a) Mapping good practices led
by women's organizations and
environmental defenders, | a) # of women-led initiatives
identified related to climate
change adaptation and
ecosystems’ valuation.
b) # of gender-sensitive
indicators included in the | a) 0
b) 0 | a) At least 7 women-led initiatives
in LAC identified, at least 3 of
them are from the 7 target
countries
b) At least 3 gender-sensitive
indicators included in the
methodology under sub-activity
3.3.2 | (a), (b) and
(c)
between
years 1 to
7
(b)
between
years 2
and 3 | C22
C26
C28
A5
B25
A44 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 183 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
adaptation including in other regions or methodology to value (c) Estimated
and the countries. ecosystem-services. c) At least 60% of the guidelines between at:
valuation of produced include years 2 $217,548
natural b) Include gender-sensitive indicators c) % of guidelines including recommendation on gender- and 4
capital into in the development of the recommendations on gender- affirmative actions.
local policies methodology under sub-activity affirmative actions
3.3.2. d) At least 1 module per training
d) # of modules on gender issues and capacity building activities is
c) Integrate gender-affirmative included in training and capacity focused on gender issues
actions in the guidelines for local building activities
governments outlining protocols e) at least 50% of female public
and criteria for implementation of e) % of female public officials in the officials in the municipalities
economic incentives for SLM under municipalities involved in the participate in the capacity
sub-activity 3.3.3. capacity building programme on building activities
the integration of climate
d) Include module on gender equality resilience in broader public policies
and climate change in all the
training of local governments that
are carried out, to promote
changes in public policies and
protocol uses
e) Ensure participation of female
public officials in the municipalities
in the capacity building programme
on the integration of climate
resilience in broader public policies
Output 4
Financial products and services to finance sustainable investments are offered by Partner Financial Institutions (PFI), including PFI access to on-lending funds and support mechanisms.
Activity 4.1. The focus of the gender action plan a) Number of guidelines for a) 0 a) At least 2 sets of guidelines By year 1 D3 Accredited
Set-up and under this activity will be on the technical, environmental, b) 0 developed for IFIs, PFIs for Annually D6 Entity/Exe
establish the definition of investment criteria and financial requirements of c) 0 the lending and guarantee Revised D9 cuting
financial operational guidelines that facilitate sustainable investments and facilities that integrate and A5 Agency
structure for financial eligibility gender equality updated if B25 Gender
the lending requirements for application considerations for the necessary A44 experts
33

--- Table 1 on Page 183 ---
adaptation
and the
valuation of
natural
capital into
local policies | including in other regions or
countries.
b) Include gender-sensitive indicators
in the development of the
methodology under sub-activity
3.3.2.
c) Integrate gender-affirmative
actions in the guidelines for local
governments outlining protocols
and criteria for implementation of
economic incentives for SLM under
sub-activity 3.3.3.
d) Include module on gender equality
and climate change in all the
training of local governments that
are carried out, to promote
changes in public policies and
protocol uses
e) Ensure participation of female
public officials in the municipalities
in the capacity building programme
on the integration of climate
resilience in broader public policies | methodology to value
ecosystem-services.
c) % of guidelines including
recommendations on gender-
affirmative actions
d) # of modules on gender issues
included in training and capacity
building activities
e) % of female public officials in the
municipalities involved in the
capacity building programme on
the integration of climate
resilience in broader public policies |  | c) At least 60% of the guidelines
produced include
recommendation on gender-
affirmative actions.
d) At least 1 module per training
and capacity building activities is
focused on gender issues
e) at least 50% of female public
officials in the municipalities
participate in the capacity
building activities | (c)
between
years 2
and 4 | Estimated
at:
$217,548 | 
Output 4
Financial products and services to finance sustainable investments are offered by Partner Financial Institutions (PFI), including PFI access to on-lending funds and support mechanisms. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity 4.1.
Set-up and
establish the
financial
structure for
the lending | The focus of the gender action plan
under this activity will be on the
definition of investment criteria and
operational guidelines that facilitate | a) Number of guidelines for
technical, environmental,
financial requirements of
sustainable investments and
financial eligibility
requirements for application | a) 0
b) 0
c) 0 | a) At least 2 sets of guidelines
developed for IFIs, PFIs for
the lending and guarantee
facilities that integrate
gender equality
considerations for the | By year 1
Annually
Revised
and
updated if
necessary | D3
D6
D9
A5
B25
A44 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
experts

=== PAGE 184 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
and and promote gender equality in access to loan funds and support operationalization of the
guarantee to finance instruments. mechanisms guarantee financial schemes Estimated
facilities. gender focus at:
Specific activities will include: b) At least 2 gender equality $99,174
b) Gender equality aspects aspects integrated in the
integrated in investment criteria investment criteria approved by
a) Inclusion of gender equality
approved by Steering Committee Steering Committee and CABEI
considerations into the
and CABEI in year 1 of the programme
operational guidelines for the
lending and guarantee facilities
c) Number of gender equality c) At least 2 gender equality
b) Integration of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring, indicators are integrated in the
aspects into the investment
reporting and verification monitoring, reporting and
criteria for the lending facility in
mechanism developed under sub- verification mechanism
line with national regulations and
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 developed under sub-activities
CABEI´s gender policy and FEM
1.1.4 and 1.1.5 including
programme
c) Integration of gender equality
recommendations from the
RPMU and PEU gender experts
indicators in the monitoring,
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5
Activity 4.2. The objective under this activity will be a) Number of guidelines for a) 0 A, b, c at D3 Accredited
Financing to promote equal access to the lending technical, environmental, b) 0 a) At least 2 sets of guidelines the end of D6 Entity/Exe
mechanism and guarantee facilities for male and financial requirements of c)0 developed for IFIs, PFIs for year 1 D9 cuting
of the EbA female farmers as well as sustainable investments and d) To be the lending and guarantee D,e by year A5 Agency
lending organizations. Specific activities will financial eligibility determin facilities that integrate 7 B25 Gender
facility and include: requirements for application ed at gender equality A44 advisor
guarantee to loan funds and support inception considerations for the
facility. a) Inclusion of gender equality mechanisms guarantee phase operationalization of the Estimated
considerations into the gender focus e) To be financial schemes at:
operational guidelines for the determin $99,174
lending and guarantee facilities b) # of gender equality aspects ed at b) At least 2 gender equality
b) Integration of gender equality integrated in investment criteria inception aspects integrated in investment
aspects into the investment approved by Steering Committee phase criteria approved by Steering
criteria for the lending facility in and CABEI Committee and CABEI in year 1
line with national regulations and of the programme
CABEI´s gender policy and FEM c) Number of gender equality
programme indicators in the monitoring,
34

--- Table 1 on Page 184 ---
and
guarantee
facilities. | and promote gender equality in access
to finance instruments.
Specific activities will include:
a) Inclusion of gender equality
considerations into the
operational guidelines for the
lending and guarantee facilities
b) Integration of gender equality
aspects into the investment
criteria for the lending facility in
line with national regulations and
CABEI´s gender policy and FEM
programme
c) Integration of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring,
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 | to loan funds and support
mechanisms guarantee
gender focus
b) Gender equality aspects
integrated in investment criteria
approved by Steering Committee
and CABEI
c) Number of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring,
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 |  | operationalization of the
financial schemes
b) At least 2 gender equality
aspects integrated in the
investment criteria approved by
Steering Committee and CABEI
in year 1 of the programme
c) At least 2 gender equality
indicators are integrated in the
monitoring, reporting and
verification mechanism
developed under sub-activities
1.1.4 and 1.1.5 including
recommendations from the
RPMU and PEU gender experts |  | Estimated
at:
$99,174 | 
Activity 4.2.
Financing
mechanism
of the EbA
lending
facility and
guarantee
facility. | The objective under this activity will be
to promote equal access to the lending
and guarantee facilities for male and
female farmers as well as
organizations. Specific activities will
include:
a) Inclusion of gender equality
considerations into the
operational guidelines for the
lending and guarantee facilities
b) Integration of gender equality
aspects into the investment
criteria for the lending facility in
line with national regulations and
CABEI´s gender policy and FEM
programme | a) Number of guidelines for
technical, environmental,
financial requirements of
sustainable investments and
financial eligibility
requirements for application
to loan funds and support
mechanisms guarantee
gender focus
b) # of gender equality aspects
integrated in investment criteria
approved by Steering Committee
and CABEI
c) Number of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring, | a) 0
b) 0
c)0
d) To be
determin
ed at
inception
phase
e) To be
determin
ed at
inception
phase | a) At least 2 sets of guidelines
developed for IFIs, PFIs for
the lending and guarantee
facilities that integrate
gender equality
considerations for the
operationalization of the
financial schemes
b) At least 2 gender equality
aspects integrated in investment
criteria approved by Steering
Committee and CABEI in year 1
of the programme | A, b, c at
the end of
year 1
D,e by year
7 | D3
D6
D9
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$99,174 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 185 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
c) Integration of gender equality reporting and verification c) At least 2 gender equality
indicators in the monitoring, mechanism developed under sub- indicators are integrated in the
reporting and verification activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 monitoring, reporting and
mechanism developed under sub- d) increase in number of women verification mechanism
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 producer’s organizations developed under sub-activities
d) Ensure equal access for male and applicants who successfully 1.1.4 and 1.1.5 including
female farmers to financing apply to on-lending funds and recommendations from the
schemes to support water support mechanisms in RPMU and PEU gender experts
efficiency measures as well as to comparison to other lending
information on how to apply for funds from CABEI d) At least 20% increase of women
them e) increase in % of women producer’s organizations
producer’s organizations that applicants who successfully apply
access similar amount of to on-lending funds and support
funding than men mechanisms in comparison to
organizations in comparison other lending funds from CABEI.
to other lending funds from
CABEI e) At least 20% increases of women
producer’s organizations that
access similar amount of funding
than men organizations in
comparison to other lending
funds from CABEI
Activity 4.3 The objective under this activity will be a) % of women trained in the a)0 a) At least 30% of women By end of D13 Accredited
Technical to promote equal access to the lending ToT programme b)0 trained in the ToT programm D14 Entity/Exe
assistance and guarantee facilities for male and b) number of financial institutions c)0 programme e D25 cuting
(TA) facility female farmers as well as that received technical assistance b) At least 10 of the 28 A5 Agency
to organizations through the integration and increased their AbE capacity associated financial B25 Gender
strengthen of gender considerations into the include women in their institutions that received A44 advisor
technical training materials for financial entities management team technical assistance and
capacity of at different levels. Specific activities c) Number of key messages to increased their AbE capacity Estimated
CABEI will include: promote women´s access to the include women in their at:
network and financial mechanisms to potential management team $218,648
non- network institutions and non- c) At least one annual campaign
regulated a) Develop and adjust training network institutions in each of the with gender focus for awareness
financial curriculums and technical 7 countries on financial mechanisms
institutions
assistance methodology targeted
to access
to fill gaps identified within
and channel
gender equality approach,
35

--- Table 1 on Page 185 ---
 | c) Integration of gender equality
indicators in the monitoring,
reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5
d) Ensure equal access for male and
female farmers to financing
schemes to support water
efficiency measures as well as to
information on how to apply for
them | reporting and verification
mechanism developed under sub-
activities 1.1.4 and 1.1.5
d) increase in number of women
producer’s organizations
applicants who successfully
apply to on-lending funds and
support mechanisms in
comparison to other lending
funds from CABEI
e) increase in % of women
producer’s organizations that
access similar amount of
funding than men
organizations in comparison
to other lending funds from
CABEI |  | c) At least 2 gender equality
indicators are integrated in the
monitoring, reporting and
verification mechanism
developed under sub-activities
1.1.4 and 1.1.5 including
recommendations from the
RPMU and PEU gender experts
d) At least 20% increase of women
producer’s organizations
applicants who successfully apply
to on-lending funds and support
mechanisms in comparison to
other lending funds from CABEI.
e) At least 20% increases of women
producer’s organizations that
access similar amount of funding
than men organizations in
comparison to other lending
funds from CABEI |  |  | 
Activity 4.3
Technical
assistance
(TA) facility
to
strengthen
technical
capacity of
CABEI
network and
non-
regulated
financial
institutions
to access
and channel | The objective under this activity will be
to promote equal access to the lending
and guarantee facilities for male and
female farmers as well as
organizations through the integration
of gender considerations into the
training materials for financial entities
at different levels. Specific activities
will include:
a) Develop and adjust training
curriculums and technical
assistance methodology targeted
to fill gaps identified within
gender equality approach, | a) % of women trained in the
ToT programme
b) number of financial institutions
that received technical assistance
and increased their AbE capacity
include women in their
management team
c) Number of key messages to
promote women´s access to the
financial mechanisms to potential
network institutions and non-
network institutions in each of the
7 countries | a)0
b)0
c)0 | a) At least 30% of women
trained in the ToT
programme
b) At least 10 of the 28
associated financial
institutions that received
technical assistance and
increased their AbE capacity
include women in their
management team
c) At least one annual campaign
with gender focus for awareness
on financial mechanisms | By end of
programm
e | D13
D14
D25
A5
B25
A44
Estimated
at:
$218,648 | Accredited
Entity/Exe
cuting
Agency
Gender
advisor

=== PAGE 186 ===
Ecosystem-based Adaptation to increase climate resilience in the Central American Dry Corridor
and the Arid Zones of the Dominican Republic
funds for b) Promote the blended EbA lending
small- and facility with potential network
large-scale institutions and non-network
EbA institutions in each of the 7
investments. countries with key messages to
promote women´s access to the
financial mechanisms
__________________________________
36

--- Table 1 on Page 186 ---
funds for
small- and
large-scale
EbA
investments. |  | b) Promote the blended EbA lending
facility with potential network
institutions and non-network
institutions in each of the 7
countries with key messages to
promote women´s access to the
financial mechanisms |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
