=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20200610141336+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20067
ModDate: D:20200723162312+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 20.9.20067
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
18 – 21 August 2020
Virtual meeting
Provisional agenda item 11
28 July 2020
Consideration of funding proposals -
Addendum X
Funding proposal package for FP138
Summary
This a ddendum contains the following seven parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
’
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
’
d) Secretariats assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page b
Table of Contents
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 59
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 60
Secretariat’s assessment 62
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 76
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
92
assessment
Gender documentation 93

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
Country(ies): Senegal
Accredited Entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD)
Date of first submission: 2020/01/21
Date of current submission 2020/05/21
Version number V.1.5

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMMESUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0
ACRONYMS
ASER : Senegalese Agency for Rural Electrification (Agence Sénégalaise d’Électrification Rurale)
ASN : Standards Association of Senegal (Association Sénégalaise de Normalisation)
AML/CFT : Anti-money laundering - combating finance of terrorism
APR : Annual Performance Report
BCEAO : Central Bank of West African States
BE : Baseline Emissions
BOAD : West African Development Bank (Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement)
CDM : Clean Development Mechanim
CoP : Conférence of Parties [to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change]
COPERES : Council of Professionals of Renewable Energies in Senegal
CRSE : Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (Commission de Régulation du Secteur de l'Électricité)
DER : General Delegation for Women and Young Entrepreneurs (Délégation générale à l’Entreprenariat Rapide des
Femmes et des Jeunes)
DEEC : Direction de l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés
DREEC : Divisions Régionales de l’Environnement et des Établissements Classés
ER : Emission Reduction
ESMF/ESMP : Environmental and social management Framework/Plan
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
ECREEE ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energies and Energy Efficiency
ERIL : Local Rural Electrification Initiative (Electrification Rurale d'Initiative Locale)
ERPA : Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement
ESIA : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
FONGIP : Priority Investment Guarantee Fund (Fonds de Garantie des Investissements Prioritaires)
FONSIS : Sovereign Strategic Investment Fund (Fonds Souverain d'Investissements Stratégiques)
FSE : Special Support Fund for the Energy Sector (Fonds Spécial de Soutien au secteur de l’Energie)
GCF : Green Climate Fund
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GEF : Global Environment Facility
GHG : Green House Gases
IPP : Independent Power Producers
IRENA : International Renewable Energy Agency
KYC : Know Your Customer
LPDSE Letter of Development for the Energy Sector (Lettre de Développement du Secteur de l’Énergie)
MCC : Millennium Challenge Corporation
MEP : Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
MFI : Microfinance institutions
MEFP : Ministry of Economy, Finance and Planification
M/SME : Micro/Small Medium Enterprises
NDA : National Designated Entity
NDCs : Nationally Determined Contributions
NGO : Non-Governmental Organization
O&M : Operation and Maintenance
OECD : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
PE : Project Emissions
PMU : Project Management Unit (Unité de Gestion du Projet)
PNER : National Rural Electrification Program (Programme National d'Électrification Rurale)
PoA : (CDM) Programme of Activities
PPER : Priority Rural Electrification Program (Programme Prioritaire de l'Électrification Rurale)
PPPs : Public Private Partnership
PREM:Multi-Sectoral Energetic Projects (Projects Energétiques Multi-sectoriels)
PSE : Plan Senegal Emergent
PUDC : Emergency Community Development Program (Programme d'Urgence de Développement Communautaire)
PV : Photovoltaic
RE : Renewable Energy
ROGEP : Regional Off-Grid Electrification Project
SENELEC : Société Nationale d’Electricité du Sénégal
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals
SHS : Solar home system
ToR : Terms of Reference
UNFCCC : United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change
WAEMU : West African economic and monetary union
(*) Some institutions’ names and acronyms are retained in French

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 1
AAAA
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.1. Project or A.2. Public or private
Project Public
programme sector
A.3. Request for
Not applicable
Proposals (RFP)
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%.
Mitigation: Reduced emissions from: GCF contribution:
☒ Energy access and power generation: 100%
Low-emission transport:
☐
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
A.4. Result area(s) ☐ Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services:
Adaptation co-benefits to
344,000 beneficiaries
A.5. Expected mitigation 1,127,447 tCO2eq A.6. Expected adaptation
(38,900 households)
impact (2021 – 2045) impact
4% of Senegal rural
population
A.7. Total financing (GCF
198,692,182 Euros
+ co-finance)
Medium (Upto USD 250
A.9. Project size
million)
A.8. Total GCF funding 75,445,176 Euros
1
requested
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested ☒ Grant EUR 1,821,945 ☐ Equity Enter number
for the GCF funding ☒ Loan EUR 73,623,231 ☐ Results-based
☐ Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number
A.11. Implementation 25 years
2021 - 2026 A.12. Total lifespan
period (PV equipment lifetime)
A.13. Expected date of
A.14. ESS category B
AE internal approval 2/24/2020
A.15. Has this FP been A.16. Has Readiness or
submitted as a CN Yes ☒ No PPF support been used Yes No ☒
☐ ☐
before? to prepare this FP?
A.17. Is this FP included A.18. Is this FP included
in the entity work Yes ☒ No in the country Yes ☒ No
☐ ☐
programme? programme?
1 Equivalent to EUR 225 million

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or
programme |  |  | Project | A.2. Public or private
sector |  |  | Public |  | 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP) |  |  | Not applicable |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets.
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF budget devoted to it.
The total of the percentages when summed should be 100%. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | Mitigation: Reduced emissions from:
☒ Energy access and power generation:
Low-emission transport:
☐
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances:
☐ Forestry and land use:
Adaptation: Increased resilience of:
☐ Most vulnerable people, communities and regions:
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security:
☐ Infrastructure and built environment:
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem services: |  |  |  |  | GCF contribution:
100% | 
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact |  |  | 1,127,447 tCO2eq
(2021 – 2045) | A.6. Expected adaptation
impact |  |  | Adaptation co-benefits to
344,000 beneficiaries
(38,900 households) |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4% of Senegal rural
population |  | 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance) |  |  | 198,692,182 Euros | A.9. Project size |  |  | Medium (Upto USD 250
million)
1 |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  |  | 75,445,176 Euros |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding |  |  | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
☒ Grant EUR 1,821,945 ☐ Equity Enter number
☒ Loan EUR 73,623,231 ☐ Results-based
☐ Guarantee Enter number payment Enter number |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.11. Implementation
period |  |  | 2021 - 2026 | A.12. Total lifespan |  |  | 25 years
(PV equipment lifetime) |  | 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval |  |  | 2/24/2020 | A.14. ESS category |  |  | B |  | 
 | A.15. Has this FP been |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | A.16. Has Readiness or |  | Yes No ☒
☐ |  | 
 | submitted as a CN |  |  |  | PPF support been used |  |  |  | 
 | before? |  |  |  | to prepare this FP? |  |  |  | 
 | A.17. Is this FP included |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | A.18. Is this FP included |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  | 
 | in the entity work |  |  |  | in the country |  |  |  | 
 | programme? |  |  |  | programme? |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.1. Project or
programme

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
A.2. Public or private
sector

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)

--- Table 5 on Page 6 ---
A.5. Expected mitigation
impact

--- Table 6 on Page 6 ---
A.6. Expected adaptation
impact

--- Table 7 on Page 6 ---
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)

--- Table 8 on Page 6 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 9 on Page 6 ---
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding

--- Table 10 on Page 6 ---
A.11. Implementation
period

--- Table 11 on Page 6 ---
25 years
(PV equipment lifetime)

--- Table 12 on Page 6 ---
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval

--- Table 13 on Page 6 ---

2/24/2020

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 2
AAAA
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
A.19. Complementarity
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
and coherence
Yes ☐ No ☒
A.20. Executing Entity Government of the Republic of Senegal represented by the Senegalese Rural
information Electrification Agency (ASER)
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
This proposal aims to foster the development of off-grid renewable energy mini-grids to reduce CO2 emissions from the
Senegal power sector whilst contributing to electricity access objectives and promoting gender-balanced rural economic
growth. Low-carbon universal access is a critical pillar of the Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) phase II, as the energy
sector was considered one of the greatest success of PSE phase I2,with national power generation increasing two-fold
between 2012 and 2018, and 20% of the energy mix derived from clean energy sources.
Currently, only 42% of Senegal’s rural population has access to electricity. Electricity access rate is still relatively low
and reveals a great disparity between urban and rural populations, with regional disparities that are even more dramatic
in terms of the level of coverage. With coverage rates ranging from 12% in Kedougou to 70% in Dakar, only five other
regions (Diourbel, Saint-Louis, Matam,Thiès, Ziguinchor) have been able to achieve an electrical coverage rate of at
least 50%. Two regions (Kolda and Kedougou) have a coverage rate of less than 20%. At the departmental level,
Salémata, Medina Yoro Foula, Ranerou and Saraya have an electrical coverage rate of less than 10%3. These low
rates are due to excessively high costs of investment and operations, dispersal and low level of consumption, yet the
benefits of rural electrification are undisputed, significantly improving the quality of life of communities and increasing
productivity. Distributed renewable energy generation also help increase the reliability and resilience of power supply
by making it less vulnerable to disruptions caused by natural disasters. Multiple socio-economic and socio-ecological
co-benefits can further contribute to improving living standards of the communities.
The Government of Senegal is thus committed to tackle this issue and has pledged to reach universal energy access
by 2025. Meanwhile, lack of resources means that any improvements are likely to be met through carbon-intensive grid
extensions and diesel-powered generators (lower upfront cost). However, the Government of Senegal (GoS) has
committed, through the Paris Agreement (2015) and COP21, to contribute to the international collective effort to mitigate
climate change emissions and put in place adequate adaptation measures. In the energy sector, this commitment has
resulted in the definition of strategies and the implementation of priority actions presented in the Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) of Senegal.
The objective of the proposed project is to support the GoS by providing concessional co-funding needed to mobilise
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market and achieve its low-carbon rural electrification
goals as proclaimed in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Senegal, under the form of sovereign loan and
grant de-risking local operators’ involvement while alleviating GoS tariff compensation burden following harmonization.
Climate change in Senegal is predicted to affect average yearly rainfall with an increase in rain intensity leading to
flooding, along with increased air temperatures and sea level rise. Its effects on water resources thus include stressors
affecting hydropower production, which contributes more than 10 percent to the country’s electricity supply and is
susceptible to variable rainfall and increased evaporation rates of retention ponds and dams4. Its effects are also
particularly faced by the agriculture sector where the majority of agricultural activities are heavily dependent on the
pumping of underground water. Rural electrification improves access to groundwater and thereby supports higher
agricultural productivity and better food security. In addition, other income-generating activities are made possible
through access to electricity and thereby informa tion and communications technologies, improving household
resilience.
Proposed intervention
In line with Senegal NDCs5 and its national ambition of universal access to electricity by 2025 (SE4All), this project, to
be executed by the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) under delegation of the Government of Senegal,
aims at deploying 100% solar mini-grids in a thousand (1,000) isolated villages across Senegal, i.e. half of the
most vulnerable, least attractive locations to be electrified, by rural electrification concessionaires. By channelling
2 Official speech of President Macky Sall in Paris in December 2018
3 MPE 2019. SE4All Universal Acces s Operational Plan for Implementation of the rural electrification program
4 USAID, 2017. Climate Change Risk in Senegal: Country risk profile5 See Senegalese NDC energy sector pledges in
section B1, including solar rural electrification targets
5 See Senegalese NDC energy sector pledges in section B1, including solar rural electrification targets

--- Table 1 on Page 7 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence |  |  | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF,
CIF, etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☐ No ☒
 | A.20. Executing Entity |  | Government of the Republic of Senegal represented by the Senegalese Rural
Electrification Agency (ASER)
 | information |  | 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) |  |  | 
This proposal aims to foster the development of off-grid renewable energy mini-grids to reduce CO2 emissions from the
Senegal power sector whilst contributing to electricity access objectives and promoting gender-balanced rural economic
growth. Low-carbon universal access is a critical pillar of the Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) phase II, as the energy
sector was considered one of the greatest success of PSE phase I2,with national power generation increasing two-fold
between 2012 and 2018, and 20% of the energy mix derived from clean energy sources.
Currently, only 42% of Senegal’s rural population has access to electricity. Electricity access rate is still relatively low
and reveals a great disparity between urban and rural populations, with regional disparities that are even more dramatic
in terms of the level of coverage. With coverage rates ranging from 12% in Kedougou to 70% in Dakar, only five other
regions (Diourbel, Saint-Louis, Matam,Thiès, Ziguinchor) have been able to achieve an electrical coverage rate of at
least 50%. Two regions (Kolda and Kedougou) have a coverage rate of less than 20%. At the departmental level,
Salémata, Medina Yoro Foula, Ranerou and Saraya have an electrical coverage rate of less than 10%3. These low
rates are due to excessively high costs of investment and operations, dispersal and low level of consumption, yet the
benefits of rural electrification are undisputed, significantly improving the quality of life of communities and increasing
productivity. Distributed renewable energy generation also help increase the reliability and resilience of power supply
by making it less vulnerable to disruptions caused by natural disasters. Multiple socio-economic and socio-ecological
co-benefits can further contribute to improving living standards of the communities.
The Government of Senegal is thus committed to tackle this issue and has pledged to reach universal energy access
by 2025. Meanwhile, lack of resources means that any improvements are likely to be met through carbon-intensive grid
extensions and diesel-powered generators (lower upfront cost). However, the Government of Senegal (GoS) has
committed, through the Paris Agreement (2015) and COP21, to contribute to the international collective effort to mitigate
climate change emissions and put in place adequate adaptation measures. In the energy sector, this commitment has
resulted in the definition of strategies and the implementation of priority actions presented in the Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) of Senegal.
The objective of the proposed project is to support the GoS by providing concessional co-funding needed to mobilise
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market and achieve its low-carbon rural electrification
goals as proclaimed in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Senegal, under the form of sovereign loan and
grant de-risking local operators’ involvement while alleviating GoS tariff compensation burden following harmonization.
Climate change in Senegal is predicted to affect average yearly rainfall with an increase in rain intensity leading to
flooding, along with increased air temperatures and sea level rise. Its effects on water resources thus include stressors
affecting hydropower production, which contributes more than 10 percent to the country’s electricity supply and is
susceptible to variable rainfall and increased evaporation rates of retention ponds and dams4. Its effects are also
particularly faced by the agriculture sector where the majority of agricultural activities are heavily dependent on the
pumping of underground water. Rural electrification improves access to groundwater and thereby supports higher
agricultural productivity and better food security. In addition, other income-generating activities are made possible
through access to electricity and thereby informa tion and communications technologies, improving household
resilience.
Proposed intervention
In line with Senegal NDCs5 and its national ambition of universal access to electricity by 2025 (SE4All), this project, to
be executed by the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) under delegation of the Government of Senegal,
aims at deploying 100% solar mini-grids in a thousand (1,000) isolated villages across Senegal, i.e. half of the
most vulnerable, least attractive locations to be electrified, by rural electrification concessionaires. By channelling |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 7 ---
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 3
AAAA
concessional funding and by easing the connection of beneficiaries and facilitating access to productive users of
energy, the project will accelerate and perpetuate the electrification of communities that remain outside the perimeter
of PPER (Rural Electrification Priority Plan’) private concessionaires and Senelec intervention.
The project will mobilize concessional resources from the GCF to engage private sector local operators with acceptable
risk-reward conditions, complementing BOAD co-financing and Senegal resources mobilized towards 1,000 newly
electrified villages through 100% solar photovoltaic mini-networks. In addition, a grant is requested for strengthening
the capacity of the main rural electrification stakeholders, for facilitating first connection access to most vulnerable
eligible social services and women & youth-entrepreneurs based on the experience of JAPPALE coupons6 and lessons
learned from PPERs, and a loaned guarantee facility for catalyzing access to local micro-financing towards productive
and gender users of energy.
Climate impacts
Whilst the energy sector is very exposed to diverse impacts of climate variability and change through changes in energy
supply (e.g. disruption of operations and distribution) and demand (growing populations and evolving power needs), it
is a strong contributor to the drivers of climate change, namely through the emission of greenhouse gases.
The proposed project seeks to place Senegal on a low-carbon energy trajectory relative to its energy sector high-GHG
baseline. By benefitting 38,917 newly electrified rural households within 5 years (32 MW total solar PV mini-grids
ultimate capacity) across 1,000 villages, it will result in an estimated 45,098 tCO annual emission reductions
2
impact i.e. 1.13 M. tCO to be avoided over its technical lifetime, resulting in an abatement cost of 28.8
2
GCF€/tCO e.
2
Moreover, access to electricity from renewable sources will co-benefit the resilience of rural livelihoods to climate
variability and their adaptive capacity related to disaster risk reduction and recovery, alleviating climate stress and
improving access to water and agriculture productivity, health and community empowerment, and information and
communic ation services.
6 See section B.3 for description of this innovative voucher system helping rural households in Senegal afford the fees to
connect to electricity solutions that b est fit their needs

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 4
BBBB
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF KEY CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND DRIVERS IN SENEGAL
Senegal’s climate is generally characterized as tropical, with one rainy season from May–November and a dry season dominated
by dry, hot harmattan winds between December and April. Temperatures and rainfall vary across regions, with rainfall generally
increasing from north to south and temperatures increasing from coast to interior. Along the coast, temperatures are cool, ranging
from 17–27°C. In the northern Sahelian zone, the climate is characterized by cool nights (minimum of 14°C) and hot days (maximum
of 40°C). The north has a longer dry season from November–May, and receives about 360 mm of rainfall the rest of the year. Moving
south, rainfall increases and reaches up to 1,500mm per year in the extreme south. Hot and humid, the southern region averages
temperatures of 30°C throughout the year.
Climate trends since the 1960s include7:
• Increase in average temperatures by 0.9°C, with higher rates of warming in the north and more pronounced between
October and December.
• Twenty-seven more ‘hot’ nights per year since 1960.
• Decline in rainfall; although rains have partially recovered since the mid-1990s, they have not recovered their pre-1970
levels and remain 15 percent below the long-term average.
• Rainfall decline is most significant in the southern region during the wet season (June– September).
Regional key climate hazards and climate projections consistently make West Africa one of the world’s most vulnerable regions to
climate variability and change, in particular at the energy sector level (Figure 1):
Source: USAID, 2018. Climate Risk Profile: West Africa
7 USGS 2012. A Climate Trend Analysis of Senegal

--- Table 1 on Page 9 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF KEY CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND DRIVERS IN SENEGAL
Senegal’s climate is generally characterized as tropical, with one rainy season from May–November and a dry season dominated
by dry, hot harmattan winds between December and April. Temperatures and rainfall vary across regions, with rainfall generally
increasing from north to south and temperatures increasing from coast to interior. Along the coast, temperatures are cool, ranging
from 17–27°C. In the northern Sahelian zone, the climate is characterized by cool nights (minimum of 14°C) and hot days (maximum
of 40°C). The north has a longer dry season from November–May, and receives about 360 mm of rainfall the rest of the year. Moving
south, rainfall increases and reaches up to 1,500mm per year in the extreme south. Hot and humid, the southern region averages
temperatures of 30°C throughout the year.
Climate trends since the 1960s include7:
• Increase in average temperatures by 0.9°C, with higher rates of warming in the north and more pronounced between
October and December.
• Twenty-seven more ‘hot’ nights per year since 1960.
• Decline in rainfall; although rains have partially recovered since the mid-1990s, they have not recovered their pre-1970
levels and remain 15 percent below the long-term average.
• Rainfall decline is most significant in the southern region during the wet season (June– September).
Regional key climate hazards and climate projections consistently make West Africa one of the world’s most vulnerable regions to
climate variability and change, in particular at the energy sector level (Figure 1):
Source: USAID, 2018. Climate Risk Profile: West Africa |  | 

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 5
BBBB
The four climate indices that are most relevant for the energy sector in Senegal and West Africa are as follow:
• Mean Annual Temperatures (projected to increase by 2.1°C in 2050 based
on RCP 8.5 high emissions scenario used in IPCC 5th Assessment
Report)8
• Temperature Seasonal Variability (changes in cooling degree days that
capture the amount of heat that society would like to reduce by period
through some form of active cooling)
• Extreme Events Precipitation ( s warmer air has a higher capacity to carry
moisture in form of water vapor, future climate raises the likelihood for
strong rainfall events and paarticularly towards extremes), while Mean
Annual Precipitation will fall by -46.0mm in 2050
• Drought / Wet-conditions Standardized Precipitation Evapotransp iration
Index (raising pressure on water resources for direct hydropower
production or indirectly through power plants cooling)
Figure 2: Observed and projected change in June–September rainfall and temperature for 1960–2039 (top),
together with smoothed rainfall and air temperature time series for June–September for southern and north-
central Senegal (bottom right). Mean rainfall and temperature are based on the 1920–1969-time period.
Actually, more extreme heavy rainfall events, and reduced river flow in some areas, are projected to increase evaporation and
siltation, damage to dams and turbines creating challenges for hydropower development hence the relevant diversification of energy
sources promoted by the solar rural electrification project, as opposed to the predominant strategy of national grid extension.
;
Research estimates that by 2050, climate effects exacerbating unsuitable development practices will reduce hydropower po tential
in the Volta River Basin by nearly 50%. River flow in Senegal and the Gambia will decrease by 8 percent and 22 percent, respectively.
Regional hydropower systems at risk on both Senegalese cross-border river basins are:
 Organisation for the Promotion of the Senegal River (OMVS) which includes Senegal, Mauritania, Guinea and Mali around
common hydropower assets:
• Manantali hydropower plant (200MW operating since 2002, 30% owned by Senegal)
• Felou hydropower plant (62 MW operating since 2013, co-sponsored by Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal)
• Gouina hydropower plant (140 MW, in construction in Mali)
• Koukoutamba hydropower plant (294 MW in construction, which will be OMVS’ fourth and largest hydropower project)
 Gambia River Basin Organisation (OMVG) which covers the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal shared hydropower
project(s):
• Kaleta (240 MW operated by Guinea since 2015, exporting 30% of its power to Senegal and Guinea-Bissau)
• Sambangalou (128 MW, in construction, owned at 48% by Senegal)
• Souapiti (450 MW, in construction)
 Multiple regional interconnections as part of the West African Power Pool (around 1/3 of annual electricity consumption within
ECOWAS is exchanged on the interconnected network)
Multi-variable climate vulnerabilities of the region’s energy sector are summarized in below Table 1:
8 at the shorter horizon of 2035, scenario RCP4.5 forecasts for Senegal are:
- Cumulative rainfall decrease of 9.4 0 mm
- Rainy season start delays of 5 days ±3.34
- Rainy season duration reduction by 8.3 days ±4.46
- Minimal and maximal temperatures are expected to increase by 0.6-0.7 °C.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 6
BBBB
Source: USAID, 2018. Climate Risk Profile: West Africa
Whilst the energy sector is very exposed to diverse impacts of climate variability and change through changes in energy supply (e.g.
disruption of operations and distribution) and demand (growing populations and evolving power needs), it is a strong contributor to
the drivers of climate change, namely through the emission of greenhouse gases.
According to the World Resources Institute Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (WRI CAIT), 27% of Senegal’s 2011 GHG emissions
arose from energy, making it the second most emitting sector as per below chart (Figure 3). Emissions in the energy sector (Figure
4) are forecast to quadruple by 2030 in the business-as-usual scenario, dominated by fossil fuel consumption (Senegal NDC).
Figure 3: Senegal GHG Emissions by sector (2011) Figure 4: Senegal Energy sector CO2eq emissions forecast 2010-2030 (GgCO2e)
KEY CHALLENGES OF THE ENERGY SECTOR RELATED TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN SENEGAL
Senegal is a regional leader for West Africa, with a reputation of economic and political stability. The country is expected to maintain
its strong rate of economic growth, having registered over 6 percent per annum for the last four years. With a highly urban population
— roughly half is concentrated around cities — the Government of Senegal is focused primarily on grid expansion in urban areas
due to their high population densities and lower expansion costs efforts. However, rural populations, low density and remotely
located, present more challenges than opportunities regarding energy access. With 196,000 square km, 54% of the 15 million
population of Senegal live in rural areas. Whilst the GDP per capita is 1,52 1 $ (2018), over 50% of the rural population lives under
the poverty line. In this context, the energy sector faces three major challenges: (i) meeting the National commitments for clean
energy and mitigation; (ii) responding to the adaptation for beneficiary communities; and (iii) building capacities at institutional level
in the rural electrification subsector.
Meeting the National commitments for clean energy and mitigation
The Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) targets

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 7
BBBB
Following the declaration of the United Nations General Assembly which considered 2012 as “The International Year of Sustainable
Energy for All (SE4ALL)”, an initiative called “global access to sustainable energy for all by 2030” was launched by the UN, in
collaboration with several development partners such as the World Bank, with the main specific objectives to be achieved by 2030
below:
- Guarantee universal access to modern energy services;
- Double the rate of improvement in energy efficiency, and
- Double the share of renewable energies in the overall energy mix.
Senegal joined this initiative and worked to achieve appreciable results in terms of access to electricity: 64% national access rate
and 33.2% in rural areas in 2016, with interesting prospects that leave glimpse the execution of current projects and programs.
Indeed, the Government aimed to reach a rural electrification rate of 60% in 2019 and universal access to sustainable electric
services by 2025.
To achieve these results, the country has mainly used, apart from the grid-connected system, isolated secondary and regional power
plants operating mainly on fossil fuels. These plants have reduced profitability, very high production costs and emit significant
greenhouse gases (GHG). However, Senegal is endowed with a large solar energy resource. Over most of country’s territory, the
solar irradiation is above 2 000 kWh /m2/year for Global Horizontal Irradiation and above 1 800 kWh/m2/year for Direct Normal
Irradiation (Ministere des Energies Renouvelables, 2011). This provides good prospects for photovoltaic solar power projects.
Today, among the 14 regions of Senegal, 9 have an electrical coverage rate of less than 60%. These show a rate of between 31%
and 56%, with the exception of Kédougou and Kolda who are the most disadvantaged with 12% and 17% respectively. These figures
obviously indicate a significant effort is expected in these two regions in particular, but also mask the equation of the absolute
number of localities that remain to be electrified in each region. With the exception of Dakar (4), Kédougou (423), Matam (762),
Sedhiou (748) and Ziguinchor (473), all the other regions each have at least 1,000 localities to be electrified. Overall, 14,519 localities
remain to be electrified and a population of 3,372,458 to be covered by 2025.
Achieving universal access by the end of 2025 is listed as a priority of the GoS Emerging Senegal Plan, translated into a National
Rural Electrification Program (PNER) under implementation according to the following phases:
The National Emergency Program for Rural Electrification (PNUER 2015-2019)
- Accelerating the implementation of Rural Electrification Concessions and Local Initiative Rural Electrification (ERIL)
- Carrying out PNUER projects with State and partner funding
The Complementary Program for Universal Access by 2025
- Implementation of a "Universal Access" investment program
The Complementary Program for Universal Access is structured according to 6 key axes, including the promotion of decentralized
systems through installation of 100% solar or hybrid mini-grids to connect 4% of the remaining rural population whilst 95% will be
connected to the national grid.
Senegal NDC9
Following on from the ratification of the UNFCCC (1994) and the Kyoto Protocol (1991), Senegal has submitted three National
Communications (NC) to the UNFCCC: the First NC was submitted in 1997; the Second NC in 2010; and the Third NC in January
2016). During this period (2011), Senegal also established the National Climate Change Committee (COMNACC) in 2011 and 14
Regional Climate Change Committees (COMRECCs) at regional levels. These committees will orchestrate the implementation of
Senegal’s INDC, which later became its First NDC when Senegal ratified the Paris Agreement in September 2016.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 8
BBBB
Senegal’s NDC targets an economy-widerelative emission reduction of 21%
by 2030 compared to BAU (blending CO2, CH4 and N2O), at an estimated cost
of implementation of6.80 billion USD. The unconditional part of its mitigation
target amounts to 5% reduction while the additional 16% ($5 billionestimated
costs of implementa tion) are conditional on the support of the international
community. Its mitigation objectives span, on the one hand, the pro duction of
electricity from renewable sources and with improved energy efficiency,
including in off-grid areas, the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in
terms of biomass and waste, and the planning of resource mobilization that
involves the implementation of national development strategies, and, on the
other hand, reduction of GHG emissions through energy efficiency in
buildings, transport and industry.
The contribution of the energy sector has been broken down into 3 sub-sectors:
(i) electricity and domestic fuel;
(ii) energy efficiency; and
(iii) transport.
Part of the emissions reduction policy in the sector is based on the increase of renewable energies in electricity production by 30%
by 2030. The above Figure 5 shows the reduction commitments of the corresponding emissions, according to the unconditional
(CDPN) and conditional (CDPN+) scenarios depicted in below Table 2 (electricity sub-sector):
Electricity sub-sector’s unconditional Electricity sub-sector’s conditional (CDPN+) options
(CDPN) options
Programme EnR (Renewable Energies) 1 Programme EnR 2 (2020 - 2025)
 Solar PV: commissioning of an additional capacity of 200 MWc
 Solar PV: power plants of a total
 Wind: commissioning of an additional capacity of 200 MW
capacity of 160 MWc
 Biomass: commissioning of an additional capacity of 50 MW
 Wind: power plants of a total capacity
 Solar – CSP: commissioning of an additional capacity of 50 MW
of 150 MW
 Hydro: commissioning of an additional power generation of 200 GWh in
 Hydro: power plants of a total capacity
2025
of 144 MW / 522 GWh
 Replacement of Jindal 320 MW coal power plant by two Liquefied Natural
Gas Combined Cycle of 400 MW (2025: 200 MW and 2028: 200 MW)
Rural Electrification (PNUER)
 5,000 villages electrified by solar mini-grids for universal access to
 392 villages electrified with solar or
electricity*
hybrid mini-grids (diesel / solar)
* Senegal 2015 NDC number of 5,000 villages suitable for solar mini-grids was recently updated as being 2,348 remaining
vulnerable localities in the latest PNER Operational Plan, of which the proposed project aims at fast-tracking 1,000 – almost half –
with the support of the GCF.
Responding to the adaptation for beneficiary communities
Among climate change threats, Senegal is vulnerable to drought, flooding and related health epidemics. Priority areas for adaptation
measures include agriculture and health sectors with particular attention to promoting access to: (i) weather & climate information
in order to mainly reduce vulnerability to flooding that affects most of the peri-urban populations in one hand, and agricultural lost
and damages due to drought towards rural communities; and (ii) basic installations for achieving communities resilience mainly to
climate-induced health hazards (heath centres) and stress on agriculture (water pumping).
The importance of access to energy in improving the resilience of poor communities to the negative effects of climate change, has
been demonstrated, particularly in the health sectors, access to water for consumption and agriculture (through electrical pumping),
in the diversification of livelihoods and in the field of climate information systems for the establishment of an effective early warning
system. For example, according to the World Health Organization, the world’s poorest populations are more frequently exposed to
number of climate-sensitive diseases from extreme weather events and disasters. However, for many people the basic requirements
for achieving resilience on health, such as a safe energy supply for cold storage of medicines, operation of health centres at night,
etc., are not being met. Climate change implies, in particular, the quality and composition of water which is compromised, thus

--- Table 1 on Page 13 ---
 | Electricity sub-sector’s unconditional |  | Electricity sub-sector’s conditional (CDPN+) options
 | (CDPN) options |  | 
Programme EnR (Renewable Energies) 1
 Solar PV: power plants of a total
capacity of 160 MWc
 Wind: power plants of a total capacity
of 150 MW
 Hydro: power plants of a total capacity
of 144 MW / 522 GWh |  |  | Programme EnR 2 (2020 - 2025)
 Solar PV: commissioning of an additional capacity of 200 MWc
 Wind: commissioning of an additional capacity of 200 MW
 Biomass: commissioning of an additional capacity of 50 MW
 Solar – CSP: commissioning of an additional capacity of 50 MW
 Hydro: commissioning of an additional power generation of 200 GWh in
2025
 Replacement of Jindal 320 MW coal power plant by two Liquefied Natural
Gas Combined Cycle of 400 MW (2025: 200 MW and 2028: 200 MW)
Rural Electrification (PNUER)
 392 villages electrified with solar or
hybrid mini-grids (diesel / solar) |  |  |  5,000 villages electrified by solar mini-grids for universal access to
electricity*

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 9
BBBB
affecting the nutritional status of populations and water security. Severe cholera epidemics have occurred due to floods with major
riverbed overflow and subsequent water contamination. Similarly, salinization is a predominant handicap of public health, at the
origin of the recrudescence of cardiovascular diseases in the regions of Kaolack and Fatick and in Casamance in particular, but also
of dental fluorosis which is rampant in the area, this salinization seriously threatens Casamance.
A safe energy supply is also important to put in place an effective early warning system in allowing populations to have access to
climate information or previsions thanks to their mobile phone which need to be recharged (currently forcing some women to walk
up to 6-7km away), their television sets or radios, and Internet. Agriculture in Senegal is predominantly rain-fed and so erratic
weather patterns present an ever-increasing risk to smallholder farmers across the country. Late onset of rain can lead to a reduced
growing season; unexpected torrential rain and flash-flooding can lead to farmers losing scarce resources of seed, other farm inputs
and labour together with the loss of topsoil, resulting in declining food security. These climate change effects also combine with
socio-economic changes – population growth and competition for scarce resources – to provide challenges to any development
strategy. Being able to anticipate climate fluctuations from a few days to a few months in advance can be decisive in allowing
smallholder farmers to adapt their agricultural practices to compensate. Vulnerability analysis with farmers identified that accurate
and early weather information is essential for farmers to mitigate risk and practice effective adaptation measures.Information may
be available both internationally and through national meteorological agencies and would be access via mobile phone, TV or radio
and help overcome the challenges of other early warning systems that struggle to get the information down to the “last mile” to
farmers on the ground, especially farmers with low literacy levels.
In terms of livelihoods, Senegal women and youth are very active in the agricultural value chain and they are found in the processing
and petty trade segments. In the processing chain, they are organized into women's promotion groups (GPF) or economic interest
groups (GIE) or micro enterprises to jointly address the challenges and issues of empowerment. They face many constraints,
especially those related to the correct supply of inputs and other factors of production such as energy. The poor access to productive
energy limits their activities of transformation, storage of raw materials, conservation and packaging of finished products. Hence
rural electrification can support more income-generating activities and thereby increase the resilience of vulnerable people and
households.
Giving that all of the sectors targeted for the growth of the Senegalese national economy, such as agriculture, livestock, fishing,
tourism, health and nutrition issues, access to water, remain vulnerable to the effects of climate change, the Government of Senegal
has made the issue of adaptation to climate change a priority as part of the country’s NDCs. To this end, a special place has been
given to the promotion of climate information and the establishment of an early warning system which requires access to reliable
and sustainable energy.
Building capacities at institutional level in the rural electrification subsector
Under the Priority Rural Electrification Program (PPER), Senegal is divided into 11 overall services territories: those belonging to
Senelec and 10 territories slated for concession to private operators. Operators for each territory are responsible for all generation,
transmission, and distribution within those territories and are mandated to undertake grid extension. From 2008–2013, six of these
concessions were successfully tendered to private consortiums, while the remaining four concessions were officially granted to
Senelec in late 2018:
Table 3 below details the six concessions awarded to private operators for 25 years, following international procurement process,
and remaining four concessions attributed to SENELEC:
Geographic concession Private concessionnaire Concession Entry into
signature date force
 Dagana-Podor-Saint Louis Compagnie Marocco-Sénégalaise 30/05/2008 29/03/2011
d’Electricité (COMASEL Louga)
 Louga-Linguère-Kébémer Compagnie Marocco-Sénégalaise 19/11/2009 29/11/2011
d’Electricité (COMASEL Louga)
 Kaffrine-Tambacounda-Kédougou Energie Rurale Africaine (ERA) 29/06/2011 24/12/2013
 Kaolack-Nioro-Fatick-Gossas Electricité Du RIP (EDR) 22/11/2012 12/11/2014
 Kolda-Vélingara Kolda Energy 29/07/2013 09/04/2015
 Mbour SCL Energie Solutions 09/11/2012 16/11/2018

--- Table 1 on Page 14 ---
Geographic concession | Private concessionnaire | Concession
signature date | Entry into
force
 Dagana-Podor-Saint Louis | Compagnie Marocco-Sénégalaise
d’Electricité (COMASEL Louga) | 30/05/2008 | 29/03/2011
 Louga-Linguère-Kébémer | Compagnie Marocco-Sénégalaise
d’Electricité (COMASEL Louga) | 19/11/2009 | 29/11/2011
 Kaffrine-Tambacounda-Kédougou | Energie Rurale Africaine (ERA) | 29/06/2011 | 24/12/2013
 Kaolack-Nioro-Fatick-Gossas | Electricité Du RIP (EDR) | 22/11/2012 | 12/11/2014
 Kolda-Vélingara | Kolda Energy | 29/07/2013 | 09/04/2015
 Mbour | SCL Energie Solutions | 09/11/2012 | 16/11/2018

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 10
BBBB
 Sédhiou - Ziguinchor - Oussouye - Bignona
 Foundiougne
 Matam – Bakel SENELEC
 Diourbel - Bambey - Mbacké - Rufisque - Thiès -
Tivaouane
The Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) was formally created by decree in 1999 with the sole aim of promoting rural
electrification. The Agency is autonomous, however it functions under the tutelage of the Ministry for Energy and the Ministry of
Finance, whilst also reporting to the CRSE. Its roles and responsibilities are laid out
in Article 30 of the 1998 Electricity law which include:
 Development of rural electrification programs in line with national plans;
 Provision of financial and technical assistance to support rural electrification initiatives;
 Encouragement of ‘bottom-up’ rural electrification project proposals from private operators;
 Organisation of invitations to tender for ‘top-down’ electricity distribution concessions;
 Provide loans and grants to licensed entities that operate in rural areas;
 Supervision of the contracted installations resulting from these activities;
 Manage the Rural Electrification Fund.
Table 4 below provides an overview of mini-grids coordinated by ASER over the past 15 years:
YEAR PROGRAM / DONOR NUMBER OF MINIGRIDS
2005-2006 Isofoton-ASER/ SPAIN Govt 9
2008 PERACO-ASER/Govt of Netherlands 18
2010 PERACO-ASER/Govt of Netherlands 70
2011 Daye Ouwens-ASER/ Govt of Netherland 10
2011 Merl-ASER/Govt Austria 27
2019 ECREE-ASER / UE Facility 40
Source: USAID Power Africa 2019 – Off-Grid market assessment for Senegal
In addition to this situation, from 2000 to 2019, ASER has realized more than 12 Grid extension projects enabling the
electrification of more than 3,000 villages.
Issues contributing to the unsustainability of O&M included non-cost-reflective tariffs, under-sizing of the grid, and lack of metering
and monitoring. In response to the former, the concept unrolled end of 2019 behind harmonization is that the government now
compensates operators for the difference between their cost-reflective tariff and the harmonized tariff, implying systematic metering.
The GoS pays th is compensation through its Special Fund for Energy Sector Support (Fonds Special de Soutien au Secteur de
l’Energie).
The grid expansion modeling for 2025 demonstrates a clear densification of the Medium Voltage network planned in the western
parts of the country, where population density and consumption are higher, as well than a significant number of off-grid solutions in
the eastern part of the country. This densification is made in great majority by ramifications of the existing Medium Voltage
backbones and planned.
There is a need to strengthen operational capacities of the solar rural electrification stakeholders, especially ASER, for planning,
implementing and monitoring of the 100%-photovoltaic mini-grids component
PROPOSED INTERVENTION
The proposed project intends to uphold the renewable share of Senegal’s ambition to reach universal energy access by 2025 by
fostering solar-powered mini-grids development in isolated villages that are not connected to the national electricity grid, which would
still rely on fossil fuels or suffer from unmet needs under the baseline scenario. GCF funds are sought for financial and technical
assistance to align Senegal energy access program with its NDC, decarbonizing and climate-proofing rural electrification with the
following outputs:

--- Table 1 on Page 15 ---
 Sédhiou - Ziguinchor - Oussouye - Bignona
 Foundiougne
 Matam – Bakel
 Diourbel - Bambey - Mbacké - Rufisque - Thiès -
Tivaouane | SENELEC

--- Table 2 on Page 15 ---
YEAR | PROGRAM / DONOR | NUMBER OF MINIGRIDS
2005-2006 | Isofoton-ASER/ SPAIN Govt | 9
2008 | PERACO-ASER/Govt of Netherlands | 18
2010 | PERACO-ASER/Govt of Netherlands | 70
2011 | Daye Ouwens-ASER/ Govt of Netherland | 10
2011 | Merl-ASER/Govt Austria | 27
2019 | ECREE-ASER / UE Facility | 40

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 11
BBBB
• strengthened operational capacities of the solar rural electrification stakeholders for planning, implementing and monitoring
of the 100%-photovoltaic mini-grids component
• 38,900 households electrified by 1,000 mini-grids within 5 years,
• enhanced access to 3,739 gender-balanced productive uses equipment and social services in all the targeted villages
Having opted for the concept of rural electrification concession and public-private partnership to make the private sector a major
player in rural electrification, Senegal has already been able to mobilize significant funding - over 67 billion CFA (EUR 102 M) raised
through KfW-Ipex.
Together with BOAD co-funding and the GCF-requested remaining financial need, this 1,000 solar mini-grids project will generate
direct emission reductions of 45,098 tonnes of CO2 equivalent per year over 25-y lifetime. ASER rural electrification program (grid
extensions, solar home systems and distinct mini-grids that will be clearly demarked from the GCF project) being already registered
under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), its monitoring and reporting of emission reductions will be conducted in
accordance with the UNFCCC-approved renewab1le0-powered rural electrification CDM methodology AMS III.BL “Integrated
methodology for electrification of communities”. The CDM offers a recognised MRV framework that will enable BOAD to
transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time and subsequently report progress to the GCF as well as integrate
them into Senegal’s NDC accounting and reporting. While separate carbon finance from the World Bank PoA replenishes the
JAPPALE household connection voucher scheme, however, the GCF supported activities will not result in carbon credits issuance
and trading, unlike the CDM-supported complementary program.
In parallel of the CDM PoA synergies, ASER will coordinate the collaboration between other relevant initiatives in both Senegal and
neighbouring countries in order to optimise the project outcome. These include: Lighting Africa’s initiative in Senegal11, the regional
off-grid electrification project (ROGEP) overseen by the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, and the
World Bank’s Scaling Solar, which represents a significant driving force in achieving Senegal’s NDC targets with regards to solar
PV installed capacity, yet outside of the scope of the GCF project.
Linkages between energy access, resilience and adaptation co-benefits
 Access to weather & climate information: rural electrification will improve access to forecasts, early warnings systems
knowledge & best practices through Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) such as radio, TV, mobile phones,
and reliable, affordable and resilient types of energy services
 Livelihood viability: rural electrification fosters new income and employment sources, water pumping and agriculture
processes and irrigation systems that improve productivity and food access, efficient time savings for new enterprises, and
more climate-adapted productive users
 Gender circumstances: rural electrification opens opportunities for women empowerment, social development and
wellbeing, improved health and access to health services particularly beneficial for women and children, improved socio-
economic status by access to better education, and time savings allowing time to be used more productively
B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram)
Senegal’s off-grid electricity market and barriers
The solar PV market is growing in Senegal, and the country is showing its
intention to become the solar leader in the region, tapping on its favourable
photovoltaic power potential (opposite Figure 6). However, these efforts are
almost exclusively focused on large-scale implementation – in only 2017, 6
grid-connected PV plants are being connected for a cumulative capacity of
113.5 MW. The vast majority of this power feeds back to urban areas.
The attractiveness of decentralised solar PV mini-grids and solar home
system (SHS) products is also becoming apparent due to decreasing costs
of solar panels and related technologies; however, implementation of these
technologies has remained limited to date. This is largely due to access to
finance barriers and lack of technical expertise, which this project aims to
tackle.
Figure 6: World Bank, Solargis, 2017.
10 UNFCCC (2018) Senegal Rural Electrification Program. CDM programme documentation is available here. Note that
none of the grids to be developed un der this project will be included in the CDM PoA.
11 Lighting Africa – Senegal. More information available at: http://bit.ly/2eXfl2m

--- Table 1 on Page 16 ---
• strengthened operational capacities of the solar rural electrification stakeholders for planning, implementing and monitoring
of the 100%-photovoltaic mini-grids component
• 38,900 households electrified by 1,000 mini-grids within 5 years,
• enhanced access to 3,739 gender-balanced productive uses equipment and social services in all the targeted villages
Having opted for the concept of rural electrification concession and public-private partnership to make the private sector a major
player in rural electrification, Senegal has already been able to mobilize significant funding - over 67 billion CFA (EUR 102 M) raised
through KfW-Ipex.
Together with BOAD co-funding and the GCF-requested remaining financial need, this 1,000 solar mini-grids project will generate
direct emission reductions of 45,098 tonnes of CO2 equivalent per year over 25-y lifetime. ASER rural electrification program (grid
extensions, solar home systems and distinct mini-grids that will be clearly demarked from the GCF project) being already registered
under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), its monitoring and reporting of emission reductions will be conducted in
accordance with the UNFCCC-approved renewab1le0-powered rural electrification CDM methodology AMS III.BL “Integrated
methodology for electrification of communities”. The CDM offers a recognised MRV framework that will enable BOAD to
transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time and subsequently report progress to the GCF as well as integrate
them into Senegal’s NDC accounting and reporting. While separate carbon finance from the World Bank PoA replenishes the
JAPPALE household connection voucher scheme, however, the GCF supported activities will not result in carbon credits issuance
and trading, unlike the CDM-supported complementary program.
In parallel of the CDM PoA synergies, ASER will coordinate the collaboration between other relevant initiatives in both Senegal and
neighbouring countries in order to optimise the project outcome. These include: Lighting Africa’s initiative in Senegal11, the regional
off-grid electrification project (ROGEP) overseen by the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, and the
World Bank’s Scaling Solar, which represents a significant driving force in achieving Senegal’s NDC targets with regards to solar
PV installed capacity, yet outside of the scope of the GCF project.
Linkages between energy access, resilience and adaptation co-benefits
 Access to weather & climate information: rural electrification will improve access to forecasts, early warnings systems
knowledge & best practices through Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) such as radio, TV, mobile phones,
and reliable, affordable and resilient types of energy services
 Livelihood viability: rural electrification fosters new income and employment sources, water pumping and agriculture
processes and irrigation systems that improve productivity and food access, efficient time savings for new enterprises, and
more climate-adapted productive users
 Gender circumstances: rural electrification opens opportunities for women empowerment, social development and
wellbeing, improved health and access to health services particularly beneficial for women and children, improved socio-
economic status by access to better education, and time savings allowing time to be used more productively |  | 
 | B.2. Theory of change (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages plus diagram) | 
Senegal’s off-grid electricity market and barriers
The solar PV market is growing in Senegal, and the country is showing its
intention to become the solar leader in the region, tapping on its favourable
photovoltaic power potential (opposite Figure 6). However, these efforts are
almost exclusively focused on large-scale implementation – in only 2017, 6
grid-connected PV plants are being connected for a cumulative capacity of
113.5 MW. The vast majority of this power feeds back to urban areas.
The attractiveness of decentralised solar PV mini-grids and solar home
system (SHS) products is also becoming apparent due to decreasing costs
of solar panels and related technologies; however, implementation of these
technologies has remained limited to date. This is largely due to access to
finance barriers and lack of technical expertise, which this project aims to
tackle.
Figure 6: World Bank, Solargis, 2017. |  | 

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 12
BBBB
The majority of the decentralised energy provision services currently in place in Senegal have been implemented in the 3 ‘top-down’
PPER pilot concessions of Dagana-Podor-Saint Louis, Louga-Linguère-Kébémer and Kaffrine-Tambacounda-Kédougou. Despite
the documented potential, these initial concessions have only delivered a fraction of their planned results in their first implementation
phase. Progress in the first half of 2018 was insufficient to meet the 30% electrification target for this first phase due to the slow
start-up of dealers, the high connection costs and the difference between the rates applied by the dealers and those of SENELEC
making the cost per kWh higher in rural areas than in urban areas. In addition, local financial institutions have limite,d familiarity with
renewable energy investments, and project finance at attractive terms (e.g. cost of capital, tenors) is not widely available in Senegal.
As of end of 2018, 4,138 rural villages have been electrified out of 21,170 rural villages in total and 2,513 rural villages are already
under development; hence 14,519 villages are still awaiting electrification, which represents 2.3 million inhabitants to address by
2025.
In parallel to the paradigm shift in terms of avoiding substantial GHG emissions for the country by diversifying energy supply from
thermal-powered national grid extensions, solar rural electrification can tackle established climate vulnerabilities of off-grid
communities to health & water sanitation, agricultural & economic productivity as well as empower women and young populations
to build more climate informed & resilient livelihoods. Droughts, floods and other severe weather events indeed have serious
consequences for rural livelihoods and economies, pushing vulnerable communities further into poverty – all the more as climate
variability and change can make these events more frequent and more damaging.
Besides households, solar energy could indeed power a myriad of different productive activities that can be mechanized across
agriculture, industry and commerce, transforming people lives while avoiding emissions. These include appliances for trades-people
such as sewing machines and carpentry tools, equipment for farmers such as water pumps and processing machines, and for retail
outlets such as refrigerators and blenders. The productive use sector is dominated by pumping, however, limited development has
occurred around solar mills or regarding cold chain applications. Given the importance of agriculture in predominantly rural off-grid
areas and since close to 50% (over 750,000) of Senegalese households are active in the agricultural sector, a focus can thus be
made on water pumping/irrigation, refrigeration and cooling, and processing use cases12:
 Water pumping & irrigation - The area of land in Senegal with good potential for irrigation is estimated at 497,500 ha.
Electric and diesel pumps are frequently used, e.g. pumping for banana plantations.13
 Agro-processing - the most important agricultural products in terms of gross production value include
groundnuts and rice, before milk, hence an established potential for solar-power milling, threshing, and drying.
 Refrigeration & cooling – since over 450,000 households in Senegal are involved in livestock breeding, the potential in this
market is significant. It is estimated that an installed capacity of close to 20 MW would be required to serve all livestock
farmers for milk storage.14
In the sector of social services, the project’s focus also targets safe energy supply for cold storage of medicines, operation of
health centres at night, and effective Information & Communication Technologies and early warning systems allowing populations
to have access to climate information or previsions.
However, several obstacles still prevent the full realization of solar power potential for servicing communities and productive users15:
 Information-wise, the advantages and possibilities of solar energy are poorly known and sometimes misunderstood. Users
do not necessarily have the right information on quality or reliability of solar products on the market, nor enough visibility on
the costs as compared to their limited ability and willingness to pay. Required implementation capacities include technical,
transactional, marketing and communication expertise.
 Upfront investment costs of solar infrastructures and equipment are out of the affordability range of most households and
rural microenterprises16. Available financial resources rates and maturities mismatch real needs from operators and end-
users, both towards traditional financial institutions and households credit sources.
 Incentives are unclear in the context of an evolving regulatory sector, existing concessions model update, applicable tax
and tariff, resulting in frustrations among the private sector. Focusing on distribution channel efficiency, tax/fiscal policies
and financing costs is necessary for facilitating the uptake of productive applications to serve as anchor loads and sustain
solar mini-grids business models.
12 https://www.get-invest.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/GETinvest-Market-Insights_SEN_PV_Guide_2019.pdf
13 Limited information is available ab out the exact number of traditional pumps in operation in the country with a frequently
stated number — from sector stakeholders in country — being 25,000.
14 Using the data from Progrès-Lait led by ASER & ENDA Energie, covering 100 milk conservation platforms by solar
systems with 20kWp batteries
15 Cartographie du secteur de l’énergie solaire au Sénégal. 2017
16 https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/PULSE-Full-Study.pdf

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 13
BBBB
Recognising this, the Ministry of Energy and ASER planned to adapt the financing model to be applied across all 10 concessions to
help overcome the access to affordable finance barrier currently hampering progress, hand-in-hand with efforts to harmonise
electricity tariffs nationwide in order to alleviate the current pricing disparities witnessed in the ‘pilot concessions’. Outside of the
concessions and grid extension-targeted localities (7,559), remaining off-grid solar-targeted villages thus call for the following shift
framework to meet Senegal’s rural electrification Nationally Determined Contribution and Universal Access ambitions:
Figure 7 : Theory of change diagram
Table 5 below provides details of the project’s objectives achievement logic:
Barrier removal actions to be undertaken by the project Assumptions underlying the project actions
 Capacity building of the project’s key stakeholdersfor  Senegal politically recognized rural vulnerabilities to
enabling solar mini-grids deployment framework, starting with climate change and its Rural Electrification National
the end-user beneficiaries’ awareness and appropria tion, the Plan offers potential for 100% solar electrification in
socially-equitable competencies of ASER-hosted Project remaining 2,348 off-grid villages
Management Unit and gender-based community groups, and  Senegal aims to integrate climate change mitigation
the environmental expertise and knowledge management into institutions that exist and can host and retain
required upstream and downstream trained staff
 Concessional co-financing of the low-carbon power  GCF involvement brings down the WACC to an
generation assets to de-risk local operators’ participation and acceptable level to Senegalese treasury
secure the best combination of tariff and service from the  Private operators are interested in investing low
conceded solar energy mini-grid networks, meters and public upfront capital risk
lighting  Appropriate micro-finance network is available in
 Incentives for connection of eligible social services (such as rural areas
Information & Communication Technologies, health centers  Households are aware of climate change and have
and schools), women & youth-entrepreneurs to the PV mini- the capacity to pay for clean energy
grids and mechanism to facilitate access to resilient productive

--- Table 1 on Page 18 ---
Barrier removal actions to be undertaken by the project | Assumptions underlying the project actions
 Capacity building of the project’s key stakeholdersfor
enabling solar mini-grids deployment framework, starting with
the end-user beneficiaries’ awareness and appropria tion, the
socially-equitable competencies of ASER-hosted Project
Management Unit and gender-based community groups, and
the environmental expertise and knowledge management
required upstream and downstream
 Concessional co-financing of the low-carbon power
generation assets to de-risk local operators’ participation and
secure the best combination of tariff and service from the
conceded solar energy mini-grid networks, meters and public
lighting
 Incentives for connection of eligible social services (such as
Information & Communication Technologies, health centers
and schools), women & youth-entrepreneurs to the PV mini-
grids and mechanism to facilitate access to resilient productive |  Senegal politically recognized rural vulnerabilities to
climate change and its Rural Electrification National
Plan offers potential for 100% solar electrification in
remaining 2,348 off-grid villages
 Senegal aims to integrate climate change mitigation
into institutions that exist and can host and retain
trained staff
 GCF involvement brings down the WACC to an
acceptable level to Senegalese treasury
 Private operators are interested in investing low
upfront capital risk
 Appropriate micro-finance network is available in
rural areas
 Households are aware of climate change and have
the capacity to pay for clean energy

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 14
BBBB
equipment financing through microfinance (such as water  Rural energy development success builds on
boreholes, refrigerators), climate information and early warning extensive community mobilization, and capacity
building for efficient electricity use
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages)
Overall Objective
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to reducing GHG emissions by boosting the solar PV mini-grids component of
the country’s ambitious goal of reaching universal energy access17 in 2025 by providing concessional co-funding needed to mobilise
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market, thus supporting the achievement of Senegal’s Nationally
Determined Contribution, which mentions rural electrification as a key objective. Vulnerable and geographically dispersed rural
communities currently disconnected from any grid are the key beneficiaries of this program, with a special focus on women and
children through productive uses, community services and early warning systems.
To meet Senegal’s target pledged under the SE4ALL initiative, a national rural electrification investment program has been prepared
by the government. The execution of the program is delegated to the Agence Sénégalaise d'Electrification Rurale (ASER), the
Senegalese rural electrification agency, on the basis of an Operational Plan released in December 2019. The overall 2019-2025
Complementary Program for Universal Access is valued at FCFA 690 billion (USD 1.17 billion), which mostly covers a) medium-
voltage grid extension; and b) rural mini-grids electrification investments. Financial support from the Green Clima te Fund is
requested to contribute concessional and grant co-finance to triple its solar mini-grids electrification component for the
benefit of 344,000 inhabitants (4% of the 8.64 million rural population).
GCF Project’s components
The project presented for the GCF’s consideration targets a FCFA 130 billion (EUR 198.7 million) investment package pursuing
decentralised, renewable energy generation in rural communities, through 100% solar PV mini-grids as a sustainable, climate-
friendly solution for vulnerable communities’ electricity access. The project is to be implemented between 2021 and 2025 by ASER
as the Delegated Executing Entity by the State of Senegal, nationwide.
Of this amount, FCFA 47 billion (EUR 71.7 million) of concessional, sovereign loan from GCF is to be dedicated to procuring and
installing solar mini-grids, lowering up-front risk for private sector to 5% of the investment costs to step-in and operate the solar
power mini-grids assets (Component 2). FCFA 940 million (EUR 1.4 million) of grant will be dedicated to Technical Assistance
(Component 1) and Project Management, besides FCFA 1.5 billion (EUR 2.3 million) of financial incentives for productive use
(Component 3). The grant will cover two components: (i) the provision of technical assistance – transactional, marketing and
communication expertise to enable the uptake of productive uses including a gender equality promotion program to ensure women
and children noticeably benefit from the realised electrif ication efforts, and (ii) the financial incentive for community services and
productive users connection through redeemable vouchers, while the productive equipment acquisition through microcredit
guarantees will be loaned.
17 ‘Access’ as defined by the multi-tier framework developed by World Bank under the Sustainable Energy 4 All initiative.
This multi-attribute framework includ es seven dimensions - Capacity, Duration, Reliability, Quality, Affordability, Legality,
Safety

--- Table 1 on Page 19 ---
 | equipment financing through microfinance (such as water
boreholes, refrigerators), climate information and early warning |  Rural energy development success builds on
extensive community mobilization, and capacity
building for efficient electricity use |  | 
 | B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2000 words, approximately 4 pages) |  |  | 
Overall Objective
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to reducing GHG emissions by boosting the solar PV mini-grids component of
the country’s ambitious goal of reaching universal energy access17 in 2025 by providing concessional co-funding needed to mobilise
private sector participation in the domestic renewable energy market, thus supporting the achievement of Senegal’s Nationally
Determined Contribution, which mentions rural electrification as a key objective. Vulnerable and geographically dispersed rural
communities currently disconnected from any grid are the key beneficiaries of this program, with a special focus on women and
children through productive uses, community services and early warning systems.
To meet Senegal’s target pledged under the SE4ALL initiative, a national rural electrification investment program has been prepared
by the government. The execution of the program is delegated to the Agence Sénégalaise d'Electrification Rurale (ASER), the
Senegalese rural electrification agency, on the basis of an Operational Plan released in December 2019. The overall 2019-2025
Complementary Program for Universal Access is valued at FCFA 690 billion (USD 1.17 billion), which mostly covers a) medium-
voltage grid extension; and b) rural mini-grids electrification investments. Financial support from the Green Clima te Fund is
requested to contribute concessional and grant co-finance to triple its solar mini-grids electrification component for the
benefit of 344,000 inhabitants (4% of the 8.64 million rural population).
GCF Project’s components
The project presented for the GCF’s consideration targets a FCFA 130 billion (EUR 198.7 million) investment package pursuing
decentralised, renewable energy generation in rural communities, through 100% solar PV mini-grids as a sustainable, climate-
friendly solution for vulnerable communities’ electricity access. The project is to be implemented between 2021 and 2025 by ASER
as the Delegated Executing Entity by the State of Senegal, nationwide.
Of this amount, FCFA 47 billion (EUR 71.7 million) of concessional, sovereign loan from GCF is to be dedicated to procuring and
installing solar mini-grids, lowering up-front risk for private sector to 5% of the investment costs to step-in and operate the solar
power mini-grids assets (Component 2). FCFA 940 million (EUR 1.4 million) of grant will be dedicated to Technical Assistance
(Component 1) and Project Management, besides FCFA 1.5 billion (EUR 2.3 million) of financial incentives for productive use
(Component 3). The grant will cover two components: (i) the provision of technical assistance – transactional, marketing and
communication expertise to enable the uptake of productive uses including a gender equality promotion program to ensure women
and children noticeably benefit from the realised electrif ication efforts, and (ii) the financial incentive for community services and
productive users connection through redeemable vouchers, while the productive equipment acquisition through microcredit
guarantees will be loaned. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 15
BBBB
Figure 8: Overview of the timing of the proposed investment18
Component 1: Technical Assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders (EUR 3.7 mln19)
Outputs Activities
Activity 1.1.1 - Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and GCF requirements
Output 1.1 - Capacity building of
rural electrification stakeholders
Activity 1.1.2 - Seminars and trips and workshops (technology watch, public consultations,
conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.)
Activity 1.2.1 - gender-relevant community-organizations mapping & tutoring
Output 1.2 - Gender action plan
Activity 1.2.2 - gender-stakeholders training (PMU – local operators – community organizations)
implementation
Activity 1.2.3 - gender-oriented communication campaign
Activity 1.3.1 - E&S measures implementation and monitoring
Output 1.3 - Environmental & social
downstream activities Activity 1.3.2 - Establishment of a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other
electronics)
This component targets capacity building of the project’s key stakeholders (ASER-hosted Project Management Unit, Ministry of
Energy, local operators, rural beneficiaries incl. community-based organizations), to favour the implementation of a sustainable
framework of the delivered services and benefits of the solar mini-grids, starting with the end-user beneficiaries’ climate information,
solar power benefits awareness and appropriation, the technical and administrative competencies of the PMU, gearing gender and
youth institutionalization, and the environmental expertise and knowledge management required upstream and downstream:
To the benefit of the Project Management Unit and the Ministry of Energy
- Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and GCF requirements
- Seminars and trips and workshops (technology watch, public consultations, conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.)
To the benefit of the targeted rural beneficiaries (prioritizing women and young involvement)
- Gender action plan implementing activities (gender-oriented training, awareness raising, and community-organizations
tutoring) in partnership with DER20, leveraging and rolling-out its framework in the remote villages of the GCF intervention
18 other programme activities (including PPER) are not directly related to the GCF project and do not impact on the
achievement of the GCF project’s go als
19 excluding Project Management Costs of EUR 0.4 mln
20 The General Delegation for Women and Young Entrepreneurs has been set up by the President of Senegal to help boost
entrepreneurship, which is the main occupation of the Senegalese population, while promoting economic, financial and
social inclusion as well as territorial equity.

--- Table 1 on Page 20 ---
Outputs | Activities
Output 1.1 - Capacity building of
rural electrification stakeholders | Activity 1.1.1 - Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and GCF requirements
 | Activity 1.1.2 - Seminars and trips and workshops (technology watch, public consultations,
conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.)
Output 1.2 - Gender action plan
implementation | Activity 1.2.1 - gender-relevant community-organizations mapping & tutoring
 | Activity 1.2.2 - gender-stakeholders training (PMU – local operators – community organizations)
 | Activity 1.2.3 - gender-oriented communication campaign
Output 1.3 - Environmental & social
downstream activities | Activity 1.3.1 - E&S measures implementation and monitoring
 | Activity 1.3.2 - Establishment of a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other
electronics)

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 16
BBBB
in order to (i) Organize awareness, financial education and entrepreneurship events for vulnerable youth and high school
students, and identify potential entrepreneurs, (ii) Accompany and coach young people in the development of their idea and
the creation of their business plan, and (iii) Providing tailor-made technical support to local incubators and spaces dedicated
to their employability
To the benefit of local concessionnaires operating the targeted villages mini-grids
- Monitoring of ESMP implementation and environmental and social support
- Setting up a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics), in order to manage the potential negative
cumulative effect of the used batteries and other systems on the environment. The recycling unit is to be installed on
governmental land, however its construction and operation will be procured from private sector and conceded for exploitation
under the supervision of the State (who will retain ownership of the assets) ba sed on ASER-DEEC convention. Local
operators will remain responsible for the collection and transportation of the e-waste; the recycling operator’s responsibility
starting at reception towards treatment
Figure 9: Technical Assistance arrangements diagram
N.B. in order to prevent conflicts of interest, the Ministry of Finance will also be involved under delegation from the GoS Executing
Entity for Component 1 that includes ASER and the Ministry of Energy as beneficiaries.
Component 2: Procurement and Installation of solar powered mini-grids (EUR 192.2 mln)
Outputs Activities
Output 2.1 - Preparation of detailed Activity 2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering studies & Specific environmental and social
Engineering Studies analysis for each site
Activity 2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants construction and minigrid deployment
Output 2.2 - Supply, installation and
commissioning of equipment
Activity 2.2.2 - Smart meters installation & miscellaneous aleas
Output 2.3 - Modern public lighting Activity 2.3.1 - Deployments of solar street lighting
Output 2.4 - Control and supervision of work Activity 2.4.1 -Control and supervision of work
Financing the bulk of the technology investment to de-risk local operators’ participation in funding solar energy production equipment,
synchronization and control tools, low-voltage mini-grid networks and connections, civil engineering (competitive Request for
Proposals, which control and supervision of construction will be assigned to independent experts), allowing private operators to
offer the best combination of tariff/service. Pending detailed Engineering studies, the mini-grids will include solar PV plants ranging
from approximately 15-45 kW peak (expected average of 32 kW) together with inverters and clean battery systems for energy
storage, as well as local distribution lines and meters tailored to villages categories by size, ranging from:

--- Table 1 on Page 21 ---
Outputs | Activities
Output 2.1 - Preparation of detailed
Engineering Studies | Activity 2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering studies & Specific environmental and social
analysis for each site
Output 2.2 - Supply, installation and
commissioning of equipment | Activity 2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants construction and minigrid deployment
 | Activity 2.2.2 - Smart meters installation & miscellaneous aleas
Output 2.3 - Modern public lighting | Activity 2.3.1 - Deployments of solar street lighting
Output 2.4 - Control and supervision of work | Activity 2.4.1 -Control and supervision of work

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 17
BBBB
• Kit I: villages with populations between 100 and 200 inhabitants: 15 kWp
• Kit II: villages with populations between 200 and 400 inhabitants: 23 kWp
• Kit III: village with a population between 400 and 750 inhabitants: 30 kWp
• Kit IV: village with a population between 750 and 1500 inhabitants: 45 kWp
From ASER’s experience in designing and implementing solar mini-grids projects in Senegal (more than 130 mini-grids already
installed and 270 under implementation), the compartmentalization was carried out on the basis of an initial classification of villages
done, considering their respective population and level of equipment in terms of productive and social basic infrastructures (school,
health, boreholes, etc.). On the basis of this village segmentation by population, a demand analysis questionnaire has been
elaborated and a survey done after sampling of villages reflecting the main characteristics of each type of village.
After the survey, a standard energetic profile has been elaborated for each type or category of village. From these energetic profiles,
different standardized types of PV kits have been selected for the project at this feasibility level (see Annex 2 Feasibility Study for
details tools utilized and sample modelling results).
At this stage, the sites are selected on the basis of their access rate of the non-electrified areas. Department having an electrification
rate below 10, 20% are priority areas. In addition, high priority is given to remote areas located far from the existing MV grids (more
than 5 to 7km) with small population (less than 700 inhabitants) for the GCF intervention.
The mini-grid connections will cater for Tier 3 to Tier 5 service levels. A consumer may upgrade from a lower service level to a higher
service level, and vice-versa.
Service level Power demand (watts) Daily capacity (kW-hrs)
Tier 3 >200 > 1 kWh/day
Tier 4 >800 > 3.4 kWh/day
Tier 5 > 2kW > 8.2 kWh/day
Local concessionnaires will not be involved in the mini-grids construction (procured to EPC by ASER) but in the meters initialization
& official connection activation once low-voltage and indoor installations of the households and productive users have been realized.
Therefore, the GoS represented by ASER (i.e. the EE) will remain responsible for implementation of this Activity, rather than
concessionaires, and it will engage concessionaires as service provider to assist with the implementation of this Activity.
- Deployment of modern public lighting from solar energy will also be realized in the project’s rural areas and help provide
suburban security and economic growth in the villages.
The Germany-financed deployments of solar street lighting will consist of the procurement and installation of energy-efficient
(LED) public lighting equipments.
Figure 10: Solar mini-grids construction and operation structure

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 18
BBBB
Component 3: Incentives for Social & Productive Use of Electricity (EUR 2.3 mln)
Outputs Activities
Activity 3.1.1 – Connection of eligible social services, women& youth-
Output 3.1 - Gender & social connections
entrepreneurs to the PV mini-grids
Output 3.2 – Micro-financed productive equipment credits Activity 3.2.1 - Implementation of mechanism to facilitate access to productive
guarantees equipment financing through microfinance
Social services and productive equipment will respectively lead to the development of sustainable livelihoods and enhance the
capacity of villages to pay for solar power supply, strengthening the mini-grids business model viability while maximizing social and
gender inclusivity. This bottom-up component aims at supporting productive use & services access to off-grid solar power and
related revenue-generating production/transformation equipment through a two-level financial assistance:
- Gender & Social connections (result-based payment) for eligible social services and women & youth-led enterprises
‘PREM’ (Multi-Sectoral Energetic Projects), lifting the upfront connection costs related to the indoor installation of community
services (such as health clinics & schools) and gender-focus productive users (predominantly agriculture-related) , to
stimulate anchor load demand and ground the mini-grids sustainable operation.
Besides general eligibility criteria (geographic location within a village where electricity is available from the concessionaire,
first electrification of the women or youth entrepreneur with productive use intention or community service need justification
and compliance with the technical conditions required by the concessionaire), the identification of beneficiaries of the
coupons distribution will be empowered to the gender-mainstreaming communities in selected villages once informed about
the rules and objectives, to build ownership and commitment among beneficiaries. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
will govern between ASER and the concessionaires, containing the legally-binding rules of the project towards Subsidy
Payment Requests, the eligibility of beneficiaries and a set of rights of the coupon beneficiaries.ASER will pre-approve the
concessionaries coupon distribution plans on a periodic basis.
When making use of the coupon, the beneficiary must: remit the coupon to the concessionaire, pay the remaining value and
sign the payment receipt. Concessionaires will only be able to confirm the coupon in the coupon software after initializing
the electrical connection. This confirmation will allow ASER to be informed on the beneficiary’s connection, and honor the
corresponding Subsidy Payment Request (SPR) from concessionnaires.After payment to the concessionaires, ASER will
issue a Subsidy Payment Confirmation, in order to link payment to specific SPRs, which will allow the traceability of
payments, and to keep the financial history for each coupon.
This mechanism inspires from the original JAPPALE coupon program a World Bank carbon-finance voucher system to
reduce electricity connection costs for rural households, thus making connection costs accessible to rural populations in
order to increase access to electricity and significantly increase the rate o,f dealer penetration into the electrification market21.
For productive users, the vouchers nominal value will be set at 100,000 CFA (150 EUR) and prioritize youth & women-
involving activities, giving right to a reduction on connection fees which can be redeemed by the operator upon verified
completion of connections, aiming at the following objectives:
 Eliminate the access barrier constituted by connection costs (installations, connection or first top-up costs),
 Guarantee the safety of installations and the application of energy efficiency measures,
 Increase the service rate in electrified villages,
 Contribute to achieving the overall goal of universal access
A JAPPALE scheme concept evaluation and adaptation in relation to tariff harmonization as well as best practices for scaling
up throughout the territory have been released in 2019, including a valuable set of recommendations about the software,
the training material, villages selection, activation payments, e-codes confirmation and communication22. Likewise, ASER
will provide coupons to concessionaires, who will distribute coupons in villages or at their agency, for eligible clients who
opt to go directly to the agency.
21 Emission reductions achieved under Component 2 will not be used to subsidize the coupons of the World Bank JAPPALE
programme, because distinctly moni tored and not to be issued under the CDM.
22 As per World Bank 2018-11 minutes from the last steering committee of the JAPPALE vouchers project, and World Bank
2019-01 pilot implementation report

--- Table 1 on Page 23 ---
Outputs | Activities
Output 3.1 - Gender & social connections | Activity 3.1.1 – Connection of eligible social services, women& youth-
entrepreneurs to the PV mini-grids
Output 3.2 – Micro-financed productive equipment credits
guarantees | Activity 3.2.1 - Implementation of mechanism to facilitate access to productive
equipment financing through microfinance

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 19
BBBB
Figure 11: Scheme of the coupon mechanism
- Productive equipment acquisition credit access facility; Guarantee issued to cover the loans extended by a micro-
finance institution for the purchase of resilient productive use equipment by rural entrepreneurs and support for the
development of micro businesses23across agriculture, industry and commerce (equipment for farmers such as water pumps
and processing machines like grinding mills, appliances for trades-people such as sewing machines and carpentry tools,
and for retail outlets such as refrige rators and blenders.
Examples show that there is increased interest in financing renewable energy applications for productive use in Senegal.
Nevertheless, the lack of access to medium and long-term agriculture financing and credit, in particular for smallholders
facing land tenure issues, remains a critical barrier and will need further attention if the country is to successfully tap into
these markets24.
Table 6: Top six Micro-Fi nance Institutions (MFIs) in Senegal by outstanding loan amount25
MFI Total loan portfolio (USD million) Number of Borrowers Total deposits (USD million)
CMS 202.5 nc 242.9
ACEP Senegal 73.9 49,000 19.4
MicroCred – SEN 101.11 48,000 48.44
PAMECAS 60.98 89,000 60.69
U-IMCEC 17.77 21,000 12.52
MECAP 11.9 Nc 7.53
MFI selection will remain at the discretion of the Government of Senegal (Ministry of Economy and Finance) and be subject to
eligibility criteria(including geographical proximity with rural target beneficiaries, energy-related products management abilities and
financial capacity criteria) & BOAD due diligence that will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists – on
top of obligation s in the AMA between GCF and BOAD; the Bank will conduct also administrative investigations into corruption,
fraud, coercion, collusions and inconvenient practices, and make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal
investigations. Upon BOAD’s experience, this financial guarantee will be a loan proceed committed for covering part of the risk taken
by the microfinance institutions (maximum 40% of receivables deemed irrecoverable). The resources will be managed by a Partner
Financial Institution to be competitively selected by the Government of Senegal among national institutions like Banque Agricole,
23 Principles and operational guidelines to be further developed during Year 1
24 2019. GET.Invest market insights — Senegal: renewable energy applications in agricultural value-chains
25 MIX. Link: https://www.themix.org/ — accessed January 2019

--- Table 1 on Page 24 ---
MFI | Total loan portfolio (USD million) | Number of Borrowers | Total deposits (USD million)
CMS | 202.5 | nc | 242.9
ACEP Senegal | 73.9 | 49,000 | 19.4
MicroCred – SEN | 101.11 | 48,000 | 48.44
PAMECAS | 60.98 | 89,000 | 60.69
U-IMCEC | 17.77 | 21,000 | 12.52
MECAP | 11.9 | Nc | 7.53

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 20
BBBB
Crédit Mutuel, COFINA, FONGIP, following BOAD due-diligence and general minimum criteria including reputational/recognition,
governance and regulation, systems and experience.
Figure 12: Microfinance guarantees structure diagram
Business Model
The GCF sovereign loan to the Government of Senegal intends to reduce local operators’ risks in operating and maintaining solar
mini-grids in the smallest, most remote vulnerable villages to be electrified in Senegal. Based on the limited upfront concession fee
of 5% of investments levied from the local operators and the applicable compensation from harmonized tariffs, private sector
profitability can be expected above 12%, when full equity investment from operators in the same context would return a negative
IRR (unless governmental tariff compensations payable to operators are increased fivefold to reach a comparable return, given the
communities limited ability to pay which translated in tariff harmonization). Project arrangements, procurement and ownership remain
under the GoS, while construction is contracted to private suppliers and local operations & maintenance to historical
concessionnaires.
The project will create an enabling environment for the private sector to step in and to provide the necessary co-finance and
expertise, delivering the following outputs by 2025:
• strengthened institutional capacities for mobilizing private sector towards Universal Access completion, enhancing rural
stakeholders’ awareness and gender-driven participation
• 38,917 households electrified by rural mini-grids, focusing on solar solutions with battery storage
• financially-incentivized implementation of 3,739 ‘Projets Énergétiques Multi-sectoriels’, for the solar powering of productive
uses (mostly irrigation, refrigeration and agro-processing) and community services (such as schools, clinics) in villages with
more than 250 inhabitants.
In doing so, the project will reach up to over 344,000 rural inhabitants, tabling on a progressive growth in demand, diversified
between households improving their living standards, emerging productive economic uses and reinforced community services.
Based on its 25 years projected supply, the project is estimated to contribute to the mitigation of at least 45,098 tonnes of CO2e
equivalent per year, i.e. 1.13 M. tCO2 to be avoided over its technical lifetime.
Besides its mitigation impact and environmental co-benefits including (i) reduction of air pollution due to fossil fuel consumption
and improvement of air quality thanks to promotion of renewable energies and (ii) reduction of pollution by waste oils at thermal
power plants, the project’s adaptation co-benefits will feature:
• Greater resilience to climate-stresses through reduced vulnerability to water scarcity, diseases and farming yields
• Illuminated studying and access to ICTs
• Socially-equitable avenues for income generation
Indeed, the introduction of modern energy and related productive incentives in the rural communities will actually lead to specific
socio-economic and gender-sensitive development effects including:
- better sanitation and social services and increased possibility of activities during evening hours
- long-term effects through schooling and information, as well as changed migratory patterns
- increased availability of safe drinking water, refrigeration and mechanization for food production and sale
- improved access to climate / weather / best practises information through radio, television, and the Internet
- better health of especially women and girls following improved indoor lighting and decreased air pollution as well as safer
streets and reduced distances to cover in search of energy services and/or resources
- local economy stimulation, employment generation and value-added revenue increaseslifting rural areas out of poverty
- fossil fuel imports savings, improving households power purchase and in turn, the country’s energy security & fiscal balance

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 21
BBBB
Figure 13: proposed alternative technologies by type of settlement (ASER)
- At the peri-urban level, off-grid solutions are not suitable given the presence of networks MT and BT
- past experiences using diesel have shown that the logistics of fuel can be very expensive and complex (with supply disruptions
in more isolated regions)
- Investments in SHS can be envisaged in very small villages and isolated (in the eastern parts of the country) for which an
investment in the extension of the network or in a mini-network is not justified from an economic point of view.
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)
In its role as representant of the Executing Entity (Government of Senegal), ASER will ensure operational supervision of the project
from procurement and construction of all mini-grids until end-beneficiary installations. The project implementation unit will be
integrated at ASER general management level, with a Project Coordinator acting under the supervision of a Steering Committee
(Comité de Pilotage – CP). It will rely on the following structures to assume its coordination functions:
• the Technical Monitoring Committee (CTS) which will support the coordination and monitoring of the project work
implementation;
• the operational structures (management units) of ASER General Management which will be responsible for the
implementation of the project.

--- Table 1 on Page 26 ---
Figure 13: proposed alternative technologies by type of settlement (ASER)
- At the peri-urban level, off-grid solutions are not suitable given the presence of networks MT and BT
- past experiences using diesel have shown that the logistics of fuel can be very expensive and complex (with supply disruptions
in more isolated regions)
- Investments in SHS can be envisaged in very small villages and isolated (in the eastern parts of the country) for which an
investment in the extension of the network or in a mini-network is not justified from an economic point of view. |  | 
 | B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) | 
In its role as representant of the Executing Entity (Government of Senegal), ASER will ensure operational supervision of the project
from procurement and construction of all mini-grids until end-beneficiary installations. The project implementation unit will be
integrated at ASER general management level, with a Project Coordinator acting under the supervision of a Steering Committee
(Comité de Pilotage – CP). It will rely on the following structures to assume its coordination functions:
• the Technical Monitoring Committee (CTS) which will support the coordination and monitoring of the project work
implementation;
• the operational structures (management units) of ASER General Management which will be responsible for the
implementation of the project. |  | 

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 22
BBBB
Figure 14: ASER management organogram
ASER Project Management Unit will be based within ASER premises and comprise:
- a Project Coordinator
- an expert Engineer in Renewable Energies (solar)
- a Financial Analyst
- an UN Procurement Specialist
- a person in charge of Monitoring and Evaluation,
- an Environmental and Social Safety officer
The project’slegal, contractual, institutional and financial arrangements will include the following stakeholders:
• NDA (National Designated Entity): The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development acts as the Senegalese NDA
and is supportive of the ASER program and the proposed GCF project. It was introduced to the NDA during the Senegalese
National Committee on Climate Change, as early as September 2017. The NDA has provided a letter of no objection upon
the Funding Proposal preparation stage.
• AE (Accredited Entity): BOAD will act as the AE, trustee and co-financier of the ASER GCF project. BOAD already has an
ongoing financing relationship with the Senegalese government, and made available a total sum of CFA 12.22 billion (USD
22.00 million) through subordinate, longer-term loan,no yet disbursed andconditional upon the provision of concessional
co-finance by a partner financier, as part of the total budget for the 1,000 villages. It will enter into a Trust Agreement with
GCF for the entire amounts to be loaned and granted to the GoS.
• CRSE (Regulatory Commission of the Electricity Sector): The Commission is mandated to protect consumers against
excessive electricity tariffs, ensure access and quality of service, enhance competition among IPPs and supervise
SENELEC’s performance. In the project, the CRSE will be responsible for monitoring compliance of operators against set
tariffs and terms of reference as well as grievances once the assets are commissioned.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 23
BBBB
Figure 15: Institutional arrangements (GCF scope highlighted in yellow)
Regulatory framework for the development of mini solar grids
 Law 98-29 relating to the Electricity Sector
o Guarantee the country's electricity supply at the lowest cost
o Broaden people's access to electricity, especially in rural areas
o Attract the significant private investments required for the development of the sector
 Law 2010-21 on renewable energies
o Diversify sources of production by using renewable energies.
o Promote the dissemination of equipment related to renewable energy technologies.
 Decree 98-334, setting the terms for issuing and withdrawing licences or concessions for the production, distribution and sale
of electrical energy
 Decree 98-335 relating to the principles and procedures for determining and revising tariff conditions.
 LPDSE/2019-2023 (Policy Letter for the Development of the Electricity Sector), including mini-grids related advocacies:
Implementation of the electricity tariff harmonization at national level
o
Electrification of community services and productive uses by integrating the gender approach for sustainable
o
improvement of rural people's living conditions
Support for renewable energy development by setting up incentives for facilitation of the acquisition of renewable energy
o
equipment
Establishment of a promotion and quality control system of renewable energy equipment
o
Project implementation map
The country has been divided into 10 geographic concessions, whereby each concession groups a number of localities for which
an international bidding process was enacted. An international bidding process has been completed in 6 out of the 10 concessions,

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 24
BBBB
identifying the most competitive private sector concessionaires26 that are tasked to build, operate and maintain assets for a fixed
period, while the remaining 4 have been attributed to SENELEC public scope; the first phase of implementation (‘Programme
National d’Urgence d’Électrification Rurale’ covering the period 2015 – 2018) being under finalisation.
Figure 16: map of Senegal rural electrification concessions (left) and unelectrified villages (right, SEMIS) as of 2019
Lack of adequate (debt) finance has forced private sector concessionaires in the initial ‘pilot concessions’ to charge excessive
electricity tariffs to rural customers to allow investors me et their financial return requirements. While the national electricity tariff has
been set at harmonized levels of FCFA 90-97 (EUR 0.14-0.15) per kWh27 for low to medium power domestic subscribers,
concessionaires currently charge as high as FCFA 250 (EUR 0. 38) per kWh. The gap is compensated by the Government in a
harmonization effort aiming at removing the disparity in electricity tariffs – representing a burden of 11 billion FCFA (USD 19 million)
per year, which the GCF intervention will help phasing out. When factoring high grid-connection costs (and internal house wiring),
only the most affluent rural households could afford to sign up for such services, leaving the vast majority disconnected.
ASER, the Government’s delegated contracting authority for the development of rural electrification in Senegal, has set up a new
organisation to meet current challenges. To guarantee a successful implementation of this program, ASER has developed a
Strategic Development Plan (PSD) which defines the main axes around which its intervention will be articulated during the period
2019-2023. It has also formulated an operational plan for implementing the ‘Complementary Program for Universal Access’ enabling
Senegal to reach its objective of universal access by 2025.
The Accredited Entity
The West African Development Bank (BOAD) will act as the Accredited Entity, Trustee (the FAA between GCF and BOAD will be in
the form of a trust arrangement) and co-financier of the ASER project. BOAD, in its role as AE, will be responsible for the overall
management of this project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives;
(iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure
and evaluation.
BOAD has been active in Senegal since its inception and has cooperated with both the Senegalese Ministry of Finance and the
ASER program for a long time. As of December 2019, BOAD has a total of FCFA 128.8 billion in public sector loans in Senegal,
supporting 191 projects and initiatives. BOAD is also closely engaged in the Senegalese energy market, managing an aggregate
amount of FCFA 239.9 billion in loans to the sector, equivalent to 23.3% of all outstanding loans to the Senegalese government.
BOAD recognises the potential of the ASER program to scale-up and contribute to the Bank’s ambition to promote rural electrification
and development in its target region, hereby both tackling climate change mitigation and strengthening the resilience of the most
vulnerable communities. In 2014, BOAD provided a medium-term (2 year) loan valued at FCFA 5 billion (USD 9.06 million) to the
26 These include ERA - African Rural Energy, COMASEL - Maroc-Sénégal Electricity Company, ENCO - Energy Service
Company, and SCL - Energy Solutio ns
27 The national tariff of FCFA 97 per kWh is based on a SENELEC 2017-2030 production plan that defines the average cost
of electricity generation at FCFA 62 per kWh; a cost of transmission estimated at 20 FCFA per kWh; and the cost of
distribution of 15 FCFA per kWh; and the remainder linked to electricity loss.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 25
BBBB
Senegalese government, which was used to support the initial development phase of the ASER program. In 2015, a second longer-
term loan valued at FCFA 10 billion (USD 18.12 million) was issued to the government, to be serviced by the project.
BOAD promotes the balanced development of its member countries and fosters economic integration within West Africa by financing
priority development projects. BOAD has identified the off-grid renewable energy generation component of the ASER program as a
highly relevant and viable investment opportunity given its transformational mitigation impacts. BOAD’s contribution of FCFA 10
billion (EUR 15 million) to this project is conditional upon the provision of concessional co-finance by a partner financier. This will
enable BOAD to offer debt finance with more attractive terms to the targeted concessionaires by a) lowering the cost of capital by
2.4%; and b) softening the repayment terms by extending the loan tenors and introducing longer grace periods – two barriers
currently hampering scaled-up investments by the private sector in the domestic energy market.
Figure 17 : Visualisation of the financing plan of the project

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 26
BBBB
Figure 18 : Visualisation of the flow of funds of the project
Eligibility criteria
EPCs Operators MFIs
Detailed technical selection criteria to be  existing concessionnaires  approved by the Ministry of Economy and
developed as part of the Technical Licensed by the Ministry of Finance
Assistance in component 1 Energy  regulated and licensed for the duration of
 ability to invest 5% of the the guarantee
total cost per minigrid  number of years of experience and
operation in the target rural areas &
products,
 financial situation over the last three (03)
years through
 pre-agreed effective lending rate cap to be
applied to end-users
Beneficiaries under Activity 3.1.1 and Output 1.2 Partner Financial Institution
 geographic location within a village  the identification of  Rating of BB or higher or industry
where electricity is available from the beneficiaries of the coupons recognition as a key player in the
concessionaire, distribution will be microfinance sector
 first electrification of woman-led or youth- empowered to the gender-  Reputable and sound ownership,
led enterprise with productive use mainstreaming communities management, and governance
intention, or social service need in selected villages once standards
 compliance with the technical conditions informed about the rules and  Status as a duly registered, regulated,
required by the concessionaire objectives, to build and licensed entity in Senegal

--- Table 1 on Page 31 ---
EPCs | Operators | MFIs
Detailed technical selection criteria to be
developed as part of the Technical
Assistance in component 1 |  existing concessionnaires
Licensed by the Ministry of
Energy
 ability to invest 5% of the
total cost per minigrid |  approved by the Ministry of Economy and
Finance
 regulated and licensed for the duration of
the guarantee
 number of years of experience and
operation in the target rural areas &
products,
 financial situation over the last three (03)
years through
 pre-agreed effective lending rate cap to be
applied to end-users
Beneficiaries under Activity 3.1.1 and Output 1.2 |  | Partner Financial Institution
 geographic location within a village
where electricity is available from the
concessionaire,
 first electrification of woman-led or youth-
led enterprise with productive use
intention, or social service need
 compliance with the technical conditions
required by the concessionaire |  the identification of
beneficiaries of the coupons
distribution will be
empowered to the gender-
mainstreaming communities
in selected villages once
informed about the rules and
objectives, to build |  Rating of BB or higher or industry
recognition as a key player in the
microfinance sector
 Reputable and sound ownership,
management, and governance
standards
 Status as a duly registered, regulated,
and licensed entity in Senegal

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 27
BBBB
 priority to women and youth (below 40 ownership and commitment  Acceptable underwriting systems and
years old) among beneficiaries servicing platforms in place
 3 years of experience in lending to MFIs
Applicable tariff structure
Senegal has completed a tariff harmonization process since 2019 that brings all electricity tariffs in the country in line with those
charged by the national utility SENELEC, on the basis of the Prepaid WOYOFAL category described below.
Tariff Option 1st tranche 2nd tranche 3rd tranche
UD-PP From 0 to 150 kWh 151 - 250 kWh > 250 kWh
UD-MP From 0 to 50 kWh 51 - 300 kWh > 300 kWh
UP-PP From 0 to 50 kWh 51 - 500 kWh > 500 kWh
UP-MP from 0 to 100 kWh 101 - 500 kWh > 500 kWh
Electricity Price in FCFA/kWh Fixed monthly
Tariff CATEGORIES
1st Tranche 2nd Tranche 3rd Tranche prime FCFA/kW
Domestic usage (UD)
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) 90.47 101.64 112.65
Domestic Medium Puissance (DMP) 96.02 102.44 112.02
Professional Usage (UP)
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) 128.85 135.68 147.68
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) 129.81 136.53 149.24
Prepaid (WOYOFAL)
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) 90.47 101.64 101.64
Domestic Medium Capacity (DMP) 96.02 102.44 102.44
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) 128.85 135.68 135.68
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) 129.81 136.53 136.53
Street Light 118.16 3,007.21
Source : CRSE decision on SENELEC new applicable tariff
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Senegal is a regional leader for West Africa, with a reputation of economic and political stability and a long track record of peaceful
democratic elections. The country is expected to maintain its strong rate of economic growth, having registered over 6% per annum
for the last four years. However, it is facing delays and difficulties in realizing its universal access milestones and associated NDC
contributions for the rural electrification sub-sector, especially in the most remote and smallest vulnerable villages where grid
extension is not feasible.
It is noted that in rural areas, due to high investments costs, concessionaires charge high electricity tariffs. The differentiated tariffs
between SENELEC (the national utility company) and concessions have generated a lot of resistance to electrification in rural areas.
To enable the government to reach universal (and equitable) energy access by 2025, an adapted financing approach that enables
access to affordable finance and creates investor confidence needs to be adopted.
According to the study funded by the European Union to help Senegal define the appropriate procedure for the harmonisation of
tariffs (aligning the cost of electricity for rural consumers to grid-connected terms), a compensation mechanism towards the
concessionaires’ initial tariff levels as a consequence of the reduction in retailed tariffs amounts needs an effort of 11 billion FCFA
(USD 19 million) per year. The analysis showed that 100% solar systems – if funded by grants or other sources of funding – could
be profitable, since the vast majority of costs are related to the investment.28
The requested GCF contribution has a dual aim:
28 GESTO 2018 SE4ALL Rural Electrification Program for Senegal | Action Plan & Investment Prospectus

--- Table 1 on Page 32 ---
 priority to women and youth (below 40 ownership and commitment  Acceptable underwriting systems and
years old) among beneficiaries servicing platforms in place
 3 years of experience in lending to MFIs
Applicable tariff structure
Senegal has completed a tariff harmonization process since 2019 that brings all electricity tariffs in the country in line with those
charged by the national utility SENELEC, on the basis of the Prepaid WOYOFAL category described below.
Tariff Option 1st tranche 2nd tranche 3rd tranche
UD-PP From 0 to 150 kWh 151 - 250 kWh > 250 kWh
UD-MP From 0 to 50 kWh 51 - 300 kWh > 300 kWh
UP-PP From 0 to 50 kWh 51 - 500 kWh > 500 kWh
UP-MP from 0 to 100 kWh 101 - 500 kWh > 500 kWh
Electricity Price in FCFA/kWh Fixed monthly
Tariff CATEGORIES
1st Tranche 2nd Tranche 3rd Tranche prime FCFA/kW
Domestic usage (UD)
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) 90.47 101.64 112.65
Domestic Medium Puissance (DMP) 96.02 102.44 112.02
Professional Usage (UP)
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) 128.85 135.68 147.68
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) 129.81 136.53 149.24
Prepaid (WOYOFAL)
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) 90.47 101.64 101.64
Domestic Medium Capacity (DMP) 96.02 102.44 102.44
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) 128.85 135.68 135.68
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) 129.81 136.53 136.53
Street Light 118.16 3,007.21
Source : CRSE decision on SENELEC new applicable tariff |  | 
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) | 
Senegal is a regional leader for West Africa, with a reputation of economic and political stability and a long track record of peaceful
democratic elections. The country is expected to maintain its strong rate of economic growth, having registered over 6% per annum
for the last four years. However, it is facing delays and difficulties in realizing its universal access milestones and associated NDC
contributions for the rural electrification sub-sector, especially in the most remote and smallest vulnerable villages where grid
extension is not feasible.
It is noted that in rural areas, due to high investments costs, concessionaires charge high electricity tariffs. The differentiated tariffs
between SENELEC (the national utility company) and concessions have generated a lot of resistance to electrification in rural areas.
To enable the government to reach universal (and equitable) energy access by 2025, an adapted financing approach that enables
access to affordable finance and creates investor confidence needs to be adopted.
According to the study funded by the European Union to help Senegal define the appropriate procedure for the harmonisation of
tariffs (aligning the cost of electricity for rural consumers to grid-connected terms), a compensation mechanism towards the
concessionaires’ initial tariff levels as a consequence of the reduction in retailed tariffs amounts needs an effort of 11 billion FCFA
(USD 19 million) per year. The analysis showed that 100% solar systems – if funded by grants or other sources of funding – could
be profitable, since the vast majority of costs are related to the investment.28
The requested GCF contribution has a dual aim: |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 32 ---
 priority to women and youth (below 40
years old) | ownership and commitment
among beneficiaries |  Acceptable underwriting systems and
servicing platforms in place
 3 years of experience in lending to MFIs

--- Table 3 on Page 32 ---
Tariff Option | 1st tranche | 2nd tranche | 3rd tranche
UD-PP | From 0 to 150 kWh | 151 - 250 kWh | > 250 kWh
UD-MP | From 0 to 50 kWh | 51 - 300 kWh | > 300 kWh
UP-PP | From 0 to 50 kWh | 51 - 500 kWh | > 500 kWh
UP-MP | from 0 to 100 kWh | 101 - 500 kWh | > 500 kWh

--- Table 4 on Page 32 ---
Tariff CATEGORIES |  | Electricity Price in FCFA/kWh |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Fixed monthly
prime FCFA/kW | 
 |  | 1st Tranche |  | 2nd Tranche |  |  |  | 3rd Tranche |  |  | 
Domestic usage (UD) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) |  | 90.47 |  | 101.64 |  |  |  | 112.65 |  |  | 
Domestic Medium Puissance (DMP) |  | 96.02 |  | 102.44 |  |  |  | 112.02 |  |  | 
Professional Usage (UP) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) |  | 128.85 |  | 135.68 |  |  |  | 147.68 |  |  | 
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) |  | 129.81 |  | 136.53 |  |  |  | 149.24 |  |  | 
Prepaid (WOYOFAL) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Domestic Small Capacity (DPP) |  | 90.47 |  | 101.64 |  |  |  | 101.64 |  |  | 
Domestic Medium Capacity (DMP) |  | 96.02 |  | 102.44 |  |  |  | 102.44 |  |  | 
Professional Small Capacity (PPP) |  | 128.85 |  | 135.68 |  |  |  | 135.68 |  |  | 
Professional Medium Capacity (PMP) |  | 129.81 |  | 136.53 |  |  |  | 136.53 |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Street Light |  | 118.16 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3,007.21 | 

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSALV.2.1 | PAGE 28
BBBB
• GCF’s concessional contribution is required to ensure that, in combination with BOAD’s loan and other nationally mobilized
resources, the average cost of capital of outstanding debt does not exceed 4%. Without GCF financing, the Senegalese
government will have to borrow more from international financial institutions29 at unfavourable terms and delays. Hence the
need for external support becomes more urgent if climate change mitigation is to be achieved within the ambitioned
timeframe.
With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average cost of capital is reduced by 2.4% (to a level of 3.9%, instead of
6.3% without the GCF) thus lightening its debt obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years
further optimizes its debt servicing schedule to viable instalments.
• Furthermore, by providing a mix of long-term concessional debt and grant to ASER, BOAD and the GCF will make the
investment proposition significantly more attractive for private sector investors, who are required to contribute 5% of the
total investment cost in equity. This lowered contribution level is necessary to an acceptable rate of return to equity investors
above 12.6 %30 and strengthen the debt service coverage ratios of new investments, in the most remote and vulnerable
villages that would otherwise not be financially viable on the private sector’s own funding.
Based on the limited upfront concession fee levied from the local operators and the applicable compensation from harmonized
tariffs, private sector profitability can be expected at 12.6%, when full equity investment from operators in the same context would
return a negative IRR (unless governmental tariff compensations payable to operators are increased fivefold to reach a comparable
return, given the communities limited ability to pay which translated in tariff harmonization).
The GCF’s grant contribution will further de-risk the investment by reinforcing capacities and stimulating productive anchor demand
through components 1 and 3.
B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Beyond the GCF intervention, the project benefits will be sustained throughout the Universal Access Completion Program as follows:
• The estimated cost reduction from the diversification from imported fossil fuels through the introduction of renewable power
generation will reduce the cost of grid-based rural electrification and will free public resources that will be redirected to rural
electrification. In the medium-term, this will result in improved public debt conditions and lower the cost at which Senegalese
entities (both public and private) will be able to secure debt. Lowered cost of capital will, in turn, strengthen the case for
investments in the domestic renewable energy sector, mobilising private sector capital.
• The Technical Assistance component will contribute to ensure that a stable regulatory framework is created to oversee the
national electricity tariff regulation. ASER being a state body, the loan will be made to the Government of Senegal which
will be the Executing Entity, represented by ASER as the delegated project owner; this arrangement will avoid legal
problems. Long-term certainty conc erning the tariff policy will further strengthen investor confidence in the domestic energy
sector, creating an investment environment where by 2025 new investments in the decentralised power generation projects
can be supported on a purely commercial basis.
Project sustainability and exit provisions will also be embedded in contractual arrangements (cf. draftministerial order relating to the
conditions and modalities of realization and operation of off-network rural electrification projects in Senegal), entailing:
- operating titles with a duration of 25 years
- provision for the renewal of equipment included in the rate base provided that these provisions are used to fund an escrow
account
- case of extension of the network of SENELEC or of a concessionaire in the perimeter of an off-grid electrification project
before the end of the current operating permit on said perimeter
29 Rural Electrification lenders round table expected in April 2020
30 UNFCCC CDM energy sector exp ected return on equity threshold in Senegal
(https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-27-v10.0.pdf)

--- Table 1 on Page 33 ---
• GCF’s concessional contribution is required to ensure that, in combination with BOAD’s loan and other nationally mobilized
resources, the average cost of capital of outstanding debt does not exceed 4%. Without GCF financing, the Senegalese
government will have to borrow more from international financial institutions29 at unfavourable terms and delays. Hence the
need for external support becomes more urgent if climate change mitigation is to be achieved within the ambitioned
timeframe.
With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average cost of capital is reduced by 2.4% (to a level of 3.9%, instead of
6.3% without the GCF) thus lightening its debt obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years
further optimizes its debt servicing schedule to viable instalments.
• Furthermore, by providing a mix of long-term concessional debt and grant to ASER, BOAD and the GCF will make the
investment proposition significantly more attractive for private sector investors, who are required to contribute 5% of the
total investment cost in equity. This lowered contribution level is necessary to an acceptable rate of return to equity investors
above 12.6 %30 and strengthen the debt service coverage ratios of new investments, in the most remote and vulnerable
villages that would otherwise not be financially viable on the private sector’s own funding.
Based on the limited upfront concession fee levied from the local operators and the applicable compensation from harmonized
tariffs, private sector profitability can be expected at 12.6%, when full equity investment from operators in the same context would
return a negative IRR (unless governmental tariff compensations payable to operators are increased fivefold to reach a comparable
return, given the communities limited ability to pay which translated in tariff harmonization).
The GCF’s grant contribution will further de-risk the investment by reinforcing capacities and stimulating productive anchor demand
through components 1 and 3. |  | 
 | B.6. Exit strategy and sustainability (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
Beyond the GCF intervention, the project benefits will be sustained throughout the Universal Access Completion Program as follows:
• The estimated cost reduction from the diversification from imported fossil fuels through the introduction of renewable power
generation will reduce the cost of grid-based rural electrification and will free public resources that will be redirected to rural
electrification. In the medium-term, this will result in improved public debt conditions and lower the cost at which Senegalese
entities (both public and private) will be able to secure debt. Lowered cost of capital will, in turn, strengthen the case for
investments in the domestic renewable energy sector, mobilising private sector capital.
• The Technical Assistance component will contribute to ensure that a stable regulatory framework is created to oversee the
national electricity tariff regulation. ASER being a state body, the loan will be made to the Government of Senegal which
will be the Executing Entity, represented by ASER as the delegated project owner; this arrangement will avoid legal
problems. Long-term certainty conc erning the tariff policy will further strengthen investor confidence in the domestic energy
sector, creating an investment environment where by 2025 new investments in the decentralised power generation projects
can be supported on a purely commercial basis.
Project sustainability and exit provisions will also be embedded in contractual arrangements (cf. draftministerial order relating to the
conditions and modalities of realization and operation of off-network rural electrification projects in Senegal), entailing:
- operating titles with a duration of 25 years
- provision for the renewal of equipment included in the rate base provided that these provisions are used to fund an escrow
account
- case of extension of the network of SENELEC or of a concessionaire in the perimeter of an off-grid electrification project
before the end of the current operating permit on said perimeter |  | 

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 29
D
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Requested GCF funding Total amount Currency
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 75.445176 million euro (€)
GCF financial instrument Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
(i) Senior loans 73.623231 40 years 10 years 0 %
(ii) Subordinated loans -
(iii) Equity -
(iv) Guarantees -
(v) Reimbursable grants -
(vi) Grants 1.821945
(vii) Results-based payments -
Total amount Currency
(b) Co-financing information
123.247006 million euro (€)
Financial Tenor &
Name of institution Amount Currency Pricing Seniority
instrument grace
million 10 years 7.6 %31 senior
BOAD Senior Loans 15.244902
euro (€) 3 years
million Enter years Enter% Options
Senegalese Government Grant 5.606169
euro (€) Enter years
million 10 years 6.14 % senior
KfW Senior Loans 102.395935
euro (€) 0.5 years
Amount Currency
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) 198.692182 million euro (€)
With regards to the tenor between the GCF and BOAD, it should be noted that BOAD
funding has already been approved by its board of directors for the project, mobilizing
resources from States and on the international financial market according to
characteristics which are reflected in the cost of the resource. Each year, the
characteristics of the resources are fixed by the senior authorities of the Bank
accordingly. As the cost of BOAD resources is higher, the request for GCF
(d) Other financing concessional resources is meant at reducing the project's WACC for the Senegalese
arrangements and State which is the borrower, and lighten its debt servicing in smaller instalments to
contributions (max. 250 improve viability.
words, approximately 0.5
Private sector parallel equity financing will amount to EUR 9.6 mln, which will be
page)
channeled for the tariff harmonisation funding (result-based compensation), beside
their operational expenditures and batteries replacement cost to be provisioned
yearly in escrow account.
Tax exemptions will be granted to rural electrification equipment supply by framework
convention between ASER and the Ministry of Finance.
C.2. Financing by component
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million euro
million euro Instrument million euro Instrument Institutions
(€)
(€) (€)
31 Fixed interest rate, on top of which a commitment fee (0,5%) and a service fee (1%) are due.

--- Table 1 on Page 34 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) Requested GCF funding |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) |  |  |  |  |  | 75.445176 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF financial instrument |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | (i) |  |  | Senior loans |  | 73.623231 |  |  |  |  | 40 years |  |  |  | 10 years |  |  |  |  | 0 % |  |  | 
(ii) |  |  | Subordinated loans |  |  | - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iii) |  |  | Equity |  |  | - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(iv) |  |  | Guarantees |  |  | - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(v) |  |  | Reimbursable grants |  |  | - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vi) |  |  | Grants |  |  | 1.821945 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(vii) |  |  | Results-based payments |  |  | - |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(b) Co-financing information |  |  |  |  |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 123.247006 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Name of institution |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  |  |  | Currency |  |  | Tenor & |  | Pricing |  |  |  | Seniority | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | instrument |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | grace |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
BOAD |  |  |  |  |  | Senior Loans |  |  | 15.244902 |  |  |  | million
euro (€) |  | 10 years
3 years |  |  | 7.6 %31 |  |  |  | senior | 
Senegalese Government |  |  |  |  |  | Grant |  |  | 5.606169 |  |  |  | million
euro (€) |  | Enter years
Enter years |  |  | Enter% |  |  |  | Options | 
KfW |  |  |  |  |  | Senior Loans |  |  | 102.395935 |  |  |  | million
euro (€) |  | 10 years
0.5 years |  |  | 6.14 % |  |  |  | senior | 
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b) |  |  |  |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 198.692182 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million euro (€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
(d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page) |  |  |  |  |  | With regards to the tenor between the GCF and BOAD, it should be noted that BOAD
funding has already been approved by its board of directors for the project, mobilizing
resources from States and on the international financial market according to
characteristics which are reflected in the cost of the resource. Each year, the
characteristics of the resources are fixed by the senior authorities of the Bank
accordingly. As the cost of BOAD resources is higher, the request for GCF
concessional resources is meant at reducing the project's WACC for the Senegalese
State which is the borrower, and lighten its debt servicing in smaller instalments to
improve viability.
Private sector parallel equity financing will amount to EUR 9.6 mln, which will be
channeled for the tariff harmonisation funding (result-based compensation), beside
their operational expenditures and batteries replacement cost to be provisioned
yearly in escrow account.
Tax exemptions will be granted to rural electrification equipment supply by framework
convention between ASER and the Ministry of Finance. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million euro
million euro Instrument million euro Instrument Institutions
(€)
(€) (€) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 34 ---
(c) Total financing
(c) = (a)+(b)

--- Table 3 on Page 34 ---
(d) Other financing
arrangements and
contributions (max. 250
words, approximately 0.5
page)

--- Table 4 on Page 34 ---
Component | Output | Indicative
cost
million euro
(€) |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions | Name of | 
 |  |  |  | million euro |  |  | Instrument |  |  | million euro |  |  |  | Institutions | 
 |  |  |  | (€) |  |  |  |  |  | (€) |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 5 on Page 34 ---
Indicative
cost
million euro
(€)

--- Table 6 on Page 34 ---
Financial
Instrument

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 30
D
1.1 Capacity
building of
0.24 Loan BOAD
rural 0.94 0.23 Grants
0.47 Grant GoS
electrification
stakeholder
1. Technical
1.2 Gender
assistance to
action plan
the solar rural 1.23 0.61 Grants 0.61 Grant GoS
implementatio
electrification
n
stakeholders
1.3
Environmental
& social 1.57 0.5 Grants 1.07 Grant GoS
downstream
activities
2.1
Preparation of 0.24 GoS
Grant
detailed 3.49 0.58 Loan
Loan
Engineering 2.660 KfW
studies
2.2 Supply, 2.91 Grant GoS
2. Procurement installation Loan
and Installation and
177.16 70.81 Loan 89.36 KfW
of solar commissionin
Loan
g of
powered mini-
14.09 BOAD
equipment
grids
2.3 Modern
6.10 6.10 Loan KfW
public lighting
2.4 Control
4.27 Loan KfW
and
5.48 0.29 Loan
supervision of
0.91 Loan BOAD
work
3.1 Gender & -
social
connections 0.39 0.39 Grants
3. Incentives
for Social &
3.2 -
Productive Use
Microfinanced
of Electricity
productive
1.94 1.94 Loan
equipment
credits
guarantees
Project - 0.30 Grant GoS
Management 0.39 0.09 Grants
Cost
Indicative total cost (EUR)
198,692,182 75,445,176 123,247,006
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☒ No
☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes No ☒
☐
GCF-funded Technical Assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders will amount to EUR 3.7 mln, including
among others, Gender action plan implementing activities, Monitoring of ESMP implementation and environmental
and social support, Subsidy for setting up a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics) and
Training on procurement procedures and GCF requirements

--- Table 1 on Page 35 ---
 | 1. Technical
assistance to
the solar rural
electrification
stakeholders | 1.1 Capacity
building of
rural
electrification
stakeholder | 0.94 | 0.23 | Grants |  | 0.24
0.47 | Loan
Grant | BOAD
GoS | 
 |  | 1.2 Gender
action plan
implementatio
n | 1.23 | 0.61 | Grants |  | 0.61 | Grant | GoS | 
 |  | 1.3
Environmental
& social
downstream
activities | 1.57 | 0.5 | Grants |  | 1.07 | Grant | GoS | 
 | 2. Procurement
and Installation
of solar
powered mini-
grids | 2.1
Preparation of
detailed
Engineering
studies | 3.49 | 0.58 | Loan |  | 0.24
2.660 | Grant
Loan | GoS
KfW | 
 |  | 2.2 Supply,
installation
and
commissionin
g of
equipment | 177.16 | 70.81 | Loan |  | 2.91
89.36
14.09 | Grant
Loan
Loan | GoS
KfW
BOAD | 
 |  | 2.3 Modern
public lighting | 6.10 |  |  |  | 6.10 | Loan | KfW | 
 |  | 2.4 Control
and
supervision of
work | 5.48 | 0.29 | Loan |  | 4.27
0.91 | Loan
Loan | KfW
BOAD | 
 | 3. Incentives
for Social &
Productive Use
of Electricity | 3.1 Gender &
social
connections | 0.39 | 0.39 | Grants |  | - |  |  | 
 |  | 3.2
Microfinanced
productive
equipment
credits
guarantees | 1.94 | 1.94 | Loan |  | - |  |  | 
 | Project
Management
Cost | - | 0.39 | 0.09 | Grants |  | 0.30 | Grant | GoS | 
 | Indicative total cost (EUR) |  | 198,692,182 | 75,445,176 |  |  | 123,247,006 |  |  | 
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes ☒ No
☐ |  |  | 
 | C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  |  |  |  |  | Yes No ☒
☐ |  |  | 
GCF-funded Technical Assistance to the solar rural electrification stakeholders will amount to EUR 3.7 mln, including
among others, Gender action plan implementing activities, Monitoring of ESMP implementation and environmental
and social support, Subsidy for setting up a recycling unit for batteries and other waste (CFL, other electronics) and
Training on procurement procedures and GCF requirements |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 31
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
In terms of mitigation, the project will contribute to climate action in the generation of emission reductions of 1.13 M.
tonnes of CO2 equivalent by 2045. The estimated emission reduction potential arises from the implementation of
renewable energy-based rural electrification replacing the continuous, alternative use of fossil fuel-based solutions.
ASER rural electrification initiatives are registered under a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Programme of
Activities (PoA), including technological distinctions32 between Project Activities of Mini-Grids, Grid Extension, Solar
Home Systems and (upcoming) Portable Solar Lamps.
Approved Methodology applied is AMS-III.BL. - Integrated methodology for electrification of communities33.
Figure 19: Flow diagram for baseline and project scenario showing emissions sources
Figure 20: UNFCCC CDM simplified emission reductions determination approach
55 kWh 250 kWh
User type:
Households
Power consumed
per facility
(kWh/year)
Energy service Lighting Mixed uses Mixed uses
Baseline Kerosene Micro-generation
pressure lamp
Default Emission 6.8 (tCO/MWh) 1.3 tCOe/MWh 1.0 tCOe/MWh
2 2 2
factor
Summary calculations:
=Σ( , , × , )
2
Where:
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑥𝑥 𝐵𝐵 𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝐸𝐸
, = Baseline emission from consumers Types in year y (tCO2)
, , = Annual electricity consumption of consumer Types in year y (MWh)
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵 2, • If ECT,x,y is equal to or less than 0.055 MWh, then a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh);
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑥𝑥𝐵𝐵 • If ECT1,x,y is less than or equal to 0.250 MWh but greater than 0.055 MWh, then:
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝐸𝐸 o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh, a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh);
o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh, a default value of 1.3 (tCO2/MWh);
• If ECT1,x,y is greater than 0.250 MWh but less than or equal to 0.500 MWh, then:
o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh);
32 UNFCCC (2018) Senegal Rural Electrification Program. CDM programme documentation is available here
33 N.B. Under this CDM methodology ’s eligibility requirements, at least 75% (by number) of the project consumers shall be
households

--- Table 1 on Page 36 ---
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF’s Initial Investment Framework. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | In terms of mitigation, the project will contribute to climate action in the generation of emission reductions of 1.13 M. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tonnes of CO2 equivalent by 2045. The estimated emission reduction potential arises from the implementation of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | renewable energy-based rural electrification replacing the continuous, alternative use of fossil fuel-based solutions. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ASER rural electrification initiatives are registered under a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Programme of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activities (PoA), including technological distinctions32 between Project Activities of Mini-Grids, Grid Extension, Solar |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Home Systems and (upcoming) Portable Solar Lamps. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Approved Methodology applied is AMS-III.BL. - Integrated methodology for electrification of communities33. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Figure 19: Flow diagram for baseline and project scenario showing emissions sources |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Figure 20: UNFCCC CDM simplified emission reductions determination approach |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 55 kWh 250 kWh
User type:
Households
Power consumed
per facility
(kWh/year)
Energy service Lighting Mixed uses Mixed uses
Baseline Kerosene Micro-generation
pressure lamp
Default Emission 6.8 (tCO/MWh) 1.3 tCOe/MWh 1.0 tCOe/MWh
2 2 2
factor |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Summary calculations: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | =Σ( , , × , )
2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Where: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵 | 𝐵𝐵 | 𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
, | 𝑥𝑥 |  | = | 𝐵𝐵 |  | 𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝐸𝐸
Baseline emission from consumers Types in year y (tCO2) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | , , |  |  | = |  |  | Annual electricity consumption of consumer Types in year y (MWh) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵 2,
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑥𝑥𝐵𝐵
𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝐸𝐸 | 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵 2, |  |  |  |  |  | • If ECT,x,y is equal to or less than 0.055 MWh, then a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh); |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • If ECT1,x,y is less than or equal to 0.250 MWh but greater than 0.055 MWh, then: |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh, a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh); |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh, a default value of 1.3 (tCO2/MWh); |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • If ECT1,x,y is greater than 0.250 MWh but less than or equal to 0.500 MWh, then: |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | o For the portion up to and including 0.055 MWh a default value of 6.8 (tCO2/MWh); |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 36 ---
 | 

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 32
D
o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh and less than 0.25 MWh/y a default value of 1.3
(tCO2/MWh); and
o For the portion greater than 0.250 MWh a default value of 1.0 (tCO2/MWh);
• If ECT1M,j,y is greater than 0.500 MWh then a default value of 1.0 (tCO2/MWh) for the entire
portion (i.e. default values of 1.3 (tCO2/MWh) or 6.8 (tCO2/MWh) are not eligible for any of
the portions)
1 2 3 4 5 ->25
year 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 years
Households connections # 11 675 23 350 38 917 38 917 38 917 38 917
PREM completion # 374 1 122 2 617 3 739 3 739 3 739
Electricity demand growth %/y 3.2 percent per annum
Baseline emissions tCO2e/y 7 782 19 932 33 220 34 272 35 357 1 127 447
Project emissions tCO2e/y - - - - -
Emissions reductions tCO e/y 7 782 19 932 33 220 34 272 35 357 1 127 447
2
Table 7: Underlying mini-grids beneficiaries’ specific consumption breakdown
User type Specific consumption (kWh/day) Emission factor (kgCO 2 /kWh)
School 2,5 1,0
Mill 15 1,0
Dispensary 7,68 1,0
Health center 15,28 1,0
Health shop 4 1,0
Boutique 8 1,0
Sewing maching 0,5 1,0
Borehole pump 33 1,0
Public lighting 0,3 1,0
Religious center 1,5 1,0
Socio-educational house 1,5 1,0
Household 1,2 2,67
In terms of adaptation co-benefits34, the programme will contribute to fostering resilience and sustainable
development in the following ways:
• Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, with a particular focus on women and children as the key
beneficiaries, withequalized gender roles and enhanced access to education and information (a dedicated EUR
1.2 million gender equality promotion program will target this development).
• Diversifying energ y generation portfolio in relation to scattered geography (decreased vulnerability to disasters),
fuel use needs (no fuel supply at risk of extreme weather events), cooling/refrigeration needs and water use needs
(removed dependence on water challenges), supporting a more climate-resilient power system
• Climate-resilient productive assets deployment thanks to the revolving guarantees of up to 40% of nominal loans
of 3-y average duration (the GCF funding being worth EUR 20 mln total borrowings), improving reliability of water
and food chains, as well as services in health, education and social institutions, throughout 3,739 ‘Projets
Energétiques Multi-sectoriels’ including farmers, entrepreneurs, schools and clinics lacking electricity
• Providing employment opportunities and supporting economic growth in rural areas. Affordable renewable
electricity will further strengthen the economic resilience of rural households as it will improve community income
levels and reduce migration patterns.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The project is designed to produce a paradigm shift by supporting the transition away from a traditional energy
pathway that would otherwise continue to be dependent on imported fossil fuels35 especially in the most remote and
smallest vulnerable villages where grid extension is not feasible, to a progressive, low-carbon and sustainable
34 see CCKN and IISD (2014) case study on adaptation benefits from rural solar electrification projects in Senegal
35 Senegal imported 655 ktoe of oil in 2015 and used 305 ktoe of it to generate electricity, according to the African Energy
Commission

--- Table 1 on Page 37 ---
 |  |  |  |  | o For the portion greater than 0.055 MWh and less than 0.25 MWh/y a default value of 1.3
(tCO2/MWh); and
o For the portion greater than 0.250 MWh a default value of 1.0 (tCO2/MWh);
• If ECT1M,j,y is greater than 0.500 MWh then a default value of 1.0 (tCO2/MWh) for the entire
portion (i.e. default values of 1.3 (tCO2/MWh) or 6.8 (tCO2/MWh) are not eligible for any of
the portions) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 3 |  |  |  | 4 |  |  | 5 |  |  | ->25 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | y | ear |  |  |  | 2021 |  |  | 2022 |  |  | 2023 |  |  |  | 2024 |  |  | 2025 |  |  | years | 
 | Households connections |  |  |  |  |  | # |  |  |  |  | 11 675 |  |  | 23 350 |  |  | 38 917 |  |  |  | 38 917 |  |  | 38 917 |  |  | 38 917 | 
 | PREM completion |  |  |  |  |  | # |  |  |  |  | 374 |  |  | 1 122 |  |  | 2 617 |  |  |  | 3 739 |  |  | 3 739 |  |  | 3 739 | 
 | Electricity demand growth |  |  |  |  |  | %/y |  |  |  |  | 3.2 percent per annum |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Baseline emissions |  |  |  |  |  | tCO2e/y |  |  |  |  | 7 782 |  |  | 19 932 |  |  | 33 220 |  |  |  | 34 272 |  |  | 35 357 |  |  | 1 127 447 | 
 | Project emissions |  |  |  |  |  | tCO2e/y |  |  |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  |  | - |  |  | - |  |  |  | 
 | Emissions reductions |  |  |  |  |  | t | CO e/y
2 |  |  |  | 7 782 |  |  | 19 932 |  |  | 33 220 |  |  |  | 34 272 |  |  | 35 357 |  |  | 1 127 447 | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Table 7: Underlying mini-grids beneficiaries’ specific consumption breakdown |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | User type |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Specific consumption (kWh/day) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Emission factor (kgCO /kWh)
2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | School |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2,5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mill |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 15 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Dispensary |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 7,68 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Health center |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 15,28 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Health shop |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Boutique |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 8 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Sewing maching |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0,5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Borehole pump |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 33 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Public lighting |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0,3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Religious center |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Socio-educational house |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Household |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 1,2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2,67 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | In terms of adaptation co-benefits34, the programme will contribute to fostering resilience and sustainable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | development in the following ways: |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, with a particular focus on women and children as the key |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | beneficiaries, withequalized gender roles and enhanced access to education and information (a dedicated EUR |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1.2 million gender equality promotion program will target this development). |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Diversifying energ y generation portfolio in relation to scattered geography (decreased vulnerability to disasters), |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | fuel use needs (no fuel supply at risk of extreme weather events), cooling/refrigeration needs and water use needs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (removed dependence on water challenges), supporting a more climate-resilient power system |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Climate-resilient productive assets deployment thanks to the revolving guarantees of up to 40% of nominal loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | of 3-y average duration (the GCF funding being worth EUR 20 mln total borrowings), improving reliability of water |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and food chains, as well as services in health, education and social institutions, throughout 3,739 ‘Projets |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Energétiques Multi-sectoriels’ including farmers, entrepreneurs, schools and clinics lacking electricity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | • Providing employment opportunities and supporting economic growth in rural areas. Affordable renewable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | electricity will further strengthen the economic resilience of rural households as it will improve community income |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | levels and reduce migration patterns. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The project is designed to produce a paradigm shift by supporting the transition away from a traditional energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | pathway that would otherwise continue to be dependent on imported fossil fuels35 especially in the most remote and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | smallest vulnerable villages where grid extension is not feasible, to a progressive, low-carbon and sustainable |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 33
D
pathway that prioritises decentralized energy generation and gender involvement, focusing both on electricity for
economic development (value-added productive use) and for improved access (community adaptative capacity) of
marginalised rural areas. The project intends to achieve the following paradigm shift potentialities:
• Crowd in private sector capital and expertise
Given the lack of technology track-record and the financial sector’s limited know-how of clean energy
investments (particularly when it comes to decentralised power generation), private capital for the targeted
investments is prohibitively expensive. The proposed financing package offers a solution to incentivise
participation of the private sector by increasing investor confidence. Confidence is enhanced by making
available concessional finance and grant funding that significantly lower the WACC by over a third (2.4%),
thereby strengthening debt-service coverage ratios and increasing overall profitability in the long run. The
private sector, which is required to contribute 5% of the total investment in equity (concession fee), furthermore
brings in much-needed technical expertise to operate these assets cost-effectively and sustainably. This
collaboration will greatly improve the business environment in the energy sector, which, according to the IMF,
currently stands out as the weakest of all economic sectors in Senegal.36
• Improve the investment framework and disseminate knowledge through knowledge-sharing and learning
The TA component will focus on designing and implementing productive use-targeted de-risking tools that both
satisfy the capacities of the final beneficiaries and reflect the needs of private sector operators, which is
expected to generate a powerful trickle-down effect on the national economy. Combined with the gender
equality promotion plan, the programme is expected to have significant positive co-benefits on the economic
resilience of the most vulnerable communities in Senegal.
• Modernise the rural economy through increased solar-powered productive use
The demonstration of transformative potential of productive uses leveraging solar energy will provide a
compelling case for their adoption in agriculture and other sectors of activity. The vast majority of Africa’s off-
grid households are in rural areas and largely engaged in agricultural activities – for sustenance, for income,
or both. Most are smallholder farmers, often without access to electricity to power electrical appliances which
would help them increase their yields, water access and sanitation.Solar rural electrification is an effective way
of improving community assets through cheaper delivery of services (health, education, water & agriculture),
increasing quality of life and enhancing the adaptive capacity of co mmunities.
• Enhance Senegal readiness for leveraging further climate finance opportunities
Senegal already has a proven leadership in accessing climate finance for adaptation purposes – Centre de
Suivi Ecologique (CSE), a public utility association based in Senegal, was the first national institution to access
international climate finance (as the nominated National Implementing Entity for the Adaptation Fund since
2010), based on a proposal from the National Committee for Adaptation to Climate Change (COMNACC)
through the Designated Authority (MEDD, which is also the GCF NDA for Senegal).
The Technical Assistance embedded in this project will contribute to building expertise in public-private
mitigation activities coordination and implementation in the rural electricity sector, backed by a robust MRV
system, which will also help to further attract public and private climate finance, including from carbon markets.
• Encourage regional replication by advancing fossil-fuel grids to clean energy and low-carbon development
Senegal’s electricity access rate is 68% nationally and it stands only at 42% in rural areas. Senegal is a Least
Developed Country and lacks the resources to finance the roll-out of the planned rural electrification activities.
Under a business-as-usual scenario, any improvements in the rates of rural electrification are likely to be met
through diesel-powered generators (due to its relatively low upfront cost). Neighbouring countries, including
some of BOAD’s other member countries, face similar obstacles. The financial package proposed by BOAD
and complemented by the requested GCF contribution will enable ASER to mobilise private sector investment
in the domestic energy sector by facilitating access to affordable, long-term finance. Without this concessional
finance, private sector concessionaires will struggle to get their projects financed or will only do so against
excessively high tariffs to end-customers. Such business-as-usual scenario would lock in carbon intensive
infrastructure – a pathway that the Government of Senegal aims to avoid.
36 IMF African Department (2015) Making Senegal a Hub for West Africa

--- Table 1 on Page 38 ---
 | pathway that prioritises decentralized energy generation and gender involvement, focusing both on electricity for | 
 | economic development (value-added productive use) and for improved access (community adaptative capacity) of | 
 | marginalised rural areas. The project intends to achieve the following paradigm shift potentialities: | 
 |  | 
 | • Crowd in private sector capital and expertise | 
 | Given the lack of technology track-record and the financial sector’s limited know-how of clean energy | 
 | investments (particularly when it comes to decentralised power generation), private capital for the targeted | 
 | investments is prohibitively expensive. The proposed financing package offers a solution to incentivise | 
 | participation of the private sector by increasing investor confidence. Confidence is enhanced by making | 
 | available concessional finance and grant funding that significantly lower the WACC by over a third (2.4%), | 
 | thereby strengthening debt-service coverage ratios and increasing overall profitability in the long run. The | 
 | private sector, which is required to contribute 5% of the total investment in equity (concession fee), furthermore | 
 | brings in much-needed technical expertise to operate these assets cost-effectively and sustainably. This | 
 | collaboration will greatly improve the business environment in the energy sector, which, according to the IMF, | 
 | currently stands out as the weakest of all economic sectors in Senegal.36 | 
 |  | 
 | • Improve the investment framework and disseminate knowledge through knowledge-sharing and learning | 
 | The TA component will focus on designing and implementing productive use-targeted de-risking tools that both | 
 | satisfy the capacities of the final beneficiaries and reflect the needs of private sector operators, which is | 
 | expected to generate a powerful trickle-down effect on the national economy. Combined with the gender | 
 | equality promotion plan, the programme is expected to have significant positive co-benefits on the economic | 
 | resilience of the most vulnerable communities in Senegal. | 
 |  | 
 | • Modernise the rural economy through increased solar-powered productive use | 
 | The demonstration of transformative potential of productive uses leveraging solar energy will provide a | 
 | compelling case for their adoption in agriculture and other sectors of activity. The vast majority of Africa’s off- | 
 | grid households are in rural areas and largely engaged in agricultural activities – for sustenance, for income, | 
 | or both. Most are smallholder farmers, often without access to electricity to power electrical appliances which | 
 | would help them increase their yields, water access and sanitation.Solar rural electrification is an effective way | 
 | of improving community assets through cheaper delivery of services (health, education, water & agriculture), | 
 | increasing quality of life and enhancing the adaptive capacity of co mmunities. | 
 |  | 
 | • Enhance Senegal readiness for leveraging further climate finance opportunities | 
 | Senegal already has a proven leadership in accessing climate finance for adaptation purposes – Centre de | 
 | Suivi Ecologique (CSE), a public utility association based in Senegal, was the first national institution to access | 
 | international climate finance (as the nominated National Implementing Entity for the Adaptation Fund since | 
 | 2010), based on a proposal from the National Committee for Adaptation to Climate Change (COMNACC) | 
 | through the Designated Authority (MEDD, which is also the GCF NDA for Senegal). | 
 | The Technical Assistance embedded in this project will contribute to building expertise in public-private | 
 | mitigation activities coordination and implementation in the rural electricity sector, backed by a robust MRV | 
 | system, which will also help to further attract public and private climate finance, including from carbon markets. | 
 |  | 
 | • Encourage regional replication by advancing fossil-fuel grids to clean energy and low-carbon development | 
 | Senegal’s electricity access rate is 68% nationally and it stands only at 42% in rural areas. Senegal is a Least | 
 | Developed Country and lacks the resources to finance the roll-out of the planned rural electrification activities. | 
 | Under a business-as-usual scenario, any improvements in the rates of rural electrification are likely to be met | 
 | through diesel-powered generators (due to its relatively low upfront cost). Neighbouring countries, including | 
 | some of BOAD’s other member countries, face similar obstacles. The financial package proposed by BOAD | 
 | and complemented by the requested GCF contribution will enable ASER to mobilise private sector investment | 
 | in the domestic energy sector by facilitating access to affordable, long-term finance. Without this concessional | 
 | finance, private sector concessionaires will struggle to get their projects financed or will only do so against | 
 | excessively high tariffs to end-customers. Such business-as-usual scenario would lock in carbon intensive | 
 | infrastructure – a pathway that the Government of Senegal aims to avoid. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 34
D
The ambition of this program is to demonstrate a blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by
other nations. The shift from BOT regional concessions to a public pre-financed concession fee model will
lower long-term power generation costs and secure improved energy access for all segments of the
population.37 Proof of concept will allow other countries in the ECOWAS region to replicate this sovereign
approach, with a higher likelihood of commercial financiers stepping in to provide the required pre-finance
directly to the private sector project developers. Collection of the concession fees (5% of the solar mini-grids
CAPEX) will contribute to funding tariff harmonisation and off-grid renewable electrification through the Special
Support Fund for the Energy Sector (FSE), which in turn support the country’s NDC implementation plans
without needing to rely on international, concessional (climate) finance.
Lessons learned throughout the project lifetime (2021 – 2025) will be disseminated regionally. The ambition of these
activities will be to encourage replication of best-practice approaches both within WAEMU member states (e.g. Benin,
Burkina, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, and Togo) as well as across the entire ECOWAS region. This will
be achieved through the development of knowledge products, delivery of regional workshops, and publication of
relevant resources targeted at partner countries that face similar technical, financing and institutional issues.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The implementation of ASER project will place Senegal on a sustainable, climate-resilient development pathway in
relation to several Sustainable Development Goals:
- SDG 7 (ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all),
- SDG 1 (poverty reduction - Improved Productivity and economic diversification)
- SDG 3 (health improvement – Avoided use of diesel/kerosene/paraffin)
- SDG 5 (gender equality and empowerment of women and girls)
- SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth)
It will contribute to these sustainable development benefits in the following ways:
Economic co-benefits
• Enabling productive uses of electricity and income-generating activities through improved reliability of power
supply, including for irrigation and climate-resilient agriculture practices
• Improving the country’s energy security budget deficit which is negatively impacted by the import of fossil fuels in
foreign denominated currencies
• Lowered operating costs for enterprises benefitting from the generated renewable energy, including clinics and
schools that will reduce or eliminate their dependence on diesel
• Direct creation of employment opportunities including construction and maintenance provision services, highly
relevant given the decentralised nature of the rural electrification program
• Indirect creation of employment opportunities by creating possibilities for shop owners and entrepreneurs to
manufacture or import new technologies that can be powered by electricity.
Social co-benefits
• Improved health conditions, as renewable energy-powered lights will reduce the use of kerosene lamps and
eliminate indoor air pollution which causes eye irritation and lung injury
• Enhanced conditions in educational and social institutions
• Poverty reduction through the promotion of income-generating activities
• Improved access to potable water and water pumping for crop irrigation.
Environmental co-benefits
• Reducing the risk of ground-water contamination caused by leaking diesel generators
• Reduction in local air pollution and noise disturbances on local communities by eliminating the use of diesel-
generated electricity (by 2025 no diesel-only mini-grids will remain in Senegal).
Gender co-benefits
37 Gesto Energy Consulting (2016) Programme d’électrification rurale pour le Sénégal 2015-2025 : Plan de Financement

--- Table 1 on Page 39 ---
 | The ambition of this program is to demonstrate a blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by | 
 | other nations. The shift from BOT regional concessions to a public pre-financed concession fee model will | 
 | lower long-term power generation costs and secure improved energy access for all segments of the | 
 | population.37 Proof of concept will allow other countries in the ECOWAS region to replicate this sovereign | 
 | approach, with a higher likelihood of commercial financiers stepping in to provide the required pre-finance | 
 | directly to the private sector project developers. Collection of the concession fees (5% of the solar mini-grids | 
 | CAPEX) will contribute to funding tariff harmonisation and off-grid renewable electrification through the Special | 
 | Support Fund for the Energy Sector (FSE), which in turn support the country’s NDC implementation plans | 
 | without needing to rely on international, concessional (climate) finance. | 
 |  | 
 | Lessons learned throughout the project lifetime (2021 – 2025) will be disseminated regionally. The ambition of these | 
 | activities will be to encourage replication of best-practice approaches both within WAEMU member states (e.g. Benin, | 
 | Burkina, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, and Togo) as well as across the entire ECOWAS region. This will | 
 | be achieved through the development of knowledge products, delivery of regional workshops, and publication of | 
 | relevant resources targeted at partner countries that face similar technical, financing and institutional issues. | 
 | D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | The implementation of ASER project will place Senegal on a sustainable, climate-resilient development pathway in | 
 | relation to several Sustainable Development Goals: | 
 | - SDG 7 (ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all), | 
 | - SDG 1 (poverty reduction - Improved Productivity and economic diversification) | 
 | - SDG 3 (health improvement – Avoided use of diesel/kerosene/paraffin) | 
 | - SDG 5 (gender equality and empowerment of women and girls) | 
 | - SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) | 
 |  | 
 | It will contribute to these sustainable development benefits in the following ways: | 
 |  | 
 | Economic co-benefits | 
 | • Enabling productive uses of electricity and income-generating activities through improved reliability of power | 
 | supply, including for irrigation and climate-resilient agriculture practices | 
 | • Improving the country’s energy security budget deficit which is negatively impacted by the import of fossil fuels in | 
 | foreign denominated currencies | 
 | • Lowered operating costs for enterprises benefitting from the generated renewable energy, including clinics and | 
 | schools that will reduce or eliminate their dependence on diesel | 
 | • Direct creation of employment opportunities including construction and maintenance provision services, highly | 
 | relevant given the decentralised nature of the rural electrification program | 
 | • Indirect creation of employment opportunities by creating possibilities for shop owners and entrepreneurs to | 
 | manufacture or import new technologies that can be powered by electricity. | 
 |  | 
 | Social co-benefits | 
 | • Improved health conditions, as renewable energy-powered lights will reduce the use of kerosene lamps and | 
 | eliminate indoor air pollution which causes eye irritation and lung injury | 
 | • Enhanced conditions in educational and social institutions | 
 | • Poverty reduction through the promotion of income-generating activities | 
 | • Improved access to potable water and water pumping for crop irrigation. | 
 |  | 
 | Environmental co-benefits | 
 | • Reducing the risk of ground-water contamination caused by leaking diesel generators | 
 | • Reduction in local air pollution and noise disturbances on local communities by eliminating the use of diesel- | 
 | generated electricity (by 2025 no diesel-only mini-grids will remain in Senegal). | 
 |  | 
 | Gender co-benefits | 

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 35
D
• Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, ensuring that men and women are equally benefitting from
the initiative. ASER will offer special support to promote equal opportunities arising from the rural electrification
project through the TA component for both men and women
• Freeing up time for women (previously allocated to household tasks, through the use of mills and access to drinking
water supply among others) and children (increasing light time available at night) to engage in productive and
education activities that improve income generation and strengthen social standing.
• Positive discrimination will be made against women's microenterprises by setting up mechanisms to take better
advantage of the energy opportunities that will arise: training of target groups in trades, design of business plans
around activities identified beforehand and access to micro-financing for equipment and provision of connection
coupons to the most vulnerable, support for a good organizational and institutional structuring of women's
organizations
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Vulnerability of recipients
The electricity sector in Senegal (a Least Developed Country) is mostly exposed to mitigation-related climate risks
through (i) decreased/variable water availability for hydropower generation and thermal power generation cooling, (ii)
increased damage to hydropower infrastructure from flooding and river sediment loads, and (iii) increased damage to
power transmission and distribution infrastructure from sea level rise and coastal erosion. Adaptation-related climate
vulnerabilities of off-grid rural communities span disruptions caused by natural disasters like increasing mean
temperatures, rainfall variability and droughts with consequences in terms of diseases, water scarcity, food insecurity,
lower agricultural and economic productivity as well a s disempowerment of women and young populations from building
more resilient livelihoods. These water resources, agriculture, livestock and health risks are further aggravated by the
expensive fossil fuels, low income and limited employment burdens on development and wellbeing.
Growing national debt level
Senegal’s public debt currently stands at USD 7.5 billion, representing 57% of the country’s GDP. A combination of
exchange rate depreciation and a dependence on foreign debt places the treasury at risk. The Ministry of Finance is
committed to reduce debt ratios over the medium term by means of fiscal consolidation, improvements in the current
account and improved debt management policies.38 With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average
cost of capital is reduced by 2.4% (to a level of 3.9%, instead of 6.3% without the GCF) thus lightening its debt
obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years further optimizes its debt servicing
schedule to viable instalments (further sustained by private operators’ 5% concession fee collection towards the
harmonization fund).
Local capital market constraints
Given the pricing risk and lack of track-record of similar projects in the country, local financial institutions are unwilling
to provide affordable financing solutions to project developers. High costs of capital force project developers to charge
excessive electricity tariffs, denting demand and sustainability of investments. Lessons learned from the first phase of
the initial 3 ‘pilot concessions’ indicate that investor confidence in off-grid renewable energy IPPs is still weak.
Furthermore, there is a significant mismatch between the amount of money that rural consumers can pay for electricity
and the minimum tariffs that private concessionaires need to charge to meet their required rates of return. As such, a
shift from the current BOT scheme to a concessional finance model is required to offer local financial lenders a de-
risked proposition and help the sector mobilise private sector finance sustainably.
Without the concessional co-finance extended through BOAD and the GCF, the investment hurdle for local financiers
will continue to exist and access to affordable finance will remain an issue for the concessionaires. The result will be
lagging rural electrification rates, highly variable electricity tariffs and the inability to meet the government’s target of
achieving universal access by 2025. By demonstrating successful engagement of private sector concessionaires in the
proposed project, the perceived risk of future interventions is expected to decline. Consequently, commercial funders
will have more confidence to step in by the time GCF’s involvement comes to an end.
38 In accordance with the ‘Plan Senegal Emergent’ launched in 2014 – the country’s new development model aimed at
accelerating its progress toward eme rging market status – low inflation and controlled public debt are key objectives to
contribute to sustainable long-term economic growth

--- Table 1 on Page 40 ---
 | • Increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural areas, ensuring that men and women are equally benefitting from | 
 | the initiative. ASER will offer special support to promote equal opportunities arising from the rural electrification | 
 | project through the TA component for both men and women | 
 | • Freeing up time for women (previously allocated to household tasks, through the use of mills and access to drinking | 
 | water supply among others) and children (increasing light time available at night) to engage in productive and | 
 | education activities that improve income generation and strengthen social standing. | 
 | • Positive discrimination will be made against women's microenterprises by setting up mechanisms to take better | 
 | advantage of the energy opportunities that will arise: training of target groups in trades, design of business plans | 
 | around activities identified beforehand and access to micro-financing for equipment and provision of connection | 
 | coupons to the most vulnerable, support for a good organizational and institutional structuring of women's | 
 | organizations | 
 |  | 
 | D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Vulnerability of recipients | 
 | The electricity sector in Senegal (a Least Developed Country) is mostly exposed to mitigation-related climate risks | 
 | through (i) decreased/variable water availability for hydropower generation and thermal power generation cooling, (ii) | 
 | increased damage to hydropower infrastructure from flooding and river sediment loads, and (iii) increased damage to | 
 | power transmission and distribution infrastructure from sea level rise and coastal erosion. Adaptation-related climate | 
 | vulnerabilities of off-grid rural communities span disruptions caused by natural disasters like increasing mean | 
 | temperatures, rainfall variability and droughts with consequences in terms of diseases, water scarcity, food insecurity, | 
 | lower agricultural and economic productivity as well a s disempowerment of women and young populations from building | 
 | more resilient livelihoods. These water resources, agriculture, livestock and health risks are further aggravated by the | 
 | expensive fossil fuels, low income and limited employment burdens on development and wellbeing. | 
 |  | 
 | Growing national debt level | 
 | Senegal’s public debt currently stands at USD 7.5 billion, representing 57% of the country’s GDP. A combination of | 
 | exchange rate depreciation and a dependence on foreign debt places the treasury at risk. The Ministry of Finance is | 
 | committed to reduce debt ratios over the medium term by means of fiscal consolidation, improvements in the current | 
 | account and improved debt management policies.38 With the help of GCF concessional loan, ASER project’s average | 
 | cost of capital is reduced by 2.4% (to a level of 3.9%, instead of 6.3% without the GCF) thus lightening its debt | 
 | obligations weigh on the government’s balance sheet. The long tenor of 40 years further optimizes its debt servicing | 
 | schedule to viable instalments (further sustained by private operators’ 5% concession fee collection towards the | 
 | harmonization fund). | 
 | Local capital market constraints | 
 | Given the pricing risk and lack of track-record of similar projects in the country, local financial institutions are unwilling | 
 | to provide affordable financing solutions to project developers. High costs of capital force project developers to charge | 
 | excessive electricity tariffs, denting demand and sustainability of investments. Lessons learned from the first phase of | 
 | the initial 3 ‘pilot concessions’ indicate that investor confidence in off-grid renewable energy IPPs is still weak. | 
 | Furthermore, there is a significant mismatch between the amount of money that rural consumers can pay for electricity | 
 | and the minimum tariffs that private concessionaires need to charge to meet their required rates of return. As such, a | 
 | shift from the current BOT scheme to a concessional finance model is required to offer local financial lenders a de- | 
 | risked proposition and help the sector mobilise private sector finance sustainably. | 
 | Without the concessional co-finance extended through BOAD and the GCF, the investment hurdle for local financiers | 
 | will continue to exist and access to affordable finance will remain an issue for the concessionaires. The result will be | 
 | lagging rural electrification rates, highly variable electricity tariffs and the inability to meet the government’s target of | 
 | achieving universal access by 2025. By demonstrating successful engagement of private sector concessionaires in the | 
 | proposed project, the perceived risk of future interventions is expected to decline. Consequently, commercial funders | 
 | will have more confidence to step in by the time GCF’s involvement comes to an end. | 

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 36
D
Limited institutional capacities
Despite the recent liberalisation of the national energy market and allowance of IPPs to compete with SENELEC,
institutional capacities in both the public and private sectors are still insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling
environment. Technical support to strengthen the technical and gender capacity of the PMU, implementing partners,
private concessionnaires and community beneficiaries with a focus on gender mainstreaming throughout the project
cycle is necessary. Furthermore, outreach to national and regional commercial financiers is needed to maximise the
replication potential of the project in neighbouring countries. The proposed EUR 3.7 million TA component aims to
overcome the current institutional gaps.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The project falls under the auspices of the Ministry of Energy and is fully endorsed and co-financed by the Ministry of
Finance, also processing all disbursement requests with BOAD acting as the Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants
from the GCF. The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (the NDA) has been following the preparation
of this project since its inception and assured BOAD and ASER of its willingness to support this GCF funding application
due to its clear alignment with the following national strategies and development plans:
• The Senegalese Nationally Determined Contribution submitted to the UNFCCC in September 2015, which lists
rural electrification as a key component of this action plan. The document refers to the commissioning of 392
mini-grid systems (unconditional pledge) and up to 5,000 villages connected through PV mini-grids contingent
on external support (conditional target)39
• The government’s commitment to the SE4ALL initiative, which identifies rural electrification as one of the most
important components of the global program. Senegal has committed to achieve universal access to electricity
by 2025
• The National Strategy for Economic and Social Development adopted in 2012 (SNDES), in which the
government is committed to increase access to electricity in rural areas in an affordable and equitable way
• Universal access to energy in rural areas is considered in the ‘Plan Sénégal Emergent’ as a fundamental factor
for economic development and for the fight against poverty. The main objective of the plan is the emergence
of Senegal to promote economic growth as a strong leverage for human development
• The ‘‘Plan Sénégal Emergent’ also aims to reduce the cost of generation to a value between 60 and 70 FCFA
/ kWh (EUR 0.09-0.11) in the long-term. Investment in renewable energy generation will reduce the
government’s dependence on fossil fuels which are expensive to import.
• Fiscal exemption on VAT was granted by the State of Senegal to all rural electrification related equipment. This
agreement shall be subject to periodic renewal by mutual agreement.
Implementation of these mitigation activities is slower than desired because of various constraints, including absence
of capital and insufficient institutional capacity and experience. However, the country has instituted the agencies and
structures required to finalise and implement these climate action plans/strategies.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The adequacy of the instruments proposed to the GCF (long term, subordinated project debt to be mixed with private
sector concessionaires’ equity and grant finance towards the public sector) is based on the following elements:
• Given the relatively high CAPEX investment required by off-grid renewable energy technologies relative to
other fossil-based alternatives (which offer lower CAPEX demands but higher operational costs), there is need
for project debt with longer tenors of at least 10 to 15 years. Local financial institutions, if at all willing to provide
debt co-finance to the concessionaires, limit debt tenors to 5 to 7 years. Such short repayment schedules,
combined with high costs of capital, negatively impact the competitiveness of the concessionaires and dent
scale-up potential.
• The proposed financing plan, whereby a) BOAD’s loan and the GCF’s concessional loan contribution enable
ASER to reduce WACC by over a third for the overall project CAPEX until 2025; and b) longer-term
concessional debt offered to ASER subsequently lower concessionaires required equity investments (down to
5% concession fee, to be collected on the Special Support Fund for the Energy Sector administered by CRSE
for tariff harmonization and renewable energy development) as well as commercial loans from local financial
institutions. Lower upfront CAPEX demands combined with softer financing terms will strengthen the
concessionaires’ debt service coverage ratios and profitability, a prerequisite to a maturing, private sector-led
market space.
39 UNFCCC (2015) Contribution Prévue Déterminée au Niveau National

--- Table 1 on Page 41 ---
 | Limited institutional capacities | 
 | Despite the recent liberalisation of the national energy market and allowance of IPPs to compete with SENELEC, | 
 | institutional capacities in both the public and private sectors are still insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling | 
 | environment. Technical support to strengthen the technical and gender capacity of the PMU, implementing partners, | 
 | private concessionnaires and community beneficiaries with a focus on gender mainstreaming throughout the project | 
 | cycle is necessary. Furthermore, outreach to national and regional commercial financiers is needed to maximise the | 
 | replication potential of the project in neighbouring countries. The proposed EUR 3.7 million TA component aims to | 
 | overcome the current institutional gaps. | 
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | The project falls under the auspices of the Ministry of Energy and is fully endorsed and co-financed by the Ministry of | 
 | Finance, also processing all disbursement requests with BOAD acting as the Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants | 
 | from the GCF. The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (the NDA) has been following the preparation | 
 | of this project since its inception and assured BOAD and ASER of its willingness to support this GCF funding application | 
 | due to its clear alignment with the following national strategies and development plans: | 
 | • The Senegalese Nationally Determined Contribution submitted to the UNFCCC in September 2015, which lists | 
 | rural electrification as a key component of this action plan. The document refers to the commissioning of 392 | 
 | mini-grid systems (unconditional pledge) and up to 5,000 villages connected through PV mini-grids contingent | 
 | on external support (conditional target)39 | 
 | • The government’s commitment to the SE4ALL initiative, which identifies rural electrification as one of the most | 
 | important components of the global program. Senegal has committed to achieve universal access to electricity | 
 | by 2025 | 
 | • The National Strategy for Economic and Social Development adopted in 2012 (SNDES), in which the | 
 | government is committed to increase access to electricity in rural areas in an affordable and equitable way | 
 | • Universal access to energy in rural areas is considered in the ‘Plan Sénégal Emergent’ as a fundamental factor | 
 | for economic development and for the fight against poverty. The main objective of the plan is the emergence | 
 | of Senegal to promote economic growth as a strong leverage for human development | 
 | • The ‘‘Plan Sénégal Emergent’ also aims to reduce the cost of generation to a value between 60 and 70 FCFA | 
 | / kWh (EUR 0.09-0.11) in the long-term. Investment in renewable energy generation will reduce the | 
 | government’s dependence on fossil fuels which are expensive to import. | 
 | • Fiscal exemption on VAT was granted by the State of Senegal to all rural electrification related equipment. This | 
 | agreement shall be subject to periodic renewal by mutual agreement. | 
 |  | 
 | Implementation of these mitigation activities is slower than desired because of various constraints, including absence | 
 | of capital and insufficient institutional capacity and experience. However, the country has instituted the agencies and | 
 | structures required to finalise and implement these climate action plans/strategies. | 
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | The adequacy of the instruments proposed to the GCF (long term, subordinated project debt to be mixed with private | 
 | sector concessionaires’ equity and grant finance towards the public sector) is based on the following elements: | 
 | • Given the relatively high CAPEX investment required by off-grid renewable energy technologies relative to | 
 | other fossil-based alternatives (which offer lower CAPEX demands but higher operational costs), there is need | 
 | for project debt with longer tenors of at least 10 to 15 years. Local financial institutions, if at all willing to provide | 
 | debt co-finance to the concessionaires, limit debt tenors to 5 to 7 years. Such short repayment schedules, | 
 | combined with high costs of capital, negatively impact the competitiveness of the concessionaires and dent | 
 | scale-up potential. | 
 | • The proposed financing plan, whereby a) BOAD’s loan and the GCF’s concessional loan contribution enable | 
 | ASER to reduce WACC by over a third for the overall project CAPEX until 2025; and b) longer-term | 
 | concessional debt offered to ASER subsequently lower concessionaires required equity investments (down to | 
 | 5% concession fee, to be collected on the Special Support Fund for the Energy Sector administered by CRSE | 
 | for tariff harmonization and renewable energy development) as well as commercial loans from local financial | 
 | institutions. Lower upfront CAPEX demands combined with softer financing terms will strengthen the | 
 | concessionaires’ debt service coverage ratios and profitability, a prerequisite to a maturing, private sector-led | 
 | market space. | 

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 37
D
• Experience in other countries indicates that extended debt tenors are capable of increasing returns on equity
by 3%, or even higher. Such increase will positively impact the attractiveness of new investments to sponsors,
and reduce the burden of tariff harmonization compensation for the Senegalese Treasury.
The GCF’s total contribution of EUR 75.45 million will leverage a total public-private investment of EUR 208 million,
representing a leverage ratio of 1.8. In terms of cost-effectiveness of the proposed intervention, the impact is estimated
as follows:
a) To tal project financing EUR 198.7 million
b) Requested GCF contribution of EUR 75.45 million
c) Estimated emission reduction potential generated over the project lifetime is a cumulative 1.13 M. tonnes of
CO2e
d) Calculated cost per tonne CO2e equals EUR 176.2
e) Calculated GCF cost40 per tonne CO2e equals EUR 28.8
Although the estimated abatement cost of the project may be higher than the abatement cost of typical larger-scale
renewable energy programmes, it should be noted that the project aims to promote decentralised systems with battery
storage capacity in disperse and isolated areas with relatively low consumption where connection to the national
network is not technically or economically justifiable.
Best practices
ASER “Minima Techniques - Règles Environnementales” (Minimum Technical & Environmental Standards) including
technical standards for low voltage and medium voltage distribution systems, and comprehensive standards for the
solar components and systems (IEC 61215 and IEC 61646 for the PV modules, and a laboratory testing standard IECQ
QC 001002)
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance
Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes
as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Paradigm shift objectives
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development
E.2. Core indicator targets
E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to
Annual 45,098 t CO2 eq
be reduced or avoided (mitigation
and cross-cutting only)
Lifetime 1,127,447 t CO2 eq
(a) Total project financing 198.7 mln Euros
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2 (b) Requested GCF amount 75.4 mln Euros
eq, defined as total investment
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions 1,127,447 t CO2eq
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross- (d) Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq (d = a / c) 176.2 Euros / t CO 2 eq
cutting only)
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO eqremoved
(e = b40 / c)
2 28.8 Euros / t CO
2
eq
E.2.3. Expected volume of (f) Total finance leveraged 132.8 mln Euros
finance to be leveraged by the (g) Public source co-financed 123.2 Euros
proposed project/programme as a
(h) Private source finance leveraged 9.6 mln Euros
result of the Fund’s financing,
disaggregated by public and (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) 1.8
40 In grant-equivalent, i.e. concessional funding costs accounted at 5% discount rate

--- Table 1 on Page 42 ---
 | • Experience in other countries indicates that extended debt tenors are capable of increasing returns on equity | 
 | by 3%, or even higher. Such increase will positively impact the attractiveness of new investments to sponsors, | 
 | and reduce the burden of tariff harmonization compensation for the Senegalese Treasury. | 
 |  | 
 | The GCF’s total contribution of EUR 75.45 million will leverage a total public-private investment of EUR 208 million, | 
 | representing a leverage ratio of 1.8. In terms of cost-effectiveness of the proposed intervention, the impact is estimated | 
 | as follows: | 
 | a) To tal project financing EUR 198.7 million | 
 | b) Requested GCF contribution of EUR 75.45 million | 
 | c) Estimated emission reduction potential generated over the project lifetime is a cumulative 1.13 M. tonnes of | 
 | CO2e | 
 | d) Calculated cost per tonne CO2e equals EUR 176.2 | 
 | e) Calculated GCF cost40 per tonne CO2e equals EUR 28.8 | 
 | Although the estimated abatement cost of the project may be higher than the abatement cost of typical larger-scale | 
 | renewable energy programmes, it should be noted that the project aims to promote decentralised systems with battery | 
 | storage capacity in disperse and isolated areas with relatively low consumption where connection to the national | 
 | network is not technically or economically justifiable. | 
 |  | 
 | Best practices | 
 | ASER “Minima Techniques - Règles Environnementales” (Minimum Technical & Environmental Standards) including | 
 | technical standards for low voltage and medium voltage distribution systems, and comprehensive standards for the | 
 | solar components and systems (IEC 61215 and IEC 61646 for the PV modules, and a laboratory testing standard IECQ | 
 | QC 001002) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 42 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 | This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance | 
 | Measurement Frameworks under the Results Management Framework to which the project/programme contributes | 
 | as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. | 
 | E.1. Paradigm shift objectives | 
Please select the appropriated expected result. For cross-cutting proposals, tick both.
☒ Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways
☐ Increased climate resilient sustainable development |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 42 ---
 | E.2. Core indicator targets |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | E.2.1. Expected tonnes of carbon |  | Annual |  | 45,098 t CO2 eq |  | 
 | dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | be reduced or avoided (mitigation |  | Lifetime |  | 1,127,447 t CO2 eq |  | 
 | and cross-cutting only) |  |  |  |  |  | 
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only) |  |  |  | (a) Total project financing |  | 198.7 mln Euros | 
 |  |  |  | (b) Requested GCF amount |  | 75.4 mln Euros | 
 |  |  |  | (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions |  | 1,127,447 t CO2eq | 
 |  |  |  | (d) Estimated cost per t CO eq (d = a / c)
2 |  | 176.2 Euros / t CO eq
2 | 
 |  |  |  | (e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO eqremoved
2
(e = b40 / c) |  | 28.8 Euros / t CO eq
2 | 
 | E.2.3. Expected volume of |  |  | (f) Total finance leveraged |  | 132.8 mln Euros | 
 | finance to be leveraged by the |  |  | (g) Public source co-financed |  | 123.2 Euros | 
 | proposed project/programme as a |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | (h) Private source finance leveraged |  | 9.6 mln Euros | 
 | result of the Fund’s financing, |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | disaggregated by public and |  |  | (i) Total Leverage ratio (i = f / b) |  | 1.8 | 

--- Table 4 on Page 42 ---
E.2.2. Estimated cost per t CO2
eq, defined as total investment
cost / expected lifetime emission
reductions (mitigation and cross-
cutting only)

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 38
D
private sources (mitigation and (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) 1.6
cross-cutting only)
(k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) 0.1
344,040
Direct
E.2.4. Expected total number of 172,208 of females41
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
Indirect -
(disaggregated by sex)
4% of Senegal rural population
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries Direct
(2.2% of Senegal total population)
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) Indirect -
E.3 . Fund-level impacts
Means of Target
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Results (MoV) Mid-term Final
Renewable energy-based
M1.0 Annual CO2
M1.1 Tonnes of rural electrification replacing
Reduced emission
carbon dioxide the continuous, alternative
emissions reductions
equivalent (t use of fossil fuel-based
through Monitoring,
CO2eq) reduced solutions (CDM AMS-III.BL
increased Reporting and 0 44,324 130,563
or avoided - baseline methodology) in
low-emission Verification by (tCO ) tCO tCO
gender-sensitive 2eq 2eq 2eq households, commercial
energy independent
energy access facilities such as shops,
access and CDM-DOE
power public services/buildings and
power auditor or local
generation small, medium and micro
generation carbon verifier
enterprises (SMMEs).
E.4. Fund-level outcomes
Means of Target
Expected
Indicator Verification Baseline Assumptions
Outcomes (MoV) Mid-term) Final
Rural energy
Micro- development
2.5 mln 3.3 mln
M5.1 Institutional Finance No subsidy/ success builds on
Euros Euros
and regulatory Institutions guarantee extensive
micro- micro-
M5.0 systems that balance for rural community
finance finance
Strengthened improve incentives sheet productive mobilization, and
borrowings borrowings
institutional and for low-emission summary users capacity building
guaranteed guaranteed
regulatory planning and verified by [Emerging for efficient
systems development and the Partner Senegal for for electricity use
their effective Financial Plan] productive productive Barriers for
uses uses mainstreaming
implementation Institution
solar PV projects
are
41 http://www.ansd.sn/

--- Table 1 on Page 43 ---
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only) |  | (j) Public source co-financing ratio (j = g / b) |  | 1.6
 |  | (k) Private source leverage ratio (k = h / b) |  | 0.1
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex) | Direct |  | 344,040
172,208 of females41 | 
 | Indirect |  | - | 
 |  |  |  | 
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex) | Direct |  | 4% of Senegal rural population
(2.2% of Senegal total population) | 
 | Indirect |  | - | 
 |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 43 ---
private sources (mitigation and
cross-cutting only)

--- Table 3 on Page 43 ---
E.2.4. Expected total number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries,
(disaggregated by sex)

--- Table 4 on Page 43 ---
E.2.5. Number of beneficiaries
relative to total population
(disaggregated by sex)

--- Table 5 on Page 43 ---
 | E.3 . Fund-level impacts |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results |  | Indicator | Means of
Verification
(MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  | 
M1.0
Reduced
emissions
through
increased
low-emission
energy
access and
power
generation |  | M1.1 Tonnes of
carbon dioxide
equivalent (t
CO2eq) reduced
or avoided -
gender-sensitive
energy access
power
generation | Annual CO2
emission
reductions
Monitoring,
Reporting and
Verification by
independent
CDM-DOE
auditor or local
carbon verifier | 0
(tCO )
2eq | 44,324
tCO
2eq |  | 130,563
tCO
2eq |  | Renewable energy-based
rural electrification replacing
the continuous, alternative
use of fossil fuel-based
solutions (CDM AMS-III.BL
baseline methodology) in
households, commercial
facilities such as shops,
public services/buildings and
small, medium and micro
enterprises (SMMEs). | 

--- Table 6 on Page 43 ---
Expected
Results

--- Table 7 on Page 43 ---
Verification
(MoV)

--- Table 8 on Page 43 ---
 | E.4. Fund-level outcomes |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Outcomes |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions |  | 
 |  |  |  | Verification
(MoV) |  |  |  | Mid-term) |  | Final |  |  |  | 
M5.0
Strengthened
institutional and
regulatory
systems |  | M5.1 Institutional
and regulatory
systems that
improve incentives
for low-emission
planning and
development and
their effective
implementation | Micro-
Finance
Institutions
balance
sheet
summary
verified by
the Partner
Financial
Institution |  |  | No subsidy/
guarantee
for rural
productive
users
[Emerging
Senegal
Plan] | 2.5 mln
Euros
micro-
finance
borrowings
guaranteed
for
productive
uses |  |  | 3.3 mln
Euros
micro-
finance
borrowings
guaranteed
for
productive
uses |  |  | Rural energy | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | development | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | success builds on | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | extensive | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | community | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mobilization, and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity building | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | for efficient | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | electricity use | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Barriers for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mainstreaming | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | solar PV projects | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | are | 

--- Table 9 on Page 43 ---
Micro-
Finance
Institutions
balance
sheet
summary
verified by
the Partner
Financial
Institution

--- Table 10 on Page 43 ---
M5.1 Institutional
and regulatory
systems that
mprove incentives
or low-emission
planning and
development and
heir effective
mplementation

--- Table 11 on Page 43 ---
2.5 mln
Euros
micro-
finance
borrowings
guaranteed
for
productive
uses

--- Table 12 on Page 43 ---
3.3 mln
Euros
micro-
finance
borrowings
guaranteed
for
productive
uses

--- Table 13 on Page 43 ---
No subsidy/
guarantee
for rural
productive
users
[Emerging
Senegal
Plan]

--- Table 14 on Page 43 ---
M5.0
Strengthened
nstitutional and
egulatory
systems

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 39
D
overcome, the
capacity of the
stakeholders
developed and
the financial
incentives
implemented
M6.3 MWs of low-
M6.0 Increased emission energy ASER Private operators
number of small, capacity installed, database & are interested in
0 19 MW 32 MW
medium and large generated and/or CRSE investing in the
low-emission rehabilitated as a independent sector
power suppliers result of GCF verification/cl
support earance
E.5 . Project/programme performance indicators
Expected Means of Target Assumptions
Indicator Verification Baseline
Results
(MoV)
Mid-term Final
0 Senegal politically
Community-
(no gender- recognized rural
based
specific vulnerabilities to
gender
Percentage of rural framework, climate change
committees
electrification communica and the interest of
meeting
procedures, tion gender
minutes, 50% 75%
communications strategy in institutionalization
gender-
and decisions use by at both national
sensitive
reflecting women & ASER or bodies and local
communicati
youth priorities Community committees levels
Strengthened
on tools and
-Based Investment
PREM
rural Organizatio targets are
electrification MoUs
ns) achieved, less
stakeholders
turnover and
awareness,
higher retention
capacities and
rate of trained
gender-inclusion
agents
Number of
ASER Rural energy
additional
database & development
vulnerable localities 600 1,000
CRSE 0 success builds on
attributed to rural localities localities
independent extensive
electrification
verification community
operators
mobilization, and
capacity building
for efficient
electricity use
GCF involvement
Installation
Operational rural MWh energy brings down the
solar-power new project
consumption from 24,815 74,879 WACC to an
mini-grids reports and 0
installed solar MWh MWh acceptable level
increasing concessionn
plants to Senegalese
access to clean aires billing
treasury

--- Table 1 on Page 44 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | overcome, the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | capacity of the | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | stakeholders | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | developed and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | the financial | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | incentives | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | implemented | 
M6.0 Increased
number of small,
medium and large
low-emission
power suppliers | M6.3 MWs of low-
emission energy
capacity installed,
generated and/or
rehabilitated as a
result of GCF
support |  |  |  | 0 | 19 MW | 32 MW | Private operators
are interested in
investing in the
sector | 
 |  |  | ASER |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | database & |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | CRSE |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | independent |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | verification/cl |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | earance |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 44 ---
M6.3 MWs of low-
emission energy
capacity installed,
generated and/or
ehabilitated as a
esult of GCF
support

--- Table 3 on Page 44 ---
M6.0 Increased
number of small,
medium and large
ow-emission
power suppliers

--- Table 4 on Page 44 ---
Private operators
are interested in
investing in the
sector

--- Table 5 on Page 44 ---
 | E.5 . Project/programme performance indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Expected
Results |  | Indicator |  | Means of |  | Baseline |  |  | Target |  |  |  |  | Assumptions | 
 |  |  |  | Verification
(MoV) |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  |  | Final |  | 
Strengthened
rural
electrification
stakeholders
awareness,
capacities and
gender-inclusion |  | Percentage of rural
electrification
procedures,
communications
and decisions
reflecting women &
youth priorities | Community-
based
gender
committees
meeting
minutes,
gender-
sensitive
communicati
on tools and
PREM
MoUs |  |  |  | 0 |  | 50% |  |  | 75% |  | Senegal politically
recognized rural
vulnerabilities to
climate change
and the interest of
gender
institutionalization
at both national
bodies and local
committees levels
Investment
targets are
achieved, less
turnover and
higher retention
rate of trained
agents
Rural energy
development
success builds on
extensive
community
mobilization, and
capacity building
for efficient
electricity use | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (no gender- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | specific |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | framework, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | communica |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | tion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | strategy in |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | use by |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ASER or |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Community |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | -Based |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | Organizatio |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ns) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Number of
additional
vulnerable localities
attributed to rural
electrification
operators | ASER
database &
CRSE
independent
verification |  |  | 0 |  |  | 600
localities |  |  | 1,000
localities |  |  | 
Operational rural
solar-power new
mini-grids
increasing
access to clean |  | MWh energy
consumption from
installed solar
plants | Installation
project
reports and
concessionn
aires billing |  |  | 0 |  |  | 24,815
MWh |  |  | 74,879
MWh |  | GCF involvement
brings down the
WACC to an
acceptable level
to Senegalese
treasury | 

--- Table 6 on Page 44 ---
Community-
based
gender
committees
meeting
minutes,
gender-
sensitive
communicati
on tools and
PREM
MoUs

--- Table 7 on Page 44 ---
Percentage of rural
electrification
procedures,
communications
and decisions
eflecting women &
youth priorities

--- Table 8 on Page 44 ---
50%


--- Table 9 on Page 44 ---
Strengthened
rural
electrification
stakeholders
awareness,
capacities and
gender-inclusion

--- Table 10 on Page 44 ---
Number of
additional
vulnerable localities
attributed to rural
electrification
operators

--- Table 11 on Page 44 ---
ASER
database &
CRSE
independent
verification

--- Table 12 on Page 44 ---
600
localities

--- Table 13 on Page 44 ---
Operational rural
solar-power new
mini-grids
increasing
access to clean

--- Table 14 on Page 44 ---
Installation
project
reports and
concessionn
aires billing

--- Table 15 on Page 44 ---
MWh energy
consumption from
nstalled solar
plants

--- Table 16 on Page 44 ---
24,815
MWh

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 40
D
energy and Local Baseline to
Appropriate
productive use operators be
30% of total 60% of total micro-finance
% of sales income tariff surveyed
clean power clean power network is
from total productive harmonizatio according
sales from sales from available in rural
use by SMEs and n requests to the
SMEs and SMEs and areas and access
community services breakdown, implementa
community community coupons
of clean energy ASER tion sites of
services services mechanism
aggregated the mini-
understood
database grids42
1,529 newly 2,548 newly
ASER Baseline to connected connected Access to
Number of coupon-
coupon be defined eligible eligible electricity fosters
subsidized
Energy-improved distribution according social social agriculture
basic needs connections of
plans & to the services, services, productivity,
services for eligible social
Subsidy implementa women& women& health &
achieving services, women&
Payment tion sites of youth- youth- community
resilience youth-entrepreneurs
Confirmation the mini- entrepreneu entrepreneu services, ICTs &
to the PV mini-grids
s database grids422 rs to the PV rs to the PV lighting benefits
mini-grids mini-grids
E.6. Activities
Activity Description Sub-activities Deliverables
Capacity building of the Project Launch workshops
Activity 1.1.1 Trainings on procurement
project’s key and public consultations
stakeholders, to favour procedures, project management and GCF
report
the implementation of a requirements
Gender committees
sustainable framework Activity 1.1.2 - Seminars and trips and
creation MoU, trainings
of the delivered workshops (technology watch, public
and communication
services and benefits consultations, conferences, sharing of
strategy
of the solar mini-grids, experiences, etc.)
Entrepreneurship
starting with the end- Activity 1.2.1 - gender-relevant community-
1. Technical user beneficiaries’ awareness and tutoring
organizations mapping & tutoring
Assistance to the awareness and events
Activity 1.2.2 - gender-stakeholders training
solar rural appropriation, the attendance/minutes
(PMU – local operators – community-based
electrification technical and
organizations)
stakeholders administrative Operational facility for
Activity 1.2.3 - gender-oriented
competencies of ASER used batteries, CFL and
communication campaign
Project Management
electronic waste recycling
Unit, and the Activity 1.3.1 - E&S measures
environmental implementation and monitoring
Independent survey on
expertise and Activity 1.3.2 - Establishment of a recycling
income generating
knowledge unit for batteries and other waste (CFL,
activities implemented by
management required other electronics)
capacited rural women
upstream and
downstream organisations
Financing the bulk of Activity 2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering Detailed engineering
the technology
studies & Specific environmental and social studies & specific
investment to de-risk
2. Procurement analysis for each site environmental and social
local operators’
and Installation of Activity 2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants analysis reports
participation in
solar powered construction and minigrid deployment: EPC ToRs for
competitive Request
mini-grids - PV energy equipment procurement
for Proposal to select
- Civil works Contractualization of
the bidder who offers
the best combination of - LV grids supply, factor y inspection
42 Baseline to be defined during inception and reported/agreed to the satisfaction of the GCF in the project inception report

--- Table 1 on Page 45 ---
energy and
productive use |  | % of sales income
from total productive
use by SMEs and
community services
of clean energy |  |  | Local |  |  |  | Baseline to |  | 30% of total
clean power
sales from
SMEs and
community
services |  |  | 60% of total
clean power
sales from
SMEs and
community
services |  |  |  | Appropriate
micro-finance
network is
available in rural
areas and access
coupons
mechanism
understood | 
 |  |  |  |  | operators |  |  |  | be |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | tariff |  |  |  | surveyed |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | harmonizatio |  |  |  | according |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | n requests |  |  |  | to the |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | breakdown, |  |  |  | implementa |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | ASER |  |  |  | tion sites of |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | aggregated |  |  |  | the mini- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | database |  |  |  | grids42 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Energy-improved
basic needs
services for
achieving
resilience |  | Number of coupon-
subsidized
connections of
eligible social
services, women&
youth-entrepreneurs
to the PV mini-grids |  | ASER
coupon
distribution
plans &
Subsidy
Payment
Confirmation
s database |  |  |  | Baseline to
be defined
according
to the
implementa
tion sites of
the mini-
grids422 |  |  |  | 1,529 newly |  |  | 2,548 newly |  |  | Access to
electricity fosters
agriculture
productivity,
health &
community
services, ICTs &
lighting benefits | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | connected |  |  | connected |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | eligible |  |  | eligible |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | social |  |  | social |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | services, |  |  | services, |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | women& |  |  | women& |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | youth- |  |  | youth- |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | entrepreneu |  |  | entrepreneu |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | rs to the PV |  |  | rs to the PV |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | mini-grids |  |  | mini-grids |  |  |  | 
 | E.6. Activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activity |  |  | Description |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Deliverables |  |  | 
1. Technical
Assistance to the
solar rural
electrification
stakeholders |  |  | Capacity building of the
project’s key
stakeholders, to favour
the implementation of a
sustainable framework
of the delivered
services and benefits
of the solar mini-grids,
starting with the end-
user beneficiaries’
awareness and
appropriation, the
technical and
administrative
competencies of ASER
Project Management
Unit, and the
environmental
expertise and
knowledge
management required
upstream and
downstream |  |  | Activity 1.1.1 Trainings on procurement
procedures, project management and GCF
requirements
Activity 1.1.2 - Seminars and trips and
workshops (technology watch, public
consultations, conferences, sharing of
experiences, etc.)
Activity 1.2.1 - gender-relevant community-
organizations mapping & tutoring
Activity 1.2.2 - gender-stakeholders training
(PMU – local operators – community-based
organizations)
Activity 1.2.3 - gender-oriented
communication campaign
Activity 1.3.1 - E&S measures
implementation and monitoring
Activity 1.3.2 - Establishment of a recycling
unit for batteries and other waste (CFL,
other electronics) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Project Launch workshops
and public consultations
report
Gender committees
creation MoU, trainings
and communication
strategy
Entrepreneurship
awareness and tutoring
events
attendance/minutes
Operational facility for
used batteries, CFL and
electronic waste recycling
Independent survey on
income generating
activities implemented by
capacited rural women
organisations |  |  | 
2. Procurement
and Installation of
solar powered
mini-grids |  |  | Financing the bulk of
the technology
investment to de-risk
local operators’
participation in
competitive Request
for Proposal to select
the bidder who offers
the best combination of |  |  | Activity 2.1.1 - Site selection, engineering
studies & Specific environmental and social
analysis for each site
Activity 2.2.1 - Solar PV power plants
construction and minigrid deployment:
- PV energy equipment
- Civil works
- LV grids |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Detailed engineering
studies & specific
environmental and social
analysis reports
EPC ToRs for
procurement
Contractualization of
supply, factor y inspection |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 45 ---
energy and
productive use


--- Table 3 on Page 45 ---
Appropriate
micro-finance
network is
available in rural
areas and access
coupons
mechanism
understood

--- Table 4 on Page 45 ---
30% of total
clean power
sales from
SMEs and
community
services

--- Table 5 on Page 45 ---
60% of total
clean power
sales from
SMEs and
community
services

--- Table 6 on Page 45 ---
% of sales income
rom total productive
use by SMEs and
community services
of clean energy

--- Table 7 on Page 45 ---
ASER
coupon
distribution
plans &
Subsidy
Payment
Confirmation
s database

--- Table 8 on Page 45 ---
Baseline to
be defined
according
to the
implementa
tion sites of
the mini-
grids422

--- Table 9 on Page 45 ---
Access to
electricity fosters
agriculture
productivity,
health &
community
services, ICTs &
lighting benefits

--- Table 10 on Page 45 ---
Number of coupon-
subsidized
connections of
eligible social
services, women&
youth-entrepreneurs
o the PV mini-grids

--- Table 11 on Page 45 ---
Energy-improved
basic needs
services for
achieving
resilience

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 41
D
tariff and service for - Control & synchronisation devices of first kits and installation
solar energy - LV connections reports
production equipment, - Indoor installations Commissioning reports of
synchronisation and Activity 2.2.2 - Smart meters installation & the 1,000 mini-grids
control tools, low-
miscellaneous aleas implemented and handed
voltage mini-grid
Activity 2.3.1 - Deployments of solar street over to local operators
networks and
lighting
connections, civil
Activity 2.4.1 -Control and supervision of
engineering.
work
PREM baseline surveys
Social services and
Coupons design workshop
productive equipment
Coupon software
will lead to the
dashboard
development of Activity 3.1.1 - Connection of eligible
MFIs due-diligence
sustainable livelihoods social services, women& youth-
3. Incentives for Guarantee issuer
and enhance the entrepreneurs t o the PV mini-grids
Social & selection and contract
capacity of villages to Activity 3.2.1 - Implementation of
Productive Use of Micro-finances guarantee
pay for solar power mechanism to facilitate access to
Electricity facility summary for the
supply, strengthening productive equi p ment financing through
3,739 solar–powered
mini-grids business microfinance
SMEs and community
model visibility while
services
maximising social &
Final Monitoring and
gender inclusivity
Evaluation Report
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Monitoring
As with all projects supported by BOAD, this intervention will be monitored by BOAD project management team as per
the relevant internal policies and procedures. As the accredited entity agency, BOAD will be responsible for supervising
monitoring activities, implementation conditions and for reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to be defined
by GCF and BOAD. The project progress will be monitored by the entity responsible for M&E in the Project Management
Team based in Senegal.
The present project will comply with the BOAD appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision standards and
procedures involving all relevant teams (engineer, financial analyst, procurement expert, E&S specialist, climate finance
specialist, financial management officer, and monitoring specialist). The implementation and monitoring of each stage of
the project will be guided and managed by the BOAD project cycle management framework.
Monitoring and reporting of achieved emission reductions will be conducted in accordance with the approved CDM
methodology AMS III.BL “Electrification of rural communities using renewable energy”. The CDM offers a UNFCCC-
approved MRV framework that will allow BOAD to transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time, and
subsequently report progress to the GCF. Moreover, using consistent baseline and monitoring methodologies across
different climate finance programs enables NDC integration.
The Division in charge of climate finance will perform due diligence, implementation monitoring, risk monitoring and
mitigation. For that purpose, the Division in charge of climate finance, assisted by the Department in charge of
Monitoring and Evaluation, will be working closely with the project management team based in Senegal in order to
monitor the progress of each component of the Project.
Reporting
Reporting by the project management team based in Senegal to BOAD will be in line with the standard loan agreement,
and the BOAD will conduct a biannual supervision. Reporting of the BOAD to GCF: The BOAD will comply with the
relevant GCF policies in the reporting and evaluation arrangements for this framework. The BOAD will provide the
annual performance report (APR) to the GCF during the four-year implementation period. In addition, during the sub-loan
lifetime, semi- annual activity report on the status of the GCF-financed individual sub-projects will be provided.
In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA, an inception report, interim and final evaluation reports, and
financial information reports (semi-annually throughout the life of the loan) will be submitted.

--- Table 1 on Page 46 ---
 |  | tariff and service for
solar energy
production equipment,
synchronisation and
control tools, low-
voltage mini-grid
networks and
connections, civil
engineering. | - Control & synchronisation devices
- LV connections
- Indoor installations
Activity 2.2.2 - Smart meters installation &
miscellaneous aleas
Activity 2.3.1 - Deployments of solar street
lighting
Activity 2.4.1 -Control and supervision of
work | of first kits and installation
reports
Commissioning reports of
the 1,000 mini-grids
implemented and handed
over to local operators | 
3. Incentives for
Social &
Productive Use of
Electricity |  | Social services and
productive equipment
will lead to the
development of
sustainable livelihoods
and enhance the
capacity of villages to
pay for solar power
supply, strengthening
mini-grids business
model visibility while
maximising social &
gender inclusivity | Activity 3.1.1 - Connection of eligible
social services, women& youth-
entrepreneurs t o the PV mini-grids
Activity 3.2.1 - Implementation of
mechanism to facilitate access to
productive equi p ment financing through
microfinance | PREM baseline surveys
Coupons design workshop
Coupon software
dashboard
MFIs due-diligence
Guarantee issuer
selection and contract
Micro-finances guarantee
facility summary for the
3,739 solar–powered
SMEs and community
services
Final Monitoring and
Evaluation Report | 
 | E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) |  |  |  | 
 | Monitoring |  |  |  | 
 | As with all projects supported by BOAD, this intervention will be monitored by BOAD project management team as per |  |  |  | 
 | the relevant internal policies and procedures. As the accredited entity agency, BOAD will be responsible for supervising |  |  |  | 
 | monitoring activities, implementation conditions and for reporting periodically to the GCF under the terms to be defined |  |  |  | 
 | by GCF and BOAD. The project progress will be monitored by the entity responsible for M&E in the Project Management |  |  |  | 
 | Team based in Senegal. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The present project will comply with the BOAD appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision standards and |  |  |  | 
 | procedures involving all relevant teams (engineer, financial analyst, procurement expert, E&S specialist, climate finance |  |  |  | 
 | specialist, financial management officer, and monitoring specialist). The implementation and monitoring of each stage of |  |  |  | 
 | the project will be guided and managed by the BOAD project cycle management framework. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Monitoring and reporting of achieved emission reductions will be conducted in accordance with the approved CDM |  |  |  | 
 | methodology AMS III.BL “Electrification of rural communities using renewable energy”. The CDM offers a UNFCCC- |  |  |  | 
 | approved MRV framework that will allow BOAD to transparently track the GHG impact of invested funds over time, and |  |  |  | 
 | subsequently report progress to the GCF. Moreover, using consistent baseline and monitoring methodologies across |  |  |  | 
 | different climate finance programs enables NDC integration. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | The Division in charge of climate finance will perform due diligence, implementation monitoring, risk monitoring and |  |  |  | 
 | mitigation. For that purpose, the Division in charge of climate finance, assisted by the Department in charge of |  |  |  | 
 | Monitoring and Evaluation, will be working closely with the project management team based in Senegal in order to |  |  |  | 
 | monitor the progress of each component of the Project. |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 | Reporting |  |  |  | 
 | Reporting by the project management team based in Senegal to BOAD will be in line with the standard loan agreement, |  |  |  | 
 | and the BOAD will conduct a biannual supervision. Reporting of the BOAD to GCF: The BOAD will comply with the |  |  |  | 
 | relevant GCF policies in the reporting and evaluation arrangements for this framework. The BOAD will provide the |  |  |  | 
 | annual performance report (APR) to the GCF during the four-year implementation period. In addition, during the sub-loan |  |  |  | 
 | lifetime, semi- annual activity report on the status of the GCF-financed individual sub-projects will be provided. |  |  |  | 
 | In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA, an inception report, interim and final evaluation reports, and |  |  |  | 
 | financial information reports (semi-annually throughout the life of the loan) will be submitted. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 42
D
Evaluation
The evaluation arrangements for this framework will comply with the related BOAD and GCF policies. The GCF funded
activity interim and final evaluations will be conducted by an independent expert evaluator recruited by BOAD. The final
evaluation is conducted 06 months after the reception of the project completion report.
After two to five years of closing, the project will undergo ex-post evaluation that is guided by internationally accepted
principles for the evaluation of development assistance, in particular, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation, and
Development Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) evaluation guiding principles, and the good-practice standards.

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
 |  | 
 | Evaluation | 
 | The evaluation arrangements for this framework will comply with the related BOAD and GCF policies. The GCF funded | 
 | activity interim and final evaluations will be conducted by an independent expert evaluator recruited by BOAD. The final | 
 | evaluation is conducted 06 months after the reception of the project completion report. | 
 | After two to five years of closing, the project will undergo ex-post evaluation that is guided by internationally accepted | 
 | principles for the evaluation of development assistance, in particular, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation, and | 
 | Development Assistance Committee (OECD DAC) evaluation guiding principles, and the good-practice standards. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 43
FFFF
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Selected Risk Factor 1
Category Probability Impact
Other Low High
Description
Awareness, capacity & marketing risk
There is a risk that the solar powered mini-grids’ potential and their de-risked investment opportunity, which the project
aims to create, do not get sufficient communication and promotion and fail to mobilise the relevant local
operators/investors. Similarly, beneficiaries (households and especially productive users and communities) require
proper information, awareness raising and marketing efforts to overcome the lack of knowledge and sometimes
negative perception that populations might have about solar technology as a permanent electrification solution.
Mitigation Measure(s)
This is mitigated by the implementation of component 1 Technical Assistance activities as well as component 3 to
incentivise productive use. Besides, a two-level grievance mechanism (ASER & CRSE) will be available to all
targeted customers:
i) in relation to the selection of villages, sites, and the electrification process in general, the populations can
address directly to ASER which will take the appropriate measures to remedy, in relation with its operational service
providers in the field. For this purpose, a computerized system allowing a good feedback of information is being
deployed, in addition to the classic system of referral and processing by administrative mail.
(ii) in relation to the operation of the service in rural areas (quality of service, incidents, damage, safety,
performance in providing the services described and validated in the concessionaire's service regulations), the
population first addresses its complaints to the concessionaire, which is required to give a contact number to
customers and to intervene in the event of solicitation, according to the procedures described in the concession
contract and its specifications. The concessionaire is also obliged to keep a register of complaints and to report
regularly to the Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (CRSE). Nevertheless, if the operator's customer is not
satisfied with the reaction of the concessionaire, it must refer the matter to the CRSE, which is mandated to monitor
the implementation of the concession contracts and compliance with commitments on behalf of the State.
iii) in relation to regulatory or legal claims made by the concessionaire who feel aggrieved or in danger in relation to
the operating conditions, they shall refer to ASER and the CRSE for handling the matter. For this purpose, activity
reports are required by ASER and which the concessionaire is obliged to transmit at the intervals laid down in the
concession contract.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Variable commercial risk
The slow uptake or progressive ramp-up of rural electrification beneficiaries might impair the first year(s)’ financials of
the local operators/investors. Similarly, all productive demand load profiles may not be suited to solar power solutions.
Unlike non time-critical energy demand (e.g. irrigation and manufacturing/agro-processing), time-critical demand (e.g.
cooling & refrigeration) involve surges in power needed to bring and keep temperatures down regardless of the instant
availability of solar power.
Mitigation Measure(s)

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT |  |  | 
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 1 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Other |  | Low | High | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Awareness, capacity & marketing risk
There is a risk that the solar powered mini-grids’ potential and their de-risked investment opportunity, which the project
aims to create, do not get sufficient communication and promotion and fail to mobilise the relevant local
operators/investors. Similarly, beneficiaries (households and especially productive users and communities) require
proper information, awareness raising and marketing efforts to overcome the lack of knowledge and sometimes
negative perception that populations might have about solar technology as a permanent electrification solution. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 
This is mitigated by the implementation of component 1 Technical Assistance activities as well as component 3 to
incentivise productive use. Besides, a two-level grievance mechanism (ASER & CRSE) will be available to all
targeted customers:
i) in relation to the selection of villages, sites, and the electrification process in general, the populations can
address directly to ASER which will take the appropriate measures to remedy, in relation with its operational service
providers in the field. For this purpose, a computerized system allowing a good feedback of information is being
deployed, in addition to the classic system of referral and processing by administrative mail.
(ii) in relation to the operation of the service in rural areas (quality of service, incidents, damage, safety,
performance in providing the services described and validated in the concessionaire's service regulations), the
population first addresses its complaints to the concessionaire, which is required to give a contact number to
customers and to intervene in the event of solicitation, according to the procedures described in the concession
contract and its specifications. The concessionaire is also obliged to keep a register of complaints and to report
regularly to the Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (CRSE). Nevertheless, if the operator's customer is not
satisfied with the reaction of the concessionaire, it must refer the matter to the CRSE, which is mandated to monitor
the implementation of the concession contracts and compliance with commitments on behalf of the State.
iii) in relation to regulatory or legal claims made by the concessionaire who feel aggrieved or in danger in relation to
the operating conditions, they shall refer to ASER and the CRSE for handling the matter. For this purpose, activity
reports are required by ASER and which the concessionaire is obliged to transmit at the intervals laid down in the
concession contract. |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 |  |  |  | 
Category |  | Probability | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  | Medium | Medium | 
Description |  |  |  | 
Variable commercial risk
The slow uptake or progressive ramp-up of rural electrification beneficiaries might impair the first year(s)’ financials of
the local operators/investors. Similarly, all productive demand load profiles may not be suited to solar power solutions.
Unlike non time-critical energy demand (e.g. irrigation and manufacturing/agro-processing), time-critical demand (e.g.
cooling & refrigeration) involve surges in power needed to bring and keep temperatures down regardless of the instant
availability of solar power. |  |  |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 44
FFFF
Sound market assessment and modular sizing of the proposed technical solutions should be tailored to the
circumstances of each mini-grid in order to cater for power demand extension as per the growth in demand; over-sizing
of photovoltaic panels & storage capacities (batteries) shall be considered.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Low Medium
Description
Operations & Maintenance risks
Underperformance of decentralised renewable energy technologies could lead to lower production of energy and
revenues, as there has been limited experience with financing decentralised renewable energy projects in rural parts of
Senegal to date. Limited track record and data on nationwide historical performance implies that higher-than-expected
variability in performance can occur, impacting the revenue-generation potential of the concessionaires.
Mitigation Measure(s)
This risk will be mitigated by ensuring:
- the choice of quality pieces of equipment at procurement & construction (cf. ASER “Minima Techniques”). The
concessionaires will minimise risks by only sourcing commercially proven, independently certified solar panels,
storage solutions and inverters
- that the concessions are awarded to entities that can demonstrate relevant experiences and/or capacity in the
operation and maintenance of the implemented technologies in accordance with best industry practices.
Furthermore, the concessionaires will be expected to manage maintenance reserve accounts to allow for timely
maintenance and replacement of components, when needed.
Selected Risk Factor 4
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium Low
Description
Monitoring risk
As per ASER’s experience with the 4 awarded PPER concessionaires, different data practices p a risk of improper,
incomplete or unharmonised data collection and transmission to ASER’ coordination structure (both technical,
ose
accounting and financial information).
s
As ASER rural electrification program signed an emissions reduction purchase agreement (ERPA) with the World
Bank’s Ci-Dev program in 2016, which is as of 17 May 2018 a registered programme under the CDM, there is a need
for a clear demarcation between the contribution of different climate finance sources in order to prevent double-claiming
of emission reductions.
Mitigation Measure(s)
To mitigate the risk of double-claiming or double-counting, ASER will apply the CDM MRV framework (methodologies
AMS III.BL) for GCF project activities, yet Emission reductions supported by the GCF will not be claimed elsewhere
and not result in the issuance nor transfer of any carbon credits. Therefore, the project’s linkage with the CDM
infrastructure adds transparency to the mitigation outcomes achieved and prevents any form of double claiming or
double counting.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Category Probability Impact
Prohibited practices Low High
Description
Environmental/disposal risk

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
Sound market assessment and modular sizing of the proposed technical solutions should be tailored to the
circumstances of each mini-grid in order to cater for power demand extension as per the growth in demand; over-sizing
of photovoltaic panels & storage capacities (batteries) shall be considered. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Technical and operational | Low | Medium
Description |  | 
Operations & Maintenance risks
Underperformance of decentralised renewable energy technologies could lead to lower production of energy and
revenues, as there has been limited experience with financing decentralised renewable energy projects in rural parts of
Senegal to date. Limited track record and data on nationwide historical performance implies that higher-than-expected
variability in performance can occur, impacting the revenue-generation potential of the concessionaires. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
This risk will be mitigated by ensuring:
- the choice of quality pieces of equipment at procurement & construction (cf. ASER “Minima Techniques”). The
concessionaires will minimise risks by only sourcing commercially proven, independently certified solar panels,
storage solutions and inverters
- that the concessions are awarded to entities that can demonstrate relevant experiences and/or capacity in the
operation and maintenance of the implemented technologies in accordance with best industry practices.
Furthermore, the concessionaires will be expected to manage maintenance reserve accounts to allow for timely
maintenance and replacement of components, when needed. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 4 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Governance | Medium | Low
Description |  | 
Monitoring risk
As per ASER’s experience with the 4 awarded PPER concessionaires, different data practices p a risk of improper,
incomplete or unharmonised data collection and transmission to ASER’ coordination structure (both technical,
ose
accounting and financial information).
s
As ASER rural electrification program signed an emissions reduction purchase agreement (ERPA) with the World
Bank’s Ci-Dev program in 2016, which is as of 17 May 2018 a registered programme under the CDM, there is a need
for a clear demarcation between the contribution of different climate finance sources in order to prevent double-claiming
of emission reductions. |  | 
Mitigation Measure(s) |  | 
To mitigate the risk of double-claiming or double-counting, ASER will apply the CDM MRV framework (methodologies
AMS III.BL) for GCF project activities, yet Emission reductions supported by the GCF will not be claimed elsewhere
and not result in the issuance nor transfer of any carbon credits. Therefore, the project’s linkage with the CDM
infrastructure adds transparency to the mitigation outcomes achieved and prevents any form of double claiming or
double counting. |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5 |  | 
Category | Probability | Impact
Prohibited practices | Low | High
Description |  | 
Environmental/disposal risk |  | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 45
FFFF
Inappropriate dismantling/recycling of mini-grids components (e.g. batteries) could lead to environmental contamination.
Communities in developing regions are already struggling with contaminated sites and soil pollution from unregulated
car battery recovery and recycling. Unsound end-of-life management and recycling can cause severe lead poisoning of
people and negatively affect the environment. There is a risk that inappropriate battery disposal under the project will
generate similar negative externalities.
Wrong-doing and financial malversation risk
No individuals or entities subject to United Nations Security Council Resolutions imposing financial sanctions will be
involved in or benefitting from the activities of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
While pollution caused by mishandling or disposal of batteries involved in mini-grids installations can be harmful, the
end-of-life issues associated with the used batteries has been noted in earlier consultations and a management plan
has been drafted to mitigate the risk of any spillage or inappropriate disposal of batteries. Specifically, concessionaires
will be requested to a) regularly assess and maintain their entire portfolio of batteries, and b) together with ASER
develop a collection and disposal scheme for expired batteries and equipment. ASER will carefully monitor the disposal
process of used batteries to prevent any negative impacts to the environment. BOAD will also ensure implementation
of the environmental and social measures set forth by the project.

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
Inappropriate dismantling/recycling of mini-grids components (e.g. batteries) could lead to environmental contamination.
Communities in developing regions are already struggling with contaminated sites and soil pollution from unregulated
car battery recovery and recycling. Unsound end-of-life management and recycling can cause severe lead poisoning of
people and negatively affect the environment. There is a risk that inappropriate battery disposal under the project will
generate similar negative externalities.
Wrong-doing and financial malversation risk
No individuals or entities subject to United Nations Security Council Resolutions imposing financial sanctions will be
involved in or benefitting from the activities of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
While pollution caused by mishandling or disposal of batteries involved in mini-grids installations can be harmful, the
end-of-life issues associated with the used batteries has been noted in earlier consultations and a management plan
has been drafted to mitigate the risk of any spillage or inappropriate disposal of batteries. Specifically, concessionaires
will be requested to a) regularly assess and maintain their entire portfolio of batteries, and b) together with ASER
develop a collection and disposal scheme for expired batteries and equipment. ASER will carefully monitor the disposal
process of used batteries to prevent any negative impacts to the environment. BOAD will also ensure implementation
of the environmental and social measures set forth by the project.

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 46
GGGG
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
The project falls under Category B, according to the BOAD classification given that the project entails the installation
and production of renewable energy, and given the limited scale of the proposed interventions, i.e. installation, in each
concerned village, of a solar power plant (power from 15 to 45 kWp) associated with low voltage (LV) lines.
In practice, for projects with multiple sites and where the exact location of the sites is unknown, an ESMF was developed
(Cadre de Gestion Environnemental et Social – CGES in French) at the national PNER level43.To better optimise the
management of the environmental and social aspects of the solar rural electrification project, a follow-up program and
detailed recommendations concerning institutional arrangements have been proposed in the ES MF. Thus, monitoring
will be carried out by the concessionaires; "internal" monitoring (or supervision) will be provided by PNER’s
Environmental & Social Experts; “external” monitoring (inspection) will be carried out by the CRSEs and the DREEC;
mid-term and final evaluation will be carried out by independent consultants.
Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts for each mini-grid will be determined during the project
execution based on a screening process that will be undertaken according to the guidelines provided in the ESMF. For
such small scale mini-grids, there is no need for a fully detailed ESIA, since the overall project is categorised as having
medium risk (B), but only a simplified Strategic E&S assessment. Required studies (ESIA/analysis) for subprojects will
be realized when specific sites are contracted before the installation of the mini-grids, and when the E&S documents
are disclosed locally in the local administrative buildings (townhall, and local chief offices).
The sites of mini solar power plants will not affect protected areas and reserves because they will be located at the
village level; and in general, protected areas and reserves are far from villages. In addition, the project sites will be set
up so as not to displace populations or destroy economic assets. The beneficiary communities will provide small sites
in villages for small-scale solar plants as their contribution to the project. There is no need for a resettlement plan since
there will be no resettlement. Thus, PS5PS 5 will not be triggered. PS 7 does not apply for there is no indigenous
population as defined by the World Bank Group’s policy, on which those of BOAD and GCF are based, in the project
area. Furthermore, PS 8 does not apply for activities related to the construction of such small isolated solar PV systems.
Those systems will not need a great amount of excavation: thus, there will be no potential risk for cultural heritage
degradation in beneficiaries’ communities.
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) documents are attached to this Funding Proposal.
Potential impacts and risks of the project
The major potential positive consequences of this type of project relate to
• job creation and increased local income during the construction phase. With the project, the construction works
will have certain repercussions on the national and local economy. The employment of Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises will lead to a high use of labour (especially local) whose revenues will galvanize the economic
activities of the localities concerned. In addition, the sites will develop certain related activities (catering, trade,
etc.) in the areas concerned, which will help increase the income of the population;
• improving the level of access to electricity in the area;
• contributing to the achievement of Senegal's electrification objectives;
• promoting economic development in polarised areas;
• promoting the development of local SMEs / SMIs by securing the electricity supply;
• extending the coverage of the electricity network;
• influencing gender and poverty reduction strategies;
• contributing to the fight against climate change – positive impact on global CO2 emissions by limiting the use
of fossil fuels
Potential negative consequences and mitigation measures for Project activities
• Solar photovoltaic systems are considered to be one of the least environmentally harmful energy options. As a
result, little environmental impact is anticipated from the implementation of this system. The main potential
impact is the risk of pollution in the event of poor storage or uncontrolled disposal of used batteries (leakage of
43 MEDD 2016. PNER CGES

--- Table 1 on Page 51 ---
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS | 
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) | 
The project falls under Category B, according to the BOAD classification given that the project entails the installation
and production of renewable energy, and given the limited scale of the proposed interventions, i.e. installation, in each
concerned village, of a solar power plant (power from 15 to 45 kWp) associated with low voltage (LV) lines.
In practice, for projects with multiple sites and where the exact location of the sites is unknown, an ESMF was developed
(Cadre de Gestion Environnemental et Social – CGES in French) at the national PNER level43.To better optimise the
management of the environmental and social aspects of the solar rural electrification project, a follow-up program and
detailed recommendations concerning institutional arrangements have been proposed in the ES MF. Thus, monitoring
will be carried out by the concessionaires; "internal" monitoring (or supervision) will be provided by PNER’s
Environmental & Social Experts; “external” monitoring (inspection) will be carried out by the CRSEs and the DREEC;
mid-term and final evaluation will be carried out by independent consultants.
Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts for each mini-grid will be determined during the project
execution based on a screening process that will be undertaken according to the guidelines provided in the ESMF. For
such small scale mini-grids, there is no need for a fully detailed ESIA, since the overall project is categorised as having
medium risk (B), but only a simplified Strategic E&S assessment. Required studies (ESIA/analysis) for subprojects will
be realized when specific sites are contracted before the installation of the mini-grids, and when the E&S documents
are disclosed locally in the local administrative buildings (townhall, and local chief offices).
The sites of mini solar power plants will not affect protected areas and reserves because they will be located at the
village level; and in general, protected areas and reserves are far from villages. In addition, the project sites will be set
up so as not to displace populations or destroy economic assets. The beneficiary communities will provide small sites
in villages for small-scale solar plants as their contribution to the project. There is no need for a resettlement plan since
there will be no resettlement. Thus, PS5PS 5 will not be triggered. PS 7 does not apply for there is no indigenous
population as defined by the World Bank Group’s policy, on which those of BOAD and GCF are based, in the project
area. Furthermore, PS 8 does not apply for activities related to the construction of such small isolated solar PV systems.
Those systems will not need a great amount of excavation: thus, there will be no potential risk for cultural heritage
degradation in beneficiaries’ communities.
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) documents are attached to this Funding Proposal.
Potential impacts and risks of the project
The major potential positive consequences of this type of project relate to
• job creation and increased local income during the construction phase. With the project, the construction works
will have certain repercussions on the national and local economy. The employment of Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises will lead to a high use of labour (especially local) whose revenues will galvanize the economic
activities of the localities concerned. In addition, the sites will develop certain related activities (catering, trade,
etc.) in the areas concerned, which will help increase the income of the population;
• improving the level of access to electricity in the area;
• contributing to the achievement of Senegal's electrification objectives;
• promoting economic development in polarised areas;
• promoting the development of local SMEs / SMIs by securing the electricity supply;
• extending the coverage of the electricity network;
• influencing gender and poverty reduction strategies;
• contributing to the fight against climate change – positive impact on global CO2 emissions by limiting the use
of fossil fuels
Potential negative consequences and mitigation measures for Project activities
• Solar photovoltaic systems are considered to be one of the least environmentally harmful energy options. As a
result, little environmental impact is anticipated from the implementation of this system. The main potential
impact is the risk of pollution in the event of poor storage or uncontrolled disposal of used batteries (leakage of |  | 

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 47
GGGG
lead and acid which can pollute soil and water) and which can constitute sources of accidents, especially for
children.
• During operation, the risk to the natural environment would firstly be caused by an accidental spill of sulfuric
acid during maintenance operations and during the packaging of defective or end-of-life batteries. ASER, in
partnership with the Concessionaires, will facilitate the establishment of a battery recovery system.
• Solar power plants are inspected by maintenance technicians. The risks incurred by the latter are those linked
to the handling of the acid and the explosion of the batteries if the batteries used are with liquid electrolyte. In
addition, there are risks associated with the presence of a battery in a living room (intoxication and explosion)
if certain instructions are not followed.
• There are also risks of theft and other deliberate damage to the solar panels, in the absence of security
Mitigation / improvement, monitoring and institutional measures anticipated at this stage:
Construction phase Operation phase
Social measures linked to loss of property and displacement Fire safety
of populations
Measures to reduce the effects on natural resources Measures a gainst the development of pests
Pollution control measures Waste management
Dust mitigation measures Risk management for maintenance operatio ns
Water supply measures for construction sites Management of nois e pollution from installations
Safety measures
Measures to avoid and settle social conflicts
Measures to combat the risks of STI / HIV / AIDS transmission
Institutional arrangements
For the monitoring of the implementation of the E&S measures, it is planned, through an agreement with the Ministry
of the Environment and Sustainable Development, to extend institutional support to the Department of Environment
and Listed Establishments (DEEC). DEEC will in turn support the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) in
the implementation of the environmental and social management component of the Project.
A Public Consultation Plan will aim to ensure social acceptability of projects at the community level by putting all
stakeholders in a network for sharing information on the project and its interventions.The strategic planning of and the
provision of information on the project should start by forums/gatherings in the form of Regional Development
Committees (CRD) organized in the regions. In this context, Local Information and M onitoring Committees (CLIS) will
be set up at the level of each community concerned. The role of these committees will be:
- to support ASER in the social appropriation of the project at the local level;
- to mobilize the different community actors for a peaceful implementation of the project;
- to serve as a framework for the amicable resolution of any conflicts (land or other).
An NGO or local association specializing in social mobilization could help facilitate the establishment and operations of
these sectoral or socio-professional groups, but above all ensure quality and equity in representation (marginalized
groups, gender, etc.).
At the national level, the PNER program already complies with national regulations, including Law 2001-01 of January
15, 2001, on the Environment Code. It was already subject to a Strategic Environmental Assessment validated by the
State of Senegal with the issuance of an environmental compliance certificate N° 05 AUG.2019 / 021963 to ASER.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
The State of Senegal is committed to international conventions for integrating gender issues in policies, standards and
programs to facilitate its transversality at the institutional level. A Ministry of Gender was created for the first time in
2010 and during the same year, the law instituting absolute parity in totally or partially elected assemblies was adopted.
It entered into force during the legislative elections of July 2012 and for the first time in the country's political history,
the number of women MPs has increased from 19.2 to 42.6%. However, women are still affected by disparities at all
levels and gender issues touch on poverty, health, education, access to finance, employment, access to land and the
means of production, among others. Women are active in the production sectors, the small market economy and the
informal sector. Any action tending to strengthen them in these sectors, reflects on their economic power, their

--- Table 1 on Page 52 ---
lead and acid which can pollute soil and water) and which can constitute sources of accidents, especially for
children.
• During operation, the risk to the natural environment would firstly be caused by an accidental spill of sulfuric
acid during maintenance operations and during the packaging of defective or end-of-life batteries. ASER, in
partnership with the Concessionaires, will facilitate the establishment of a battery recovery system.
• Solar power plants are inspected by maintenance technicians. The risks incurred by the latter are those linked
to the handling of the acid and the explosion of the batteries if the batteries used are with liquid electrolyte. In
addition, there are risks associated with the presence of a battery in a living room (intoxication and explosion)
if certain instructions are not followed.
• There are also risks of theft and other deliberate damage to the solar panels, in the absence of security
Mitigation / improvement, monitoring and institutional measures anticipated at this stage:
Construction phase Operation phase
Social measures linked to loss of property and displacement Fire safety
of populations
Measures to reduce the effects on natural resources Measures a gainst the development of pests
Pollution control measures Waste management
Dust mitigation measures Risk management for maintenance operatio ns
Water supply measures for construction sites Management of nois e pollution from installations
Safety measures
Measures to avoid and settle social conflicts
Measures to combat the risks of STI / HIV / AIDS transmission
Institutional arrangements
For the monitoring of the implementation of the E&S measures, it is planned, through an agreement with the Ministry
of the Environment and Sustainable Development, to extend institutional support to the Department of Environment
and Listed Establishments (DEEC). DEEC will in turn support the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) in
the implementation of the environmental and social management component of the Project.
A Public Consultation Plan will aim to ensure social acceptability of projects at the community level by putting all
stakeholders in a network for sharing information on the project and its interventions.The strategic planning of and the
provision of information on the project should start by forums/gatherings in the form of Regional Development
Committees (CRD) organized in the regions. In this context, Local Information and M onitoring Committees (CLIS) will
be set up at the level of each community concerned. The role of these committees will be:
- to support ASER in the social appropriation of the project at the local level;
- to mobilize the different community actors for a peaceful implementation of the project;
- to serve as a framework for the amicable resolution of any conflicts (land or other).
An NGO or local association specializing in social mobilization could help facilitate the establishment and operations of
these sectoral or socio-professional groups, but above all ensure quality and equity in representation (marginalized
groups, gender, etc.).
At the national level, the PNER program already complies with national regulations, including Law 2001-01 of January
15, 2001, on the Environment Code. It was already subject to a Strategic Environmental Assessment validated by the
State of Senegal with the issuance of an environmental compliance certificate N° 05 AUG.2019 / 021963 to ASER. |  | 
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
The State of Senegal is committed to international conventions for integrating gender issues in policies, standards and
programs to facilitate its transversality at the institutional level. A Ministry of Gender was created for the first time in
2010 and during the same year, the law instituting absolute parity in totally or partially elected assemblies was adopted.
It entered into force during the legislative elections of July 2012 and for the first time in the country's political history,
the number of women MPs has increased from 19.2 to 42.6%. However, women are still affected by disparities at all
levels and gender issues touch on poverty, health, education, access to finance, employment, access to land and the
means of production, among others. Women are active in the production sectors, the small market economy and the
informal sector. Any action tending to strengthen them in these sectors, reflects on their economic power, their |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 52 ---
 | Construction phase |  |  | Operation phase | 
Social measures linked to loss of property and displacement
of populations |  |  | Fire safety |  | 
Measures to reduce the effects on natural resources |  |  | Measures a gainst the development of pests |  | 
Pollution control measures |  |  | Waste management |  | 
Dust mitigation measures |  |  | Risk management for maintenance operatio ns |  | 
Water supply measures for construction sites |  |  | Management of nois e pollution from installations |  | 
Safety measures |  |  |  |  | 
Measures to avoid and settle social conflicts |  |  |  |  | 
Measures to combat the risks of STI / HIV / AIDS transmission |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 48
GGGG
participation at the strategic level and the well-being of the family. Access to electricity can therefore constitute an
important input, but also a bulwark against constraints that affect gender relations. However, until 2018, energy was
not yet perceived by policies targeting gender equality as a factor which could improve women’s participation in the
national economy, but rather as a sector beyond the scope of the Implementation Plan of the National Strategy on
Equity and Gender Equality (PMO-SNEEG)44.
Cooking and motive power remain the main gender issues in the energy sector. The collection of wood is the exclusive
domain of women and the use of biomass leads to considerations about their health and that of children, hence there
are measures aimed at modernizing cooking fuels. As for electricity, its weight in the reduction of gender inequalities is
important because of the opportunities in access to modern energy services instead of motive power.
Before carrying out the diagnosis on gender accounting in the rural electrification national program, ASER has been
involved in gender audits for policies and in energy programs conducted in 2005-2007. After several attempts to develop
a program impact monitoring framework, a gender-sensitive manual intended to strengthen the results-based
management of electrification programs was produced in 2012. In addition, it should be noted that ASER recently
completed (in 2019) its Strategic Plan for Development (PSD) 2020-2023 where gender mainstreaming becomes a
reality in the formulation of planned lines of intervention.
However, many factors still constitute constraints to allow ASER achieve effective gender mainstreaming. These
include:
- the lack of sustained collaboration between ASER and the institutions in charge of the issues gender;
- the pricing of electricity which does not integrate preferences towards women and poor people;
- the beneficiaries' lack of resources for the initial investment necessary for starting professional, revenue-generating
activities and;
- the lack of energy services for an optimized use of electricity at the productive and professional level.
Based on the constraints and challenges identified, a gender action plan for the rural electrification program using solar
mini-grids was developed focusing on three main results, from which a series of actions to be implemented were
identified: (i) gender is institutionalized in ASER; (ii) the energy needs of men and women are understood and met; (iii)
access to finance for the development of economic and professional activities is supported. The implementation of this
action plan calls for the active involvement of ASER and the synergy between all partners and development actors.
The project will confer substantial benefits on gender, due to its nature. The objective of the project is not only limited
to curbing climate change by bringing renewable electricity to the rural populations, but also it greatly contributes to
creating wealth and consequently reducing, even eliminating poverty. Rural women, through access to electricity, will
thus find an opportunity to make their activities profitable with the possibilities offered by electric current. For example,
energy-powered pumps reduce all the drudgery women endure to draw water. The socio-economic co-benefits on the
lives of populations and particularly on women is very certain. The project also creates wealth. It has strong cross-
sectoral links with various socio-economic sectors (agriculture, health and education). Electricity could therefore bring
about a lot of positive changes at almost every level of the various business sectors. These include:
- promotion of income-generating activities;
- the acquisition of household appliances (more comfort for the populations);
- the reduction of exhausting chores of the rural woman, an increase in the schooling rate of the children, in particular
the girls, and better school results;
- the development of cultural and leisure activities.
The full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan are provided as annex 8.
The Accredited Entity will validate the terms of reference for the recruitment of the consulting firm which will be in charge
of the activities in close synergy with ASER, and validate the monitoring reports on the implementation of activities and
the final evaluation of the project.
44 At least 75% of women with access to alleviating equipment have additional human energy to devote to productive, social
and leisure activities in 2011

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 49
GGGG
• BOAD provided technical support for the development of the Gender Action Plan. In its implementation, it will
monitor its implementation according to what is defined in the said action plan through field visits, review of reports
submitted by the Senegalese side and recommendations for corrections to be made.
• BOAD has recruited a Sociologist, Gender Specialist, who ensures compliance with the implementation of gender
action plans developed in the context of projects under funding of the FVC; it is not covered in the project budget.
• It was planned the training of a gender staff to ensure the implementation of the action plan. This specialist is
supported in the project framework through the budget.
• In operational side, women groups and enterprises will be targeted through the project as described in the gender
assessment
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant BOAD rules and regulations, as
well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed by BOAD and the GCF as part of
BOAD’s accreditation to the GCF. The provision of the grant proceeds (Technical Assistance and social & gender
connection coupons funds) will flow from GCF to AE based on the agreed payment schedule, subsequently to the
funded activities based on the Procurement Plan. The provision of the BOAD loan will be made to ASER through the
Ministry of Finance (Senegal Treasury) as per the Fund Flow Diagram (Figure 18), and subject to a reimbursement
plan to be agreed. BOAD will carry out financial transfers in accordance with its own policies, procedures and rules for
which it has been accredited for. Goods, and services financed from the GCF loans and the BOAD Loan will be acquired
by either:
- limited consultation after expression of interest for sub-components
- international call for tenders for the components
- open consultation on a WAEMU scale of specialized design offices for the realization of the sub-components
- national call for tenders
Procurement
To ensure that financing is applied in ways that adequately secure the BOAD’s mandate while maximizing development
effectiveness, the Bank encourages and promotes sound, fair, transparent and well performing procurement systems.
BOAD’s Guidelines for procurement of consultancy services financed by a loan or advance of funds (2016); and
Guidelines for the award of works contracts, goods and services (other than consultancy services) (2016) will be applied
by ASER in the project’s procurement.
BOAD will conduct an analysis of the procurement files and give its no objection.
AML/FT Due diligence
As part of the prevention and fight against money laundering, BOAD has developed a Financial Security Policy (2016).
This internal document constitutes the general framework of the control system covering all of BOAD's activities relating
to the prevention, surveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks.
BOAD's Financial Security Policy is inspired by the international standards defined by the United Nations through its
specialized structures, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) whose recommendations
are issued by the International Financial Action Group (FATF) and provisions of Directive 02/2015 / CM / UEMOA of
02 July 2015 on the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing in the Member States of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union. ("WAEMU Directive").
The policy requires to disclose information about its clients' transactions to the relevant authorities in cases where
international rules and local law require regulated financial institutions to do so, including cases of money laundering.
Under its due diligence, the Bank will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists. The Bank
also conducts also administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coercion, collisions and inconvenient practices,
and make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal investigations.

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
• BOAD provided technical support for the development of the Gender Action Plan. In its implementation, it will
monitor its implementation according to what is defined in the said action plan through field visits, review of reports
submitted by the Senegalese side and recommendations for corrections to be made.
• BOAD has recruited a Sociologist, Gender Specialist, who ensures compliance with the implementation of gender
action plans developed in the context of projects under funding of the FVC; it is not covered in the project budget.
• It was planned the training of a gender staff to ensure the implementation of the action plan. This specialist is
supported in the project framework through the budget.
• In operational side, women groups and enterprises will be targeted through the project as described in the gender
assessment |  | 
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 
 | Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant BOAD rules and regulations, as | 
 | well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed by BOAD and the GCF as part of | 
 | BOAD’s accreditation to the GCF. The provision of the grant proceeds (Technical Assistance and social & gender | 
 | connection coupons funds) will flow from GCF to AE based on the agreed payment schedule, subsequently to the | 
 | funded activities based on the Procurement Plan. The provision of the BOAD loan will be made to ASER through the | 
 | Ministry of Finance (Senegal Treasury) as per the Fund Flow Diagram (Figure 18), and subject to a reimbursement | 
 | plan to be agreed. BOAD will carry out financial transfers in accordance with its own policies, procedures and rules for | 
 | which it has been accredited for. Goods, and services financed from the GCF loans and the BOAD Loan will be acquired | 
 | by either: | 
 |  | 
 | - limited consultation after expression of interest for sub-components | 
 | - international call for tenders for the components | 
 | - open consultation on a WAEMU scale of specialized design offices for the realization of the sub-components | 
 | - national call for tenders | 
 | Procurement | 
 |  | 
 | To ensure that financing is applied in ways that adequately secure the BOAD’s mandate while maximizing development | 
 | effectiveness, the Bank encourages and promotes sound, fair, transparent and well performing procurement systems. | 
 |  | 
 | BOAD’s Guidelines for procurement of consultancy services financed by a loan or advance of funds (2016); and | 
 | Guidelines for the award of works contracts, goods and services (other than consultancy services) (2016) will be applied | 
 | by ASER in the project’s procurement. | 
 |  | 
 | BOAD will conduct an analysis of the procurement files and give its no objection. | 
 | AML/FT Due diligence | 
 | As part of the prevention and fight against money laundering, BOAD has developed a Financial Security Policy (2016). | 
 | This internal document constitutes the general framework of the control system covering all of BOAD's activities relating | 
 | to the prevention, surveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks. | 
 |  | 
 | BOAD's Financial Security Policy is inspired by the international standards defined by the United Nations through its | 
 | specialized structures, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) whose recommendations | 
 | are issued by the International Financial Action Group (FATF) and provisions of Directive 02/2015 / CM / UEMOA of | 
 | 02 July 2015 on the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing in the Member States of the West African | 
 | Economic and Monetary Union. ("WAEMU Directive"). | 
 |  | 
 | The policy requires to disclose information about its clients' transactions to the relevant authorities in cases where | 
 | international rules and local law require regulated financial institutions to do so, including cases of money laundering. | 
 |  | 
 | Under its due diligence, the Bank will assess civil / criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions lists. The Bank | 
 | also conducts also administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coercion, collisions and inconvenient practices, | 
 | and make use of the relevant national authorities for the necessary criminal investigations. | 
 |  | 

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 50
GGGG
The Bank integrates measures to combat illicit financial flows, the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing
in the internal operations of the Bank Group.
In the context of this project, concerning ALM/FT, the concerned stakeholder will:
- ensure that the funds financing the Project are not of illicit origin and in particular are not related to fraud against
Senegal's financial interests, corruption, organized criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and
- forward to the Bank without delay any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in
the company and in the Project;
- notify the Bank without delay if it has known at any time of any information indicating the illicit origin of all or part of
the funds of the structure;
- not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on the lists established by the
United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the
European Union in application of its Common Positions and / or by the African Union as well as on any other relative
or complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the fight against the Laundering
of Capital and the financing of terrorism.
AUDIT
Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of Projects. The
Financial Agreement with Senegal will require the submission of Audited Financial Statements to BOAD within four
months after each year-end. An independent external auditor will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable
to the Bank (not later than four months after effectiveness) for the entire duration of the project. The Financial
Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing standards.
BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, comments, and recommendations for improvements
in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial Agreements. The
cost of the audit will be met from project resources. BOAD will ensure KYC standard-compliant due diligence process
including anti-money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors is followed thoroughly.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
  full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
  redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential
information.

--- Table 1 on Page 55 ---
 | The Bank integrates measures to combat illicit financial flows, the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing | 
 | in the internal operations of the Bank Group. | 
 |  | 
 | In the context of this project, concerning ALM/FT, the concerned stakeholder will: | 
 | - ensure that the funds financing the Project are not of illicit origin and in particular are not related to fraud against | 
 | Senegal's financial interests, corruption, organized criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and | 
 | - forward to the Bank without delay any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in | 
 | the company and in the Project; | 
 | - notify the Bank without delay if it has known at any time of any information indicating the illicit origin of all or part of | 
 | the funds of the structure; | 
 | - not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on the lists established by the | 
 | United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the | 
 | European Union in application of its Common Positions and / or by the African Union as well as on any other relative | 
 | or complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the fight against the Laundering | 
 | of Capital and the financing of terrorism. | 
 |  | 
 | AUDIT | 
 |  | 
 | Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting and Auditing of Projects. The | 
 | Financial Agreement with Senegal will require the submission of Audited Financial Statements to BOAD within four | 
 | months after each year-end. An independent external auditor will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable | 
 | to the Bank (not later than four months after effectiveness) for the entire duration of the project. The Financial | 
 | Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing standards. | 
 | BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, comments, and recommendations for improvements | 
 | in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial Agreements. The | 
 | cost of the audit will be met from project resources. BOAD will ensure KYC standard-compliant due diligence process | 
 | including anti-money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors is followed thoroughly. | 
 |  | 
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 |  | 
 | ☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may | 
 | not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited | 
 | entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 |   full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 |   redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential | 
 | information. | 

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 51
HHHH
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☒ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☒ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☒ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☒ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☐ Annex 22 Other references
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
 | H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☒ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
(ESS disclosure form provided)
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
Others (please specify – e.g. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
☐
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) | 
☒ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☒ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☒ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☒ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot
project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects
financed by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 22 | Other references | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 52
HHHH
Annex 16 – map of proposed interventions

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.1 | PAGE 53
HHHH
Annex 22 – other references (bibliography)
 2015, Ministère de l’Energie et du Développement des Energies Renouvelables. SE4All Action plan
 2015, DFID‐ Literature Review on Energy Access and Adaptation to Climate Change
 2016-11 PNER - CADRE DE GESTION ENVIRONNEMENTALE ET SOCIALE (CGES)
 2016 PNUD Cartographie secteur solaire entreprises inclusives Senegal
 2017-11 UFC-MCA Amélioration-de-l’accès-à-l’électricité-en-milieux-rural-et-péri-urbain-
 2018_USAID ATLAS_Climate Change Risk Profile – West Africa & Senegal
 2018 GESTO FR-Prog Inv Acces Universel SE4All Senegal
 2018 Plan Senegal Emergent PAP 2019-2023
 2018-09 Université Paris Dauphine, PSD. Accès universel et durable à l'électricité au Sénégal.
 2019-01 Projet coupons JAPPALE Report 3 - Mise en oeuvre de la distribution - FR _FINALv
 2019 GETinvest-Market-Insights_SEN_PV_Guide_2019
 2019 UE FR-Programme d’appui au développement des énergies renouvelables pour l’accès universel
 2019-02 MCC-willingness-to-pay-for-improved-electricity-services-in-senegal
 2019-09 report Market Opportunity for Productive Use Leveraging Solar Energy (PULSE)
 2019-10 USAID-Senegal-MarketAssessment-Final_508
 2019-09 Rapport FINAL_plan operationel SE4ALL acces universel
 [draft] 2019 Projet Arrêté Ministériel Electrification Hors-Réseau Senegal
 2014 CCKN & IISD - Exploring Trends in Low-Carbon, Climate-Resilient Development

=== PAGE 59 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or
focal point(s)

=== PAGE 60 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP
Basic project or programme information
Project or
programme ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
title
Existence of
subproject(s)
to be identified
No
after GCF
Board
approval
Sector (public
Public
or private)
Accredited
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD)
entity
Environmental
and social
Category B
safeguards
(ESS) category
Location –
specific
The project sites are located in 1,000 villages spread over seven (07)
location(s) of
administrative regions of Senegal. They are Kaffrine, Kaolack, Fatick (in
project or
the Centre), Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda (in the South), and Saint-
target country
Louis (in the North).
or location(s)
of programme
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)
Date of
disclosure on
Tuesday, May 5, 2020
accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of English and French
disclosure
Explanation on
French is the official language of Senegal.
language
English translation:
https://www.boad.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
Link to glish-translation_rev2403.pdf
disclosure
French:
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport-
provisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu-23032020.pdf
Other link(s) N/A
An ESIA consistent with the requirements of a Category B project is
Remarks contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA):
Preliminary Version”.
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)
Date of
Tuesday, May 5, 2020
disclosure on

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | Basic project or programme information |  |  | 
 | Project or |  | ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project | 
 | programme |  |  | 
 | title |  |  | 
 | Existence of |  | No | 
 | subproject(s) |  |  | 
 | to be identified |  |  | 
 | after GCF |  |  | 
 | Board |  |  | 
 | approval |  |  | 
 | Sector (public |  | Public | 
 | or private) |  |  | 
 | Accredited |  | Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) | 
 | entity |  |  | 
 | Environmental |  | Category B | 
 | and social |  |  | 
 | safeguards |  |  | 
 | (ESS) category |  |  | 
 | Location – |  | The project sites are located in 1,000 villages spread over seven (07)
administrative regions of Senegal. They are Kaffrine, Kaolack, Fatick (in
the Centre), Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda (in the South), and Saint-
Louis (in the North). | 
 | specific |  |  | 
 | location(s) of |  |  | 
 | project or |  |  | 
 | target country |  |  | 
 | or location(s) |  |  | 
 | of programme |  |  | 
 | Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of |  | Tuesday, May 5, 2020 | 
 | disclosure on |  |  | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | English and French | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
 | Explanation on |  | French is the official language of Senegal. | 
 | language |  |  | 
Link to
disclosure |  |  | English translation:
https://www.boad.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
glish-translation_rev2403.pdf
French:
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport-
provisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu-23032020.pdf | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
Remarks |  |  | An ESIA consistent with the requirements of a Category B project is
contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA):
Preliminary Version”. | 
 | Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Date of |  | Tuesday, May 5, 2020 | 
 | disclosure on |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 60 ---
Link to
disclosure

=== PAGE 61 ===
accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of
English and French
disclosure
Explanation on
French is the official language of Senegal.
language
English translation:
https://www.boad.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
Link to glish-translation_rev2403.pdf
disclosure
French:
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport-
p rovisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu-23032020.pdf
Other link(s) N/A
An ESMP consistent with the requirements of a category B project is
Remarks contained in the ESIA’s Chapter 8 titled “Environmental and Social
Management Framework Plan”.
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)
Description of
report/disclosur
N/A
e on accredited
entity’s website
Language(s) of
N/A
disclosure
Explanation on
N/A
language
Link to
N/A
disclosure
Other link(s) N/A
Remarks N/A
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)
Date Tuesday, May 5, 2020
The documentation made available on BOAD website, and in Senegal in
locations that are accessible for the beneficiary people, especially Agence
Sénégalaise pour l’Electrification Rurale (ASER); Direction de
Place l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés (DEEC) in Dakar ; and at
regional level within Regional Directorate for environmental affairs
(Direction Régionale de l'Environnement et des Eltablissements Classés –
DREEC) ; and within the BOAD national representation in Senegal.
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered
Date of
accredited
N/A
entity’s Board
meeting
Date of GCF’s
Tuesday, June 23, 2020
Board meeting
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | English and French | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
 | Explanation on |  | French is the official language of Senegal. | 
 | language |  |  | 
Link to
disclosure |  |  | English translation:
https://www.boad.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/10/EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_12012020_en
glish-translation_rev2403.pdf
French:
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Rapport-
p rovisoire_EES_Projet_Solaire_BOAD_ASER_FVC_revu-23032020.pdf | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
Remarks |  |  | An ESMP consistent with the requirements of a category B project is
contained in the ESIA’s Chapter 8 titled “Environmental and Social
Management Framework Plan”. | 
 | Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement |  |  | 
 | Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) |  |  | 
 | Description of |  | N/A | 
 | report/disclosur |  |  | 
 | e on accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s website |  |  | 
 | Language(s) of |  | N/A | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
 | Explanation on |  | N/A | 
 | language |  |  | 
 | Link to |  | N/A | 
 | disclosure |  |  | 
 | Other link(s) |  | N/A | 
 | Remarks |  | N/A | 
 | Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) |  |  | 
 | Date |  | Tuesday, May 5, 2020 | 
Place |  |  | The documentation made available on BOAD website, and in Senegal in
locations that are accessible for the beneficiary people, especially Agence
Sénégalaise pour l’Electrification Rurale (ASER); Direction de
l’Environnement et des Etablissements Classés (DEEC) in Dakar ; and at
regional level within Regional Directorate for environmental affairs
(Direction Régionale de l'Environnement et des Eltablissements Classés –
DREEC) ; and within the BOAD national representation in Senegal. | 
 | Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered |  |  | 
 | Date of |  | N/A | 
 | accredited |  |  | 
 | entity’s Board |  |  | 
 | meeting |  |  | 
 | Date of GCF’s |  | Tuesday, June 23, 2020 | 
 | Board meeting |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 61 ---
Link to
disclosure

=== PAGE 62 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 62
Secretariat’s assessment of FP138
Proposal name: ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
Accredited entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD)
Country/(ies): Senegal
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The project proposes a public–private
partnership business model for investing and
operating small-scale solar mini-grids, which
fits with the country context. The shift from
“Build, Operate, Transfer” regional
concessions to a public pre-financed
concession model will result in triple
benefits: (1) increased energy access for
remote areas of the country; (2) private-
sector contribution achieved through
lowering the initial investment cost; and (3)
realizing a uniform tariff across the country,
with an electricity price that aligns with
affordability for the poorest. It sets a good
example in terms of country ownership, with
a significant level of co-financing by the
country which then partners with the GCF in
de-risking energy access activities to reach
levels acceptable to the private sector and
affordable to the communities
The project will promote productive use of
electricity along with wider access to
electricity, therefore ensuring the financial
sustainability of the project while bringing in
significant economic and social co-benefits.
The productive use of electricity across 1,000
rural villages will promote job creation and
support grass roots-level economic activities
which, as well as being a sustainability pillar
of the project, would make it a green stimulus

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  | Points of caution | 
The project proposes a public–private
partnership business model for investing and
operating small-scale solar mini-grids, which
fits with the country context. The shift from
“Build, Operate, Transfer” regional
concessions to a public pre-financed
concession model will result in triple
benefits: (1) increased energy access for
remote areas of the country; (2) private-
sector contribution achieved through
lowering the initial investment cost; and (3)
realizing a uniform tariff across the country,
with an electricity price that aligns with
affordability for the poorest. It sets a good
example in terms of country ownership, with
a significant level of co-financing by the
country which then partners with the GCF in
de-risking energy access activities to reach |  |  |  |  | 
levels acceptable to the private sector and
affordable to the communities
The project will promote productive use of
electricity along with wider access to
electricity, therefore ensuring the financial
sustainability of the project while bringing in
significant economic and social co-benefits.
The productive use of electricity across 1,000
rural villages will promote job creation and
support grass roots-level economic activities |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 63 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 63
package to support post-coronavirus disease
19 (COVID-19) pandemic recovery
The project provides a solid framework for
scalability and replication of public-sector
investment into small-scale renewable
energy mini-grid programmes in many sub-
Saharan Africa countries where energy
access rates are low and the socioeconomic
characteristics are similar to Senegal
2.
The Board may consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XVIII, titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations”.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background
3.
Although Senegal has been steadily increasing its national electrification rate, with
almost fully electrified urban areas, the majority of people in rural areas still do not have access
to electricity (approximately 58 per cent). For basic energy needs, households mainly rely on
fuelwood for cooking, and kerosene lamps for lighting – which are expensive and cause health
and environmental hazards. The rural electricity sector has been characterized by high upfront
investment costs and operation costs that are too high for rural operators to bear, which has led
to the need for recurring government subsidies to help private-sector operators maintain
revenue levels that keep them in business. Meanwhile, the effects of climate change are posing
challenges to the livelihoods of the rural population.
4.
The main barriers that have been identified as contributing to low electricity usage rates
in the rural areas of Senegal are high upfront investment costs, high levels of operational costs
to run remote electricity assets, and the low level and widely dispersed nature of consumption,
all of which have resulted in low interest for participation by the private sector. This project
aims to tackle these barriers through a set of integrated interventions. GCF will provide the
concessional financing needed to mobilize private sector participation in providing rural
households with access to modern solar-powered mini-grids in 1,000 isolated villages. The GCF
proceeds will also be used to subsidize connections to the mini-grids through a coupon/voucher
scheme, which will not only make the connection charge affordable, but also accelerates the
commercial viability of each mini-grid by catalysing “anchor customers”. This, together with the
promotion of the use of electricity from a renewable source for income generating activities (i.e.
productive use), which will be achieved together with local micro-finance institutions, has the
potential to considerably increase the financial viability of each private sector-operated solar
mini-grid. In addition, the capacity of main rural electrification stakeholders will be
strengthened to enable the deployment of a network of solar mini-grids and facilitate project
implementation.
5.
The project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by approximately
2
1.13 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO eq) over its technical lifetime by moving
away from the use of traditional energy resources. GCF finance will support the implementation
of the Government of Senegal’s plan to scale up and accelerate rural electrification through
private concessionaires with an acceptable risk-reward ratio. It will also greatly help the

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
package to support post-coronavirus disease | 
19 (COVID-19) pandemic recovery
The project provides a solid framework for
scalability and replication of public-sector
investment into small-scale renewable
energy mini-grid programmes in many sub-
Saharan Africa countries where energy | 

=== PAGE 64 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 64
poorest and most vulnerable among the country’s population to adapt to an increasingly
w armer climate.
6.
The total project cost is EUR 198.7 million. The project is structured around three
components: an investment component (component 2) and an incentives programme for
productive use of electricity (component 3) which together are funded by a GCF loan of EUR
73.6 million; and a technical assistance component(component 1) that aims to build the
necessary capacity of energy stakeholders, to be funded by a EUR 1.8 million GCF grant,
complemented by co-financing from the Government of Senegal (EUR 5.6 million contribution)
and other partners, including loans from the German development bank, KfW (EUR 102.4
million), and the accredited entity (AE), the West African Development Bank (BOAD) (EUR 15.2
m illion).
7.
The environmental and social safeguards classification of the project is category B.
2Co.2mponCenotm 1:p Toecnhennicta-lb ayss-icstoamncep toon theen sto laanr arulyrasli esl e ctrification stakeholders (total cost: EUR 3
million; GCF cost: EUR 1.65 million, or 55 per cent)
8.
This component will provide capacity-building to the project’s key stakeholders. The
capacity-building includes operational support, training and technical assistance to build the
capacity of a project management unit hosted by the executing entity (EE), the Senegalese Rural
Electrification Agency (ASER); for example, strengthening and standardizing its procurement
processes and its institutional capacity for monitoring and quality control to meet GCF
requirements. This component will also support the implementation of a gender action plan to
ensure women’s participation in and benefits from the project interventions. Local
concessionaires will be trained to operate the recycling unit for batteries and other waste to
minimize the potential environmental and social impact caused by the deployment of solar
m ini-grids.
9.
This component includes the overall project management cost, which amounts to EUR
Component 2: Procurement and installation of solar-powered mini-grids (total cost: EUR 188
0.56 million and is sufficiently justified.
million; GCF cost: EUR 75.4 million or 40 per cent)
10.
Under this component, solar-powered mini-grids will be installed in 1,000 selected
remote villages. After construction of the mini-grids, current local private sector
concessionaires will take over the operation and maintenance of the assets through an
amendment to their current concession agreement, granting them the right to extend revenue
collection to the newly electrified areas. Deployment of modern public lighting will be fully
financed by KfW to help provide suburban security and economic growth in the villages. The
procurement and installation of solar-powered mini-grids will absorb most of the GCF
Component 3: Incentives for productive use of electricity (total cost: EUR 21.5 million; GCF cost:
concessional loan, which is to be lent to the Government of Senegal.
EUR 5.7 or 26.5 per cent)
11.
Rural customers that are currently served by Senelec, the national electricity company
of Senegal, and are in the periphery of the concession areas enjoy lower tariffs than those within
the remote concession areas, therefore discouraging energy access beyond the areas covered by
Senelec. Therefore the application of a uniform tariff alone will not suffice to incentivize new
connections. With GCF proceeds, connections to the mini-grids will also be subsidized using a
coupon/voucher which will not only make the connection charge affordable, but will also
accelerate the commercial viability of each mini-grid by drawing in larger customers. This way,

=== PAGE 65 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 65
the pace of connections among rural households will increase and the project can reach out to
the poorest and most vulnerable rural populations.
12.
Another aspect of this component is promoting the productive use of electricity
generated from renewable sources through the provision of a guarantee facility. The guarantees
issued are designed to cover the loans extended by micro-finance institutions to the
beneficiaries of electricity in the areas of mini-grids undertaking for the purchase of productive
use equipment. This will lower the cost of loans to rural entrepreneurs that support the
development of micro-businesses in the areas served by the mini-grids.
13.
Successful implementation of component 3 can boost private concessionaires’
confidence and interest in the rural electrification investments, thereby ensuring the project
objective is achieved. The innovative design of this component also has huge economic
stimulation benefit in the targeted area, further enhancing the climate resilience of the local
population while facilitating recovery actions following the coronavirus 19 disease (COVID-19)
pandemic.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
Scale: Medium
3.1 Impact potential
14.
The project achieves mitigation impacts and considerable adaptation co-benefits. The
uptake of renewable energy technologies will provide access to electricity through direct
2
household connections, leading to GHG emission reductions amounting to 1.13 million tCO eq
throughout the project lifetime. Meanwhile, the project is expected to directly benefit 344,000
people and better prepare them to adapt to the potential impacts of climate change.
15.
Overall, the impact of the project is assessed as medium. Its mitigation potential is
balanced by a medium level of GHG reductions, which is an embedded characteristic of levels of
electricity demands in the rural areas of Senegal. However, the project also achieves significant
adaptation co-benefits and paves the way for broader socioeconomic impacts across 1,000
villages.
Scale: High
3.2 Paradigm shift potential
16.
GCF concessional finance is critical to crowd in the private sector, which at the moment
is limited and has low interest in the targeted areas where investment in mini-grids is not
commercially viable. The subsidized approach, which lowers the upfront investment costs for
setting up the assets, plays a catalytic role by enabling the private sector to engage in activities
that would otherwise be unprofitable. Increased electricity demand – made possible by the
increased number of connections and promotion of productive use of electricity – will in turn
allow the local private concessionaires to reach a critical scale to make the concessions more
viable and sustainable. This model has the potential to be replicated in other African countries
that have similar barriers in provision of electricity to remote subsets of population.
Scale: High
3.3 Sustainable development potential
17.
The proposal has the potential to generate relevant co-benefits, particularly for the
economy and society of Senegal, which rely on the development of the energy sector. In terms of
economic co-benefits, the promotion of productive use of electricity will likely produce greater
prosperity and generate income for the communities, thus moving them out of poverty
(Sustainable Development Goal 1). This is particularly important in the light of the COVID-19

=== PAGE 66 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 66
pandemic, if green stimulus is given priority for almost all affected countries. Moreover, moving
away from traditional sources of energy (fuels) to clean solar electricity will result in
environmental benefits such as reduction of local air pollution and noise impacts on local
communities. Component 3 also promotes access to electricity for social use, which widely
contributes to the sustainable development potential of the project.
Scale: High
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
18.
The needs of the recipient are assessed to be high. Senegal is a least developed country
with a population of 16.3 million, of which almost 55 per cent live in rural areas. Senegal has
steadily increased electrification rates, with almost fully electrified urban areas; however, the
majority (58 per cent) of people in rural areas do not have access to electricity and non-
electrification rates in some remote areas can be as high as 90 per cent. For basic needs,
households have to rely on fuelwood for cooking. This use of traditional fuel is expensive and
poses both health and environmental concerns. Meanwhile, the impacts of climate changes are
be ing felt by the poorest people in the country.
19.
The Government does not currently have the full financial capacities and knowledge to
achieve universal access to electricity. Senegal’s public debt currently stands at 57 per cent of
the country’s gross domestic product. This, together with the exchange rate depreciation and a
dependence on foreign debt, places the treasury at risk and limits its ability to borrow capital at
the market rate to implement its rural electrification programme. The GCF concessional loan
will reduce the average cost of capital to 3.9 per cent compared with a rate of 6.3 per cent
without GCF intervention.
Scale: High
3. 5 Country ownership
20.
The project is properly aligned with national priorities concerning climate change
mitigation and adaptation, including the Senegalese nationally determined contribution, the
national strategy for economic and social development, and Plan Sénégal Emergent. Moreover,
the national designated authority of Senegal communicated to GCF, through its country
programme, that it has placed this project as priority under the first replenishment period of the
GC F.
21.
BOAD, as a direct access entity to the GCF, has longstanding experience in Senegal as
well as in the energy market. The EE, ASER, was created with the sole aim of promoting rural
ele ctrification and has been involved in various rural mini-grid/grid extension programmes.
22.
The project design took into consideration perceptions, concerns, expectations and
recommendations received during the stakeholder consultations, including those of
administrative and local authorities of the region, rural communities, and ASER. The national
designated authority of Senegal was also supportive of this proposed project at its early stage
and issued a no-objection letter at the funding proposal stage.
Scale: Medium
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
23.
The efficiency and effectiveness of this project is assessed to be medium due to the
resulting higher capital expenditure (CAPEX) per unit of GHG abatement achieved. The
2 2
estimated cost of GHG abatement for GCF is EUR 28.8/tCO eq (EUR 177/tCO eq for the entire
project), which could be seen as on the high side compared with some benchmarks. However, it
is worth mentioning that, because the financial instrument is a loan, it is fair to relate the cost of
impact to the grant equivalent part of this loan only. It is also worth noting that access to clean
electricity in the context of this project has considerable adaptation benefits. The viability of the

=== PAGE 67 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 67
project will, however, broadly depend on the quality of the construction and the obligation
passed through to the concessionaires. Without GCF financing, the Government of Senegal
would have to borrow at market rates, which would increase the costs for the project and stress
the balance sheet of this least developed country. The AE and the Government are requested to
pa ss on GCF concessionality to end-beneficiaries through a uniform tariff.
24.
An economic analysis shows the project’s economic internal rate of return (IRR) to be
between 10.3 and 13.2 per cent, depending on the tariff level and electricity consumption level.
The financial analysis shows that concession holders will be paying 5 per cent up front of CAPEX
for the concession rights, but are obliged to make reinvestments for inverters (every 15 years),
batteries (every 7 years) and solar panels (every 25 years). With these reinvestments and the
operation and maintenance costs factored in, the IRR is expected to be 12.6 per cent at the
subsidized tariff level. The financial IRR is sensitive to electricity consumption and tariff level,
therefore the success of enforcing the tariff and component 3 in promoting the productive use of
electricity are key.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 EEnnvviriroonnmmenetnalt aanl da nsodc isaol rciisakl csaatfeeggouryards
25.
. The AE states that the project is risk category
B. The Secretariat agrees with this categorization, considering that the interventions on the
ground involve installations that are micro to small-scale (15 to 60 kW capacity) solar
photovoltaic (PV) power grids in 1000 villages all over the country. The project sites are located
in villages spread over seven administrative regions of Senegal, clustered into three zones,
namely centre (Kaffrine, Kaolack, Fatick), south (Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda) and north
(Sa int-L
S
o
a
u
f
i
e
s
g
).
u ards instruments and disclosure
26.
. The AE has prepared an environmental and
social impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the requirements of a Category B project. The
ESIA also contains an environmental and social management framework plan in both English
an d French.
27.
The paragraphs below summarize the status of compliance and conformance of the
project to environmental and social safeguards (ESS) performance standards 1 to 8 of the GCF
int erim
E
E
S
S
S
S
1
st
:
a
A
n
s
d
s
a
e
r
s
d
s
s
m
.
ent and management of environmental and social risks and
impacts
28.
. The ESIA provides a description of the political, legal and institutional context of the
project. It describes the environmental and socioeconomic profile of the intervention areas and
assesses and proposes management strategies for the project’s identified potential risks and
impacts. It presents the institutional arrangements for implementing the measures, including
mo nitor
E
in
S
g
S
a
2
n
:
d
L a
re
b
p
o
o
u
r
r
t i
a
n
n
g
d
o n
w
e
o
n
r
v
k
i
i
r
n
o
g
n
c
m
o
e
n
n
d
t
i
a
t
l
i
a
o
n
n
d
s
social performance.
29.
. The project involves construction-related risks
and impacts to occupational health and safety because it will involve civil engineering works
and the installation of solar PV plants, ancillary facilities and local distribution lines in the target
villages. The project will follow national decrees on labour and working conditions, and the
environmental and social management framework plan includes measures to monitor the use of
personal protective equipment during construction and operation and maintenance activities of
wo rkers
E
.
SS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention
30.
. The ESIA covers the
management of wastes from construction activities. Regarding wastes generated during
operation and maintenance, the ESMPF requires the formulation of a waste management plan to

=== PAGE 68 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 68
ensure that wastes such as discarded lead–acid batteries and other potentially hazardous
wa stes (
E
e
S
.g
S
.
4
u
:
s e
C
d
o m
oil
m
s
u
an
n
d
it
a
y
c
h
cu
ea
m
l
u
th
la
,
t
s
o
a
r
f
s
e
)
t
a
y
r
a
e
n
h
d
a n
se
d
c
le
u
d
r i
b
t
y
y
authorized agencies.
31.
. The target villages are the most
remote, isolated and least financially attractive villages in the country. Hence, there is a risk
during construction that construction worker behaviours will clash with local customs and
traditions and would expose the host community to non-endemic diseases. To minimize this
risk, the project will give priority to the recruitment of local labour and this will be incorporated
in contracts with developers. The project will also facilitate the establishment of training
programmes for local villagers to help them acquire the skills needed for the construction,
op eratio
E
n
S S
a n
5
d
: L
m
a
a
n
in
d
t
a
en
cq
an
u
c
is
e
i
o
ti
f
o
t
n
h e
a n
fa
d
c i
i
l
n
it
v
ie
o
s
l
.
u ntary resettlement
32.
. The individual PV grids would
require lands; for example, up to 1,800 square metres for a PV panel field, plus a buffer zone of
about 50 m and rights of way for the access roads. The project may incur temporary loss of use
of agricultural land because of the opening of tracks and the installation of equipment and
facilities on the construction sites. These activities could result in a reduction of land available
for cultivation and may interfere with agricultural land development. To mitigate this, the
project plans to give priority to the use of marginal land for the installation of the power plants.
The project will provide compensation to the owners of lands impacted by the activities, using
the guidelines on resettlement in the National Rural Electrification Programme’s Resettlement
Po licy F
E
ra
S
m
S 6
ew
: B
o
i
r
o
k
d
a
i
s
v e
th
r
e
s i
r
t
e
y
f e
c
r
o
e
n
n
s
c
e
e
r
f
v
o
a
r
t
a
io
ll
n
r u
a
r
n
a
d
l e
s
l
u
e
s
c
t
t
a
ri
i
f
n
ic
a
a
b
ti
l
o
e
n
m
in
a
t
n
e
a
r
g
v
e
en
m
ti
e
o
n
n
t
s
o
in
f l
t
i
h
v
e
in
c
g
o u
n
n
a
t
t
r
u
y
r
.
al
resources
33.
. Some of the target villages are located near protected areas, but there is low
probability that a PV grid, its facilities and/or access roads will fall within declared protected
areas of natural habitat. Moreover, the power plants will be located within or in the immediate
vicinity of the villages and the project will implement measures to avoid siting project facilities
in areas
E
w
S
i
S
t h
7 :
h
I
i
n
gh
d i
b
g
i
e
o
n
d
o
iv
u
e
s
r s
p
it
e
y
o
p
p
o
le
te
s
ntial.
34.
. In its assessment, the AE has declared that this
performance standard is not applicable using the ESS standard definition of indigenous peoples.
In circumstances where this would be triggered, the project will, prior to commencing any
activities that have potential application of the AE’s environmental and social standards on
indigenous peoples, furnish to the GCF copies of such social assessment, its indigenous peoples
policy and any associated management plans including, as applicable, evidence that free, prior
and informed consent from the indigenous communities has been obtained for the purposes of
the relevant activities. During the AE’s stakeholder engagement process there was a request
that the project should take into account the local sociocultural context of the sites as well as
provide compensation for affected people; and it was noted that the local communities
co nsulte
E
d
S S
ex
8
p
:
r
C
e
u
ss
lt
e
u
d
r
a
a l
d
h
es
e
i
r
r
i
e
t a
fo
g
r
e
the project activities.
35.
. The project includes measures to prevent the installation of
project components in areas that would have a negative effect on cultural heritage sites.
Nevertheless, a “chance find” procedure will be followed if and when items of cultural, historical
or archaeological interest are discovered by the contractors in the course of construction
act ivitie
I
s
n
.
s titutional arrangements
36.
. The implementation of the institutional ESS requirements
is described in the ESIA. It lists the entities that are responsible for execution and supervision
regarding the formulation of environmental and social conditionality criteria for each project,
validation of environmental and social cross-compliance criteria, integration of environmental
and social provisions in the tender and work execution documents (which will be executed by
ASER), and the execution of environmental works and site-specific environmental and social
management plans including monitoring by the respective companies.

=== PAGE 69 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 69
Stakeholder engagement
37.
. The project conducted consultations with various
stakeholders during the project planning phase (identification and preparation). Further, the
project provides for stakeholder engagement in its implementation phase (technical execution
of activities) including in its commissioning phase (infrastructure operation). Plans for
co nsulta
G
t
r
io
ie
n
v
a
a
n
n
d
c
e
e
n
r
g
e
a
d
g
r
e
e
m
ss
e n
m
t
e
w
c
i
h
th
a n
st
i
a
s
k
m
eholders are provided in the ESIA.
38.
. The AE has an established grievance redress
mechanism which will be supplemented by project-level mechanisms as provided for in the
ESIA. The grievance redress mechanism includes procedures for receiving, handling and
following up complaints and grievances, which include the preparation of complaints booklets
to be made available at the local level (village chief or town hall) so that complaints can be
registered and resolved. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Independent
Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous peoples focal point will also be available
for affected local communities. At the company level, a health, safety and environmental
manager will be responsible for processing grievances.
4. 2 Gender policy
39.
The AE through the EE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan
the refore complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF.
40.
The AE, as per the gender assessment undertaken by the EE, provides information on
the enabling environment for gender equality and women’s empowerment. Senegal has ratified
international treaties on gender equality, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, while at the country level various plans and strategies
have been put in place, including establishing a Ministry of Gender. The plans and strategies that
take gender into account are described in the national strategy (SNEEG), which serves as a
reference document on gender, and the National Action Plan for Women, which takes into
acc ount the practical needs of women, such as the use of improved cookstoves by rural women.
41.
Despite the existence of an enabling environment in general, there is limited
mainstreaming of gender issues in policies and programmes, and inadequate sex-disaggregated
data at all levels. Further, gender-related considerations are taken into account to a very limited
extent in the energy sector. Efforts by the sector to address gender issues have not developed
based on critical assessment; instead they have been done without in-depth analysis (e.g. simply
mentioning the use of improved cookstoves by rural women in the strategy document). Gender
mainstreaming was not taken into consideration during the design of the national rural
electrification programme, which is a programme that is meant to cover all forms of
electrification. For example, the intervention on the use of butane gas for cooking had benefits
and was used by communities, but the uptake was skewed towards urban populations, whereas
the rural areas – where use of wood and charcoal predominate – would have benefited from
inc rease uptake of butane, to reduce continued exposure to smoke and hazards.
42.
Throughout its assessment, the EE indicates that women in the country are affected
disproportionately by higher levels of poverty, poor health, lower levels of education, training
and literacy, lack of access to finance and employment, lack of access to land and means of
production, among other things. In addition, women face various obstacles to equitable access
to efficient and affordable energy. In rural Senegal, given the prevailing gender-based family
roles, women are mainly involved in cooking and use of motive power. Wood collection and its
use for cooking is their exclusive domain and the use of wood and other forms of biomass for
cooking has adverse effects on women’s health and that of their children. Based on the
assessment, there is evidence that women are at risk of abortion and are exposed to fumes from
the use of wood, cow dung, crop residues and other alternatives, affecting their health and well-
being. The energy needs of women and men are not the same because their roles in society are
different. Women are generally focused on domestic roles such as the management of the

=== PAGE 70 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 70
household, cooking, fetching water, looking after and educating children, maintaining the home,
health, and participating as labourers in agricultural production, and have minimal roles in
decision-making. The underlying reasons for this are the prevailing sociocultural, religious, legal
and political beliefs that justify and maintain the unequal position of women and men in the
society and limiting women’s ability to access and benefit, equally. Women heads of households
may also be disproportionately affected by the lack of access to energy, given the lack of
understanding of their particular interests, needs and priorities, as well as the need for them to
assume productive roles which might render them more vulnerable. Access to energy for
women-headed household in particular can be further hindered by their location, levels of
income, employment, age, number of dependents, financial support by family members to name
a f ew.
43.
Despite what is described above, women have active roles in the productive sectors,
albeit in the small market economy and the informal sector. They play a significant role in the
agricultural value chain and they are found in the processing industries, organized in groups or
enterprises and in small-scale trading. Within enterprises, women still face challenges in
accessing energy resources, which limits their ability to invest in growing their trade (e.g.
through engaging in transformative activities, storage of raw materials, conservation and
pa ckaging of finished products) including the high cost of energy.
44.
Although the assessment identified various issues relating to energy access by women
as individuals, women who head households and women who belong to groups and enterprises,
the assessment also mentions the importance of carrying out consultations with communities in
order to better integrate women and young people in the governance of the project. It also sees
the importance of managing possible disputes arising from the provision of energy via mini-
grids, through a complaints mechanism, in order to correct any gender inequalities that might
ari se as a result of project interventions.
45.
The AE, through the EE submission of the gender action plan, has fulfilled the
requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF in that it has provided a gender action plan. The
gender action plan includes activities that are aimed at improving access to clean energy from
solar mini-grids to meet the differentiated energy uses of men and women in the target villages
and to increase their resilience. The activities have corresponding baselines, indicators, targets,
budget and a timeline. Some targets will be determined after the consultation at the community
level and will be put in place by year one. The activities in the action plan include capacity-
building initiatives targeted at ASER and other project entities, men, women and young people,
and management committees and women’s umbrella organizations with a bid to sensitize, and
raise awareness of gender and energy, and gender institutionalization issues. It also describes
the existing energy potential and productive uses of mini-grids that can meet gender and
community infrastructure demands, and gender-differentiated and preferential tariffs for
households based on needs. The action plan also contains activities that will provide meters for
poor women-headed households to help manage costs; and, for young people, provides training
in various trades and provides subsidies for adequate equipment for economic activities The
plan also provides business opportunities for energy efficiency enterprises owned by women’s
groups with agro-processing units, as well as providing subsidies for solar kits and equipment
to the groups.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l proposal assessment (medium risk)
46.
GCF is requested to provide a 40-year sovereign loan of EUR 71.1 million and a grant of
EUR 3.7 million to support the development of solar photovoltaic mini-grids, providing a total of
32 MW across 1,000 villages in Senegal. The AE is co-financing a 10-year loan of EUR 15.3

=== PAGE 71 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 71
million. Of the other co-financiers, KfW will provide a loan of EUR 102 million and the
Government of Senegal will contribute EUR 5.6 million. The concession agreements will be
signed between the Government and private-sector operators for operation and maintenance of
the mini-grids.
47.
The success of the project depends on the capacity of the AE and EE to select suitable
mini-grid construction companies and the quality of the concessions. The project includes
training and technical assistance for the tender and procurement process, environmental and
social safeguards and gender under component 1 (grant) and support for productive use of
4 e . l 3 e .2 c . t riciAtyc curneddeirt ecdom enptointye/net x3e (cgurtainntg) .e ntity capability to execute the current programme
(medium risk)
48.
BOAD, as a direct access entity, has been operating in the West African region for 40
years and has experience in financing solar-based rural electrification projects in Senegal, and in
Mali, the Niger and Togo since 2015. The AE has a team of engineers and specialists with
expertise relevant to implementing the project, and has been building a track record in the
energy sector by managing an energy development fund. BOAD has an ongoing financing
relationship with the Government of Senegal, and made available a total sum of 12.22 billion
Communauté financière africaine francs (CFAF) (USD 22.00 million) through longer-term loans.
The AE has gained GCF approval for a proposal with a similar structure in Mali (approved at the
tw enty-second meeting of the Board).
49.
ASER is the EE for this project: it was formally created in 1999 with the sole aim of
promoting rural electrification. ASER is autonomous; however, it functions under the auspices
of the Ministry for Energy and the Ministry of Finance. In its role as EE, ASER will supervise the
project from procurement and construction of all mini-grids until the installations are
t 4 r .3 a .3 n . s ferPrerdo gtroa cmonmcees-ssipoencaiifriecs r (iseknsd -(bmeneedfiiucimar rieissk).)
Construction and technical risk
50.
. In terms of the technical risk, the procurement of
high-quality materials and using a proven technology will be critical, as will the quality of the
contractors. It is recommended that the AE require the use of an independent engineer to report
on installations to ensure quality. The AE and EE are important for overseeing procedures and
pr ovidin
O
g
p
t
e
h
r
e
a
t
t
e
io
ch
n
n
s
i
a
ca
n
l
d
a s
m
su
a
r
in
an
te
c
n
e
a
o
n
f
c
th
e
e
r
c
is
o
k
nnections to the end users.
51.
. Underperformance would reduce the impact of the
projects, as well as the financial viability of the project for the concession holders. The latter
could influence the long-term viability of the project. Concession holders are expected to
reinvest in the grid. It is recommended that cash flows for such investments be placed in a
sep arate
C r
a
e
cc
d
o
it
u
r
n
i
t
s
a
k
n
a
d
n
t
d
h a
fo
t t
r
h
e
e
ig
c
n
o n
e
c
x
e
c
s
h
s
a
io
n
n
g
s
e
b
r
e
is
g
k
ranted for a minimum of 15 years.
52.
. GCF will provide a sovereign loan to the
Government of Senegal to be provided and repaid in euros. The source of the repayment of the
loan is the Government treasury and not the cash flow from the subprojects. Senegal is currently
rated Ba3 by Moody’s. The CFAF is pegged to the euro, thus helping the Government of Senegal
to mitig
A
at
f
e
fo
t
r
h
d
e
a
c
b
u
i
r
l
r
it
e
y
ncy fluctuation risk related to GCF financing.
53.
. The financial model expects the concession-holder tariff to be around
EUR 0.30/kWh (in CFAF equivalent) but the end user will benefit from a lower tariff based on
the harmonized tariffs of CFAF 91–97 (EUR 0.14–0.15) per kWh. The difference is the result of a
subsidy by the Government. GCF financing is expected to help reduce the subsidy over time
because GCF financing could allow for lower concession-holder tariffs. The feasibility study
notes that an analysis of households’ ability to pay was conducted, and concluded that the

=== PAGE 72 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 72
assumption of a penetration rate of 85 per cent of households living in the target villages was
r 4 e .3 a .4 s . onaPbrleo jfeocr tt hveia pbriolijteyc ta’sn cdo cvoenracgees.s ionality
54.
The viability of the project depends on the quality of the construction and concessions.
Without GCF financing, the Government of Senegal would have to take loans at market rates,
which will increase the cost of the project. The AE and the Government are requested to pass on
GC F concessionality to end-beneficiaries through a reduced tariff.
55.
The financial analysis shows that with concession holders will pay 5 per cent up front of
CAPEX for the concession but are obliged to make reinvestments for inverters, batteries and
panels. The IRR is expected to be 12.6 per cent at the subsidized tariff level. It should be noted
that the IRR is determined for a horizon longer than the 15-year concession and is heavily
influenced by the reinvestment costs. Without those reinvestments the IRR for would more than
double for the concession holders. Additionally, reinvestment costs are assumed to remain
s
4
t
.3
a
.5
b
.
le, aGltChFo upgohr tcfoosltiso ocfo bnactetenrtireast, iionnve rritsekr s( laonwd rsoislkar) panels show a declining trend.
56.
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in
t 4 e .3 r .6 m . s ofC roemsuplltisa anrceea sr iasnkd ( sminegdleiu pmro rpiosska)l is no t mater ial.
57.
Regarding due diligence checks for money laundering, terrorist financing or prohibited
practices, the AE has developed a Financial Security Policy (2016) which constitutes the general
framework of the control system covering all BOAD activities relating to the prevention,
su rveillance and management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks.
58.
BOAD has indicated that its Financial Security Policy incorporates international
standards defined by the United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, the recommendations issued by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the
provisions of directive 02/2015/CM/UEMOA of 2 July 2015 on the fight against money
laundering and terrorist financing in the member States of the West African Economic and
Monetary Union (UEMOA). The policy requires the disclosure of information about its clients’
transactions to the relevant authorities in cases where international rules and local laws require
regulated financial institutions to do so, including cases of money laundering. Under its due
diligence, BOAD will assess against its civil/criminal and regulatory antecedents and sanctions
lists. BOAD also conducts administrative investigations into corruption, fraud, coercion,
collisions and inconvenient practices, and make use of the relevant national authorities for
necessary criminal investigations. BOAD integrates measures to combat illicit financial flows,
money laundering and financing of terrorism throughout the internal operations of the BOAD
Gr oup.
59.
In the context of this project, concerning money laundering/financing of terrorism, the
co ncerned stakeholder will:
(a)
Ensure that the funds financing the project are not of illicit origin and, in particular, are
not related to fraud against Senegal's financial interests, or to corruption, organized
criminal activities, terrorism or drug trafficking; and without delay forward to BOAD
any information raising suspicions as to the unlawfulness of the sums invested in the
company and in the project, or notify BOAD of any information indicating the illicit
origin of all or part of the funds of the structure; and

=== PAGE 73 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 73
(b)
Not enter into a business relationship, directly or indirectly, with persons or entities on
the lists established by the United Nations Security Council or its committees pursuant
to Security Council resolutions, by the Council of the European Union in application of its
Common Positions and/or by the African Union as well as on any other relative or
complementary resolution and any act of implementation thereof in connection with the
fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
(c)
The AE has further indicated that its “know-your-customer” standard-compliant due
diligence process, including anti-money laundering and other evaluations of sponsors, is
followed thoroughly.
60.
4.3.7.
BRaesceodm omn ethnids aintifoonrm ation, compliance risk assessment is rated as Medium.
61.
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.
Summary risk assessment Rationale
Overall programme Medium
Projects are exposed to construction and
Accredited entity /executing Medium
operation and maintenance risk. The quality
entity capability to implem ent
of materials used, the contractor and the
this programme
concession holders will drive project success.
Project-specific execution Medium
The Government of Senegal (rated Ba3 by
GCF portfolio concentration Low
Moody’s) will be the borrower of GCF funds
Compliance Medium
4. 4 Fiduciary
62.
The AE for the project is BOAD which will be responsible for the overall management of
this project, including (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and
technical oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are
effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project
monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure
an d evaluation.
63.
The EE is the ASER. In its role as EE, ASER will ensure the operational supervision of the
pr oject from procurement and construction of all mini-grids until end-beneficiary installations.
64.
The project implementation unit will be integrated at ASER general management level,
with a Project Coordinator acting under the supervision of a Steering Committee (Comité de
Pilotage – CP). The project implementation unit will be complemented by other coordination
functions such as the: (i) the Technical Monitoring Committee (CTS) which will support the
coordination and monitoring of the project work implementation; and (ii) the operational
structures (management units) of ASER General Management which will be responsible for the
implementation of the project. The ASER Project Management Unit will be comprised of the
following professionals: Project Coordinator, Expert Engineer in the Renewable Energies
(Solar), Financial Analyst, UN Procurement Specialist, a person in charge of Monitoring and
Ev aluation and an Environmental and Social Safety Officer.
65.
Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant
BOAD rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master
Agreement (AMA) signed by BOAD and the GCF as part of BOAD’s accreditation to the GCF. The
provision of the BOAD loan will be made to ASER through the Ministry of Finance (Senegal
Treasury) as per the Fund Flow Diagram described in the FP, and subject to a reimbursement

--- Table 1 on Page 73 ---
It is recommended that the Board con
Summary risk assessment |  | sider the above factors in its decision.
Rationale
 |  | Projects are exposed to construction and
operation and maintenance risk. The quality
of materials used, the contractor and the
concession holders will drive project success.
The Government of Senegal (rated Ba3 by
Overall programme
Accredited entity /executing | Medium
Medium | 
entity capability to implem ent |  | 
this programme |  | 
Project-specific execution | Medium | 

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 74
plan to be agreed. BOAD will carry out financial transfers in accordance with its own policies,
pr ocedures and rules for which it has been accredited for.
66.
Audits will be undertaken in accordance with BOAD Guidelines for Financial Reporting
and Auditing of Projects. The Financial Agreement with Senegal will require the submission of
Audited Financial Statements to BOAD within four months after each year-end. An independent
external auditor will be recruited based on Terms of Reference acceptable to the Bank (not later
tha n four months after effectiveness) for the entire duration of the project.
67.
The Financial Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing
standards. Furthermore, BOAD will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations,
comments, and recommendations for improvements in accounting records, systems, controls
and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial Agreements. The cost of the audit will
be met from project resources.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
68. 2
As a mitigation project, the intervention expects to reduce or avoid 1,127,447 tCO eq for
the lifespan of the asset, and it will provide co-benefits to 344,040 beneficiaries of which
17 2,208 are women.
69.
Overall the funding proposal and logical framework sufficiently apply GCF fund-level
(impact and outcome) results management framework/performance measurement framework
indicators, and the project has built in baselines and data collection that can inform progress
reporting on expected results. At the project performance level, as a technical
assistance/training-based grant project, measurements for behavioural change have been
int egrated that are essential to deliver the expected project results.
70.
Regarding section E.1-E.6 of the funding proposal, overall the logical framework
co mplies with GCF standards, and it has been cleared through Secretariat review.
71.
The funding proposal theory of change could benefit in implementation from further
details reflecting on the causal pathways at the project level and in relation to the climate
rationale (which ideally are tested in implementation either with project performance
management indicators or impact data/evidence generated to attribute changes to GCF
inv estment).
72.
Under section E.7 of the funding proposal, and as complemented by the information in
the monitoring and evaluation plan (annex 5 of the FP), information for implementation has
been provided with initial information on data collection, evidence generation and assessments,
not only of quantitative metrics, but also of the behavioural changes necessary for the
quantitative results to be realized. As a good practice the project will apply an innovative
approach in assessing result trends through the timing of the final evaluation to increase the
meaningfulness and utilization of the evaluation. This will enable the project to assess not only
general evaluation criteria but also the accuracy of results achieved against the results expected,
as calculated using the methodology from the funding proposal, and in relationship to the
results as reported at the project completion to verify if the assumptions of the forecasted trend
have been realized.
4. 6 Legal assessment
73.
The AMA was signed with the AE on 3 April 2017 and it became effective on 31 August
20 17.
74.
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all its
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. It is

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 75
recommended that, prior to submission of the funding proposal to the Board (1) the AE has
obtained all its internal approvals and (2) the GCF has received a certificate or legal opinion
from the AE in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF confirming that all final internal
approvals by the AE have been obtained and that the entity has the authority and capacity to
im plement the project.
75.
The proposed project will be implemented in Senegal, a country in which GCF is not
provided with privileged and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further
assessed. The Secretariat submitted a draft of the privileges and immunities agreement to the
Government of the Republic of Senegal on 30 September 2015. On 16 February 2017 the
Government of the Republic of Senegal sent a communication to the GCF stating that the draft
privileges and immunities agreement was under review by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs. No
fur ther communication has been received by the GCF Secretariat to date.
76.
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and
ex propriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.
77.
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made
su bject to the following conditions:
(a)
Delivery by the AE to the GCF of a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has
obtained all its internal approvals within 120 days of the Board approval;
(b)
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date on which the
AE has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all internal
approvals, whichever is later; and
(c)
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 76
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP138
Proposal name: ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
Accredited entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD)
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
Scale: High
1 .1 Impact potential
1.
In a 2017 publication, the World Bank reported that 61.7 per cent of the population of
Senegal, on average, had access to electricity. This national average masks the differences in
access between the urban and rural areas and between different rural areas in the country. In
the same World Bank report, the average rural electricity access in 2017 was quoted as 35.4 per
1
cent, while the urban area average was as high as 91.7 per cent in the same year. The
percentage quoted in the funding proposal reviewed from a recent year showed that rural
access in Senegal has improved very slightly in the last few years to an average of about 42 per
cent. This current average rural access percentage hides the disparity between different rural
areas. For example, it was stated in the funding proposal that electricity access in in rural areas
like Médina Yoro Foula, Ranérou, Salémata and Saraya are each less than 10 per cent. The slight
improvement in access to electricity in rural Senegal in recent years reflects the aggressive
effort of the Government of Senegal to improve electricity access in rural areas in its effort to
st ay on its declared path to universal access by 2025.
Agence
2.
SénégalaInis teh de’ Élalesct tfreiwfic yaetiaorns ,R tuhrea Gleovernment of Senegal has pursued an aggressive rural
electrification strategy through its Senegalese Agency for Rural Electrification (
) (ASER). ASER is aimed at improving the low level of rural
access to electricity, especially after the country joined the United Nations Sustainable Energy
for All (SE4All) initiative, which actually catalysed Senegal to pursue the path of 100 per cent
electrification of at least 90 per cent of rural households by 2025. The electricity access results
obtained so far were achieved via a combination of implementing grid extension projects to
selected rural communities; building isolated secondary and regional power plants that are
operated with diesel fuel; and developing solar photovoltaic/diesel generation-based
microgrids in selected rural villages. Key achievements of ASER to date (2005–2019) can be
summarized as follows: delivery of 174 mini-grids and 12 grid extension projects, enabling the
electrification of 3,000 rural villages. These achievements fall short of what is expected to put
Senegal on a path towards its SE4ALL electricity access objectives. The unsustainable
operations and maintenance (O&M) costs of these rural electrification facilities have been
identified as the key reason why the pace of the programme has not been as fast as expected.
Non-reflective tariffs, grids of a suboptimal size and a lack of metering have been identified as
common problems. The national harmonization of tariffs between the rural consumers and
those in the urban parts of Senegal as well as aggressive consumer metering were introduced to
ameliorate these problems; however, these responses created a fiscal-financial burden for the
Government of Senegal, necessitating alternative strategies.
1
See <Data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=SN>.

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 77
3.
From experience gathered in recent years, if the declared intention of universal access
by 2025 is to be met, efforts will need to be ramped up. Apart from the reasons adduced for the
unsustainable O&M of the rural elec trification projects in Senegal, the inadequate availability of
domestic funds (public and private) to accelerate the efforts has been noted as a key barrier to
achieving universal access by 2025.The Government of Senegal is highly aware of the need to
remove these barriers in order to realize the direct and indirect benefits of improving electricity
access. These benefits include the direct benefit of improving the quality of life of consumers
connected to the electricity access facilities; improving the productivity of these consumers;
and, when renewable energy generation is utilized in the rural energy access facility instead of
the fossil fuel-fired facility, delivering additional benefits apart from reduced greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, including improved reliability of the electricity supply facility, reduced
emissions of noxious gases and particulates, and a reduced import bill for fossil fuels for a net
fossil fuel importer country like Senegal. In addition, the intervention may deliver improved
resilience of the power facility to extreme events, which may affect alternative power sources as
co-benefits of the intervention. Therefore, the strategy of the conditional intervention in
Senegal’s nationally determined contribution (NDC), which requires external financing to
su pport the efforts of the Government of Senegal, is considered to be a good way forward.
4.
Further to its expressed commitment to address the low access to electricity of rural
communities in Senegal through ASER, the Government of Senegal conceptualized this proposed
intervention. The main goal of the proposed project is to uphold the renewable share of
Senegal’s ambition to reach universal energy access by 2025 by fostering solar-powered mini-
grid development in isolated villages that are not connected to the national electricity grid. The
aim s of the project can be summarized as follows:
(a)
Develop of off-grid renewable energy mini-grids to reduce carbon dioxide emissions
from the Senegalese power sector;
(b)
Contribute to achieving Senegal’s electricity access objectives;
(c)
Promote gender balance in the promotion of balanced rural economic growth;
(d)
Catalyse, expand and strengthen the participation of the private sector in financing the
electricity access programme;
(e)
Develop the capacities of key stakeholders and institutions in Senegal needed to grow
the electricity access programme of the country through a de-risking of the investment
platform; and
(f)
Create an enabling environment in Senegal that will energize the country’s journey on
its path towards universal electricity access.
5.
The proposed project has been conceptualized, designed and organized to be
im pleme
C
n
o
t
m
ed
p
w
on
it
e
h
n
t
t
h
1
e
:
following components, outputs and activities.
6. Output 1.1:
Technical assistance for solar rural electrification stakeholders:
(a)
Capacity-building of rural electrification stakeholders:
(i)
Activity 1.1.1: Trainings on procurement procedures, project management and
GCF requirements; and
(ii)
Activity 1.1.2: Seminars, trips and workshops (technology watch, public
Output
c
1
o
.
n
2
s
:
ultations, conferences, sharing of experiences, etc.);
(b)
Implementation of the gender action plan:
(i)
Activity 1.2.1: Gender-relevant mapping and tutoring of community
organizations;

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 78
(ii)
Activity 1.2.2: Gender stakeholders training for the project management unit
(PMU), local operators and community organizations; and
(Oiiiu)tput
A
1
c
.3
ti
:
vity 1.2.3: Gender-oriented communication campaign; and
(c)
Environmental and social downstream activities:
(i)
Activity 1.3.1: Implementation and monitoring of environmental and social
measures; and
(ii)
Activity 1.3.2: Establishment of Recycling unit for batteries and other waste
Compon
(c
e
o
n
m
t
p
2
a
:
ct fluorescent lamps, other electronics).
7. Output 2.1:
Procurement and installation of solar powered mini-grids:
(a)
Preparation of detailed engineering studies;
(i)
Activity 2.1.1: Site selection, engineering studies and specific environmental and
Output
s
2
o
.
c
2
i
:
a l analyses for each site;
(b)
Supply, installation and commissioning of equipment;
(i)
Activity 2.2.1: Solar photovoltaic (PV) power plant construction and minigrid
deployment; and
(Oii)utput
A
2
c
.3
ti
:
vity 2.2.2: Smart metre installation and miscellaneous;
(c)
Modern public lighting;
(Oi)utput
A
2
c
.4
ti
:
vity 2.3.1: Deployment of solar street lighting; and
(d)
Control and supervision of work;
(Ci)ompon
A
e
ct
n
i
t
v i
3
ty
:
2.4.1: Control and supervision of work
8. Output 3.1:
Incentives for social and productive use of electricity:
(a)
Gender and social connections;
(i)
Activity 3.1.1: Connection of eligible social services and women and youth
Output
e
3
n
.2
tr
:
e preneurs to the PV mini-grids; and
(b)
Microfinanced productive equipment credit guarantees;
(i)
Activity 3.2.1: Implementation of a mechanism to facilitate access to productive
equipment financing through microfinance.
9.
The total financing requested (GCF financing plus co-financing) for this project is EUR
19 8.692
G
m
CF
il
:
lion. This is expected to be contributed as follows:
(a)
EUR 75.445 million, made up of:
(i)
Senior loans: EUR 73.623 million with a 40-year tenor, 10-year grace period and
a concessional interest rate of 0.0 per cent per annum; and
(Ciio)-finan
G
c
ra
in
n
g
ts
:
: EUR 1.822 million;
(b)
EUR 123.247 million, made up of:

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 79
from the West African Development Bank (BOAD)
(i)
A senior loan : EUR 15.245
million with a 10-year tenor, 3-year grace period and an annual fixed interest
2 3
rate of 7.6 pe
f
r
r
c
o
e
m
n t
K
;
f W
(ii)
A senior loan : EUR 102.396 million with a 10-year tenor, 0.5-year
grace period and an annual interest rate of 6.14 per cent; and
(iii)
A contribution from the Government of Senegal: EUR 5.606 million.
10.
Table 1 below provides information on the plan for the appropriation of the funds
Table 1: Financing by component
presented above for the different activities of this project.
Component Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost in
Amount in Financial Amount Financial Institution
EUR million EUR million instrume in EUR instrument names
nt million
1.Technical
assistance to 3.33 1.17 Grants 2.16 Loan/ BOAD/
the solar rural contribution Government
electrification of Senegal
stakeholders
2. Procurement
and installation 192.23 71.68 Loan 120.55 Loan/ KfW, BOAD/
of solar contribution Government
powered mini- of Senegal
grids
3. Incentives for
social and 2.33 2.33 Loan/ -
productive use grants
of electricity
Project
management 0.39 0.09 Grants 0.30 Contribution Government
cost of Senegal
Abbreviations:
Indicative total cost (EUR) 198,692,182 75,445,176 123,247,006
BOAD = West African Development Bank
11.
The potential mitigation benefits and co-benefits that will be delivered by this project
are described below:
(a)
The proposed project will involve the implementation of renewable energy-based rural
electrification projects that will displace the baseline facilities, which may include
energy supplies in a village without existing microgrid connections and/or villages
connected to existing microgrids with electricity supplies coming from fossil fuel-fired
power plants. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change approved
baseline and monitoring methodology AMS-III.BL (integrated methodology for
4
electrification of communities), which was utilized to estimate GHG emission
2
Fixed interest rate, on top of which a commitment fee (0.5 per cent) and a service fee (1.0 per cent) are due.
3
As the cost of West African Development Bank resources is higher, the request for GCF concessional resources is
meant to reduce the project's weighted average cost of capital (for the Government of Senegal, which is the
borrower, and divide the project’s debt servicing into smaller instalments to improve viability.
4
Nota bene: under this clean development mechanism methodology’s eligibility requirements, at least 75 per cent
(by number) of the project consumers shall be households.

--- Table 1 on Page 79 ---
presented above
Component | for the differe
Indicative
cost in
EUR million | n | t activities of this projec
GCF financing |  |  | t. |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Amount in
EUR million | Amount in |  | Financial |  |  | Amount |  | Financial
instrument | Institution
names | Institution | 
 |  |  | EUR million |  | instrume |  |  | in EUR |  |  |  | names | 
 |  |  |  |  | nt |  |  | million |  |  |  |  | 
1.Technical
assistance to
the solar rural | 3.33 | 1.17 |  | Grants |  |  | 2.16 |  |  | Loan/
contribution | BOAD/
Government |  | 
electrification
stakeholders
2. Procurement
and installation
of solar | 192.23 | 71.68 |  | Loan |  |  | 120.55 |  |  | Loan/
contribution | of Senegal
KfW, BOAD/
Government |  | 
powered mini-
grids
3. Incentives for
social and | 2.33 | 2.33 |  | Loan/ |  |  | - |  |  |  | of Senegal |  | 
productive use
of electricity
Project
management |  |  |  | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
0.39
cost |  | 0.09 |  | Grants 0.30 |  |  |  |  |  | Contribution Government
of Senegal |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 79 ---
Financial
instrument

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 80
reductions that will emanate from this kind of project, is applicable for the project
circumstances in the targeted rural villages in Senegal. When the proposed project is
implemented, it will deliver renewable energy microgrids in about 1,000 villages, which
will lead to emission reductions of about 1.13 million tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalent by 2045;
(b)
The funding proposal also contained convincing arguments that adaptation co-benefits
of the proposed project will contribute to fostering resilience and sustainable
de velopment in the following ways:
(i)
The increased access to electricity that will be delivered by this project
intervention will promote equalized gender roles for women andenhance access
to education and information for school children at all levels in the remote rural
communities where the proposed project will be implemented. The cause-effect
argument of the impact of climate change and variability on gender and children
may be difficult to make analytically for Senegal, however, these kinds of impacts
have been reported in other regions of the world, where the most vulnerable
people are women and children. Therefore, this co-benefit may be delivered;
(ii)
The implementation of this project as proposed will deliver decentralized power
systems to these villages, which will mitigate the pre-project weakness,
characterized by: scattered consumers (due to the geography of the
settlements); fuel supply systems, that is usually at risk during extreme weather
events; and at risk from unstable international prices of crude oil (which affects
negatively the price of diesel, when fuel-based technology is utilized. All these
which will not be the case when the infrastructure of the proposed project is
delivered;
(iii)
Climate-resilient productive assets will be provided to selected consumers that
will be connected to the microgrid and whose loan facilities are already at
concessional levels, will also have revolving guarantees of up to 40 per cent of
nominal loans of an average duration of three years will improve the reliability
of water and food chains, as well as services in health, education and social
institutions, farmers, entrepreneurs, schools and clinics lacking electricity; and
(iv)
The following arguments were also convincingly made in the funding proposal
about the resilience-strengthening co-benefit of the project intervention: the
project will provide employment opportunities and support the economic
growth of the rural areas; and affordable renewable electricity will further
strengthen the economic resilience of rural households as it will improve
community income levels and reduce migration patterns; and
(c)
These co-benefits, which are likely to be delivered in addition to the estimated GHG
emission reduction of this project, and the fact that a total of about 344,000 people will
directly benefit from the successful implementation of this project. Furthermore, not
only will the project enhance the capacity of local private concessionaires who will be
contracted under an O&M agreement to run these microgrid facilities, it will also create
an enabling environment and capacity for the local financing of the future replication of
the projects. This will ensure Senegal is on a path towards universal energy access for
the rural part of the country.
12.
With these observations from the review of the project, the independent Technical
Advisory Panel (TAP) came to the conclusion that this project intervention will deliver high
climate impact potential.
Scale: High
1.2 Paradigm shift potential

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 81
1.2.1. Comprehensiveness
13.
In the absence of this projec t intervention, energy access projects in many of the
smallest and most remote vulnerable villages where grid extension is not feasible in Senegal
would continue to be dominated bythe fossil-fuelled microgrid. This traditional energy
5
pathway would otherwise continue to make Senegal dependent on imported fossil fuels. The
proposed project, when compared to this baseline strategy, will deliver faster penetration of
cle aner energy, thus reducing the need for imports of diesel fuel.
14.
The project will deliver a progressive, sustainable, low carbon and decentralized power
system that will replace the status quo ante strategy described above. This will be a paradigm
shift in that the structure of the intervention will produce an enabling environment for the
success of the project as well as develop in-country capabilities for the technical delivery of the
project under a strengthened institutional framework. This will facilitate the replication of the
ide a in similar villages in the country that are not covered by this proposed project.
15.
In the absence of the proposed project, the status quo ante situation with the electricity
access programme of the country, which has been adjudged as not proceeding at a pace
sufficient to enable the achievement of universal access by 2025, will continue. The success of
the proposed project will not only put Senegal on a low-carbon pathway, but it will also
contribute to reducing the fossil fuel dependence of Senegal and assure the acceleration of the
access programme towards the national objective of the Government of Senegal to achieve the
SE 4ALL access by 2025. This will deliver the needed paradigm shift.
16.
In the status quo ante situation, Senegal’s domestic private financial sector had limited
know-how on clean energy investments, particularly when it comes to decentralized power
generation, as most of the systems successfully implemented were fossil fuel-based microgrids.
In addition, these local financial institutions had prohibitively expensive financing packages,
which rendered such projects infeasible, especially the more capital-intensive renewable energy
alternatives. The result is that private sector investors were d iscouraged from investing. The
proposed financing package offers a solution to incentivize the participation of the private
sector by increasing investor confidence through the offer ofconcessional finance and grant
funding. The proposed funding structure for these private sector investors will facilitate their
contribution to the required concession fee required for financial closure. When this is coupled
with strong capacity-building activities on operating and maintaining these assets, it will
establish a business environment that will ensure the success of this proposed intervention in a
cost-effective and sustainable manner. This will catalyse the effective replication of the concept
in the remaining villages not covered by the current intervention, resulting in the effective
crowding-in of private sector investment and expertise at a level much higher than in the status
qu o ante. This will deliver a significant paradigm shift.
17.
For many renewable energy microgrid investments in developing countries, the ability
to attract productive-use consumers to the service area of the mini-grid is often a necessary
condition for success. Like many such projects in developing countries, earlier efforts in Senegal
also accentuated the need to include strategies in the scheme to enhance the development of
such consumers with these planned microgrids. Therefore, another convincing argument
offered by the accredited entity (AE) in the document reviewed by the independent TAP is the
importance of the technical assistance component of the proposed intervention, which is
expected to generate a powerful trickle-down effect on the national economy. It is argued in the
funding proposal that this will be delivered through the focus on the design and implementation
of productive use de-risking tools that are expected to satisfy the capacities of the final
5
Senegal imported 655 kilotonnes of oil equivalent in 2015 and used 305 kilotonnes of oil equivalent to generate
electricity, according to the African Energy Commission.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 82
beneficiaries and reflect the needs of private sector operators. This will be a strong co-benefit
tha t will also support the high paradigm shift characteristics of this proposed project.
18.
In the status quo ante, the economy of the rural areas where these micro-grids will be
implemented are rudimentary and far from modern, with very low productivity in the main
economic activity of agriculture. In most African countries, a substantial percentage of rural
dwellers are farmers who practice subsistence agriculture. For many of these rural dwellers,
electricity is not available, or, when it is available, it is not reliable for providing energy for their
productive venture, which is farming. These smallholder farmers often don’t have access to
electricity or to reliable electricity to power electrical appliances, which would help them
increase their yields through access to water irrigation and to clean portable water sources that
will enhance their health situation and sanitation. This pre-project situation will be changed
very significantly with the success of the proposed project, which will deliver improvements in
community assets through cheaper provision of services (health, education, water and
agriculture); improvements in quality of life; and enhancement in the adaptive capacity of the
communities. Thus, the project will deliver a more modernized rural economy compared to the
s 1 t .2 a .2 tu . s qIunon aonvtaet. ion
19.
Innovation is partially delivered when changes are made to the way things are done in
the status quo with a value creation, and the ultimate creation of a better way of doing what is
failing and its survival with better delivery of results. The status quo situation of electricity
access in rural Senegal before this proposed intervention was conceptualized has not been
yielding the expected results, which will facilitate the plan of Senegal to achieve universal
electricity access by the year 2025. The successful implementation of the proposed project is,
however, likely to accelerate the process of bringing electricity access to these rural villages as
many of the barriers discussed in the funding proposal – fund scarcity; high cost of funds when
they are available from private sources in the country; a weak institutional base to ensure the
success of the intervention; etc. – are ameliorated by the proposed intervention. These barriers
will be positively addressed through the interventions built into the proposed project via grant
funding that will build the skills of pertinent stakeholders (technical, planning, management,
policy and regulatory frameworks) that are usually needed to deliver such changes to the
business-as-usual situation. Thus, the proposed project structure is expected to change the
status quo in which decentralized, rural electrification projects are being carried out. Key
ch anges that will be delivered will include:
(a)
The concessional GCF funding will crowd in more public and private funds at much
higher levels than at the status quo, thus making the financial feasibility of renewable
energy projects more favourable, accelerating the implementation of such lower-carbon
generation assets for the rural microgrids;
(b)
The proposed project through the financial tools and mechanisms built into the concept,
especially the grant funding available for financing the capacity building for some
relevant stakeholders (activities in components 1 and 3), ensure that key skills
necessary to deliver the success of these microgrid projects in the many rural villages
are successfully delivered to these stakeholders. This will ensure the successful delivery
of decentralized microgrids in these villages and allow them to utilize clean solar PV
technologies at an implementation speed that could not have been achieved by the
status quo ante strategies while also achieving reductions in carbon emissions. This will
deliver a very innovative paradigm shift in Senegal;
(c)
In the status quo programme in Senegal, it was observed that a key consumer type that
were scarce in many of the villages was anchor loads. The proposed project will utilize
some of the financial tools to facilitate the uptake of productive applications to serve as

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 83
anchor loads, thus making the project more viable than the situation in the baseline.
This will contribute to the feasibility of the proposed strategy and hence deliver an
innovative paradigm shift; and
(d)
The success of the proposed project will catalyse the replication of the idea in other
villages in Senegal, which are not included in this target batch (about 1,000 in number),
thus improving the quality of the project through learning by doing and, when this is
replicated in other countries, further expanding the paradigm shift capacity of the
1.2.3. pErnoajbeclitn. g environment/sustainability of outcomes
20.
The AE for this project, the regional development bank BOAD, will provide co-financing
for part of the systems that will be implemented in components 1 and 2. The setup of a PMU for
this project will be covered by grant funding from GCF and a contribution from Government of
Senegal. The capacities of relevant staff members of the PMU will be built through some of the
capacity-building activities of component 1. Some of these capacity-building activities will be
focused on developing the technical understanding of the PMU and the ability of its members to
operate and maintain the solar PV microgrid facilities. The capacities thus built at the level of all
relevant stakeholders, especially for ASER, which will spearhead the implementation of the
proposed project, and they will eventually create an enabling environment for the sustainable
success of this concept. BOAD already has an ongoing financing relationship with the
Government of Senegal, which, coupled with the capacity of ASER (which will be strengthened
by the various capacity-building activities in component 1) should reduce any inherent
weaknesses in the abilities of the critical stakeholders. The independent TAP is therefore of the
opinion that the project will create an enabling environment for the sustainable planning and
i 1 m .2. p 4. l emeRnetpaltiicoanb oifl itthyi sa npdro sjeccatl aabnidl iittys/ rkenploicwalteiodng ein a ontdh eler apranrtins go f Senegal and beyond.
21.
Currently, according to information provided in the funding proposal, of the 14 regions
of Senegal, 9 have an electrical coverage rate of less than 60 per cent. All of these regions with
lower electricity access have localities that are yet to be electrified at all. It has been reported in
the funding proposal that over 14,000 localities remain to be electrified, with a population of
3,372,458 to be covered by 2025. Thus, if the objective of the Government of Senegal to achieve
6
universal electricity access in the country by 2025 is to be achieved, then the status quo ante
speed of the national rural electrification programme must be accelerated. The entire package of
this BOAD proposal will put in place a sound platform that will ensure the following availability
of local financing – bolstered through this project by the concessional GCF loan –; domestic
capacity that will include technical design, planning, and management of mini-grid systems; and
create very informed stakeholders, including electricity consumers. These will altogether boost
the success of the proposed project and its replication to the several thousand localities in the
country yet to be electrified. The capacity-building programme, the documentation of its
accomplishments and its knowledge base of information that can then be disseminated in
Senegal and the subregion will catalyse the replication of this proof of concept in other
countries in the subregion. Although there is no information in the funding proposal or the
annexes on information dissemination beyond Senegal on the successes of this concept,
information on the performance of this proof of concept should be internationally disseminated
du ring and after the project to facilitate replication beyond Senegal.
22.
The proposed project will deliver a comprehensive and innovative paradigm shift as
discussed above. It will also cre ate an enabling environment that will make the tangible
6
According to its SE4ALL objective.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 84
outcomes of this intervention sustainable while also enhancing the replicability of the proof of
concept to other parts of Senegal. Therefore, the independent TAP has concluded that the
paradigm shift potential of this project is high.
Scale: High
11.3.3.1. SAuligsntamiennatb wleit hd ethvee Slousptmaineanbtl ep Doetevenltoipaml e nt Goal s
23.
The project will directly contribute to the following Sustainable Development Goals
(SD Gs):
(a)
SDG 7: Affordable and clean energy – ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all. By increasing electricity access and enabling Senegal to
achieve universal access by the target date of 2025;
(b)
SDG 1: No poverty – end poverty in all its forms everywhere. By increasing the income of
rural dwellers through increased access to electricity, which will enable the financial
capacity of rural income, including farm-level incomes, and by reducing out-migration
from rural areas due to loss of livelihoods dependent on agriculture and other
productive activities that need electricity to thrive;
(c)
SDG 3: Good health and well-being – ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all
at all ages. Improved electricity access in the rural areas will gradually erase the use of
diesel/kerosene/paraffin, which poses health hazards to the people in such
communities due to emissions of noxious gases and particulates from the combustion of
the fuels for energy in the baseline scenario. Health will also be improved in these
villages, as rural health provision will become more effective with the availability of
electricity;
(d)
SDG 5: Gender equality – achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. By
means of a gender action plan that has been put in place and that is targeted at the
inclusion of women in the capacity-building programme as well as the provision of
financial and technical support to women artisans and other stakeholders;
(e)
SDG 6: Clean water and sanitation – ensure availability and sustainable management of
water and sanitation for all. Although not a directly delivered benefit of this project, the
availability of electricity in the villages will eventually lead to better quality sources of
potable water from, for example, cleaner aquifers compared to, in many cases, polluted
surface water in the status quo ante. This will also improve the sanitation situation in
these rural communities; and
(f)
SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth – promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all.
Improved electricity access will also lead to the introduction of tangible business
ventures that will provide decent work for village communities. This will enhance the
1.3.2.
eEccoonnoommicic g croo-wbtehn oeff itthse rural communities.
24.
The project will enable the productive uses of electricity and income-generating
activities through the improved reliability of the power supply. The project will also contribute
to improving the country’s energy security budget deficit, which is negatively impacted by the
import of fossil fuels into the country. The availability of electricity in these rural areas to be
covered by this project will contribute to reduced operating costs of consumers, including
clinics and schools that will reduce or eliminate their dependence on diesel. The construction,
operation and maintenance of the microgrid of this rural electrification programme will deliver

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 85
direct employment in these rural areas where the decentralized facilities will be implemented.
Indirect employment opportunities will also be created by businesses that will provide services
as a result of the proposed project, (for example, entrepreneurs who will commence the
1
m
.3
a
.3
n
.
ufacStoucriea lo cr oim-bpeonret foitf sn ew technologies that can be powered by electricity).
25.
Social co-benefits that will be delivered by this project will include: improved health
conditions, as renewable energy-powered lights will reduce the use of kerosene lamps and
eliminate indoor air pollution, which causes eye irritation and lung injury; better conditions for
students in the community thanks to available and reliable lights, which will provide a better
environment for longer periods of learning, thus enhancing education and social institutions;
and income generation that will be catalysed by greater access to electricity, which will also
contribute to poverty reduction. The project will also improve access to potable water and
w 1.3 a .4 te . r pEumnvpiirnogn fmore cnrtoapl ciror-ibgaetnioenfi.t s
26.
Key environmental co-benefits that are likely to be delivered by this proposed electricity
access project will result specifically from the complete elimination of the use of fossil fuel for
electricity generation in the microgrid compared to the baseline situation. Key environmental
co-benefits will include reducing the risk of groundwater contamination caused by leaking
diesel generators and reducing local air pollution and noise disturbances in local communities
b
1.
y
3. 5
e
.
l imiGneantidnge rt-hree ulastee odf cdoie-bseeln-geefintesr ated electricity.
27.
Gender-related co-benefits will include increasing access to electricity in (remote) rural
areas, which will ensure that men and women benefit equally from the initiative. In addition,
ASER will offer s pecial support to promote equal opportunities arising from the rural
electrification project through the technical assistance component for both men and women.
The project willalso free up time for women (previously allocated to household tasks) through
the use of mills and the provision of access to drinking water supplies, among other things, and
for children (increasing light time available at night) to engage in productive and educational
activities that improve income generation and strengthen social standing. The project plan
includes preferential support for women-owned microenterprises through the training of target
groups in trades, the design of business plans around activities identified beforehand, access to
microfinancing for equipment, the provision of connection coupons to the most vulnerable, and
su pport in the organizational and institutional structuring of women's organizations.
28.
In view of the above-mentioned contributions to various elements of sustainable
development, the independent TAP has concluded that the project will generate significant
sustainable development potential as about 344,000 people will directly benefit from the
successful implementation of this project. Therefore, the sustainable development potential is
deemed to be “high”.
Scale: High
11.4.4.1. NNeeeedds so fo tfh teh ceo urnetcriyp aiennd tt he rural p opulace
29.
About 55 per cent of the population of Senegal lives in the rural part of the country.
According to the information available in the funding proposal and its annexes, rural access to
modern electricity is as low as under 10 per cent in some areas, and national rural electricity

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 86
access is currently averaging 42 per cent. As discussed in several parts of this evaluation report,
low access to electricity in these rural parts of the country has been known to cause and
continuously contribute to poverty, cause poor health among rural inhabitants, present
barriers to the economic development of the areas, and result in many other issues that do not
foster the welfare of rural inhabitants. The Government of Senegal recognizes the negative
impacts of poor access to modern electricity and its debilitating impact on the welfare of people
and the economy of the nation, especially in rural Senegal, where access is still very low. This is
why the country very aggresively pursued the policy of achieving universal access by 2025.
Unfortunately, the first phase of these efforts, if the course is not changed, is likely to fall short
and result in the continuation of fossil fuel generation, which is bad for the environment and the
climate. Not only will this strategy cause higher environmental pollution, it will also not deliver
universal electricity access. Therefore, the proposed project will satisfy the needs of the country
w 1.4 h .2 il . e alEsoc odneolimveirci nagn idm fpinroavnecdia al cnceeessd tso o tfh teh reu croalu pnotpryu lace.
30.
Senegal incurs a remarkably high cost in its fiscal budget annually for the importation of
fossil fuel to satisfy consumer energy needs. A significant portion of this import cost goes to
diesel for the generation of power, especially for the thousands of generators connected to
microgrids serving off-grid communities and for some of the generation assets supplying
electricity to the national grid. The estimated cost reduction from the diversification from
imported fossil fuels through the introduction of renewable power generation will reduce the
cost of grid-based rural electrification and free public resources that will be redirected to rural
electrification. In the medium-term, this will result in improved public debt conditions and
lower the cost at which Senegalese entities (both public and private) will be able to secure debt.
Lowered cost of capital will, in turn, strengthen the case for investment in the domestic
renewable energy sector, mobilizing private sector capital. The proposed project’s financing
origination includes very concessional debt from GCF, which is expected to crowd in some funds
from BOAD and from the private sector, thus ameliorating the financial barrier that usually
exists for infrastructure projects in the country, by developing the capacities of local project
financiers for this project and hence creating an enabling environment for the financing of
projects in other sectors of the economy. Thus, the project, if successfully implemented, will
provide a proof of concept that will c ontribute to the satisfaction of the economic and financial
needs of Senegal. Reducing the financial needs of the country to import diesel fuel will also help
contribute to reducing the country’spublic debt, which currently stands at about USD 7.5
b
1.
i
4
l
.
l
3
i
.
o n, rSetprerensgetnhteinngi n5g7 tpheer lcoecnatl ocfa tphiet aclo munatrrky’est g ross domestic product.
31.
The concessional loan from GCF is expected to crowd in other financing from other
sources, in addition to grant funding from GCF, to build various capacities. This strengthening of
the financial market will be essential for changing the baseline situation, in which pricing risks
and the lack of a track record for similar projects in the country made local financial institutions
unwilling to provide affordable financing solutions to project developers. For the few projects
that were implemented in the rural off-grid market, the high costs of capital forced project
developers to charge excessive electricity tariffs, denting the demand for and sustainability of
the investments. Thus, a shift from the baseline situation, which was promoting fossil-fueled
microgrids and at an inadequate speed to deliver the required pathway to universal access to a
concessional financial model will accelerate the speed to universal access in Senegal. This
model, will offer local financial lenders a de-risked proposition that will help the sector mobilize
private sector finance sustainably to ensure that the country will firmly be on the universal
access pathway that will be delivered by the target time. This will be very crucial for the
replication of this proof of concept in other rural villages not included in this current project.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 87
1.4.4. Institutional needs
32.
The baseline institutional capacities in both the public and private sectors of Senegal are
still insufficient to lay the foundation for an enabling environment, despite the aggressive rural
electrification programme that was being pursued by the Government of Senegal. Under this
programme, the recent liberalization of the national energy market that allowed IPPs to
compete with SENELEC, especially in the rural off-grid market, in spite of institutional support
for the programme, did not deliver an acceptable performance, hence the need for this proposed
project. Technical support to strengthen the technical and gender capacity of the PMU,
implementing partners, private concessionaires and community beneficiaries with a focus on
gender mainstreaming throughout the project cycle will be financed by the grant funding that
will be made available by GCF. This will build the necessary private and public institutions
needed to guarantee the success of the proposed project. Furthermore, outreach (also to be
funded by the grant) to national and regional commercial financiers will help to optimize efforts
to replicate the potentials of the project in neighbouring countries.
33.
The various needs of the country and especially those of the rural dwellers regarding
access to modern electricity will be positively promoted by the success of this project as
discussed above. In addition to the successful implementation of this project and its replication
in other rural villages not covered by the proposed intervention, will contribute to some of the
economic and financial buoyancy of Senegal, while the capacity-building portion of the
intervention, facilitated through grant funding from GCF, will contribute to institutional
strengthening, especially of public and private institutions that are relevant to the electricity
access of Senegal. All the metrics discussed in sub-sections 1.4.1 – 1.4.4 above indicate that the
needs of the recipient country, its people and institutions will be very well met by the successful
implementation of this project, and TAP thus scores this metric as “high”.
Scale: High
11.5.5.1. CHoiguhn-letrvyelo gwovneernrmsheinpt suppo rt
34.
The first key indication of country ownership of this project is the willing support that a
key public sector agency of the Government of Senegal gave to this project. BOAD (the AE of this
project, which will also act as theas Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants from GCF) and
ASER (the government-owned entity set up to plan, develop and manage the rural electrification
activites of Senegal) have both obtained the endorsement of the Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum , which will exercise direct oversight for this project, and the Ministry of Economy
and Finance, which will provide co-financing for the project on behalf of the Government of
Senegal. In addition, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (national
designated authority) has been following the preparation of this project since its inception and
has assured BOAD and ASER of its willingness to support this GCF funding application due to its
clear alignment with some key national strategies and development plans of Senegal. This is
robust evidence of the support of the Government of Senegal for this project and an indication
of strong country ownership.
35.
Alignment of the project with relevant national strategies: some of the key national
pla ns and policies that this project is aligned with can be summarized as follows:
(a)
The Senegalese NDC submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in September 2015 has rural electrification as a key component of its
contribution to international efforts to mitigate climate change. Through its NDC,
Senegal pledged that it will unconditionally implement 392 mini-grid systems utilizing
domestic/national funds. The NDC document also communicated Senegal’s intention to
connect up to 5,000 villages to solar PV mini-grids if it can get external support

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 88
7
(conditional target). This proposed project is in alignment with the conditional pledge
in the country’s NDC;
(b)
Following the declaration of the United Nations General Assembly, which considered
2012 “The International Year of Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL)”, the United
Nations launched an initiative called “global access to sustainable energy for all by 2030”
in collaboration with several development partners. Senegal joined this initiative and
worked to achieve appreciable results in terms of access to electricity: a 64 per cent
national access rate and a 33.2 per cent rural access rate in 2016. Although this
programme’s plan was to achieve a rural electricity access rate of 60 per cent by 2019,
the current estimate stands at 42 per cent, indicating that the protocol put together
under the country’s SE4ALL programme is not on target to deliver Senegal’s goal of
universal access by 2025. It is expected that the proposed project, by mitigating the
various barriers that has made this target look as if it would be impossible to meet, will
set this goal back on course;
(c)
The National Strategy for Economic and Social Development adopted in 2012, in which
the government committed to increase access to electricity in rural areas in an
affordable and equitable way, will also be promoted by the implementation of this
proposed project;
Plan Sénégal Émergent
(d)
Universal access to energy in rural areas is considered in the “ ” as
a fundamental factor for economic development and the fight against poverty. The main
objective of the plan is the emergence of Senegal to promote economic growth as
signif
P
ic
la
an
n
t
S
l
é
e
n
v
é
e
g
r
a
ag
l É
e
m
fo
e
r
r
h
g
u
en
m
t
an development; and
(e)
The “ ” also aims to reduce the cost of generation to a value of
between FCFA 60 and 70/kilowatt-hour (EUR 0.09–0.11/kilowatt-hour) in the long
term. Investment in renewable energy generation will reduce the government’s
1.5.2.
dImeppelnedmeennceta otnio fno scsailp fauceiltsy, wofh tihche aarcec reexdpeitnesdiv een ttoi tiym port.
36.
BOAD, a regional development bank, will act as the AE for the proposed project. BOAD
will also act as the Trustee for the sovereign loan and grants from GCF.BOAD, in its role as AE,
will be responsible for the overall management of this project, including: (i) all aspects of
project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversight and supervision
throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver
results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the
timeliness and quality of reporting to GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. This AE is
well suited and prepared for these roles. BOAD has been active in Senegal since its inception
and has cooperated with both the Senegalese Ministry of Economy and Finance and the ASER
programme (ASER rural electrification program – grid extensions, solar home systems and
distinct mini-grids – that is clearly demarked from the proposed GCF project, being already
8
registered under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), ) for a long time. As of December
2019, BOAD has a total of XOF 128.8 billion in public sector loans in Senegal, supporting 191
projects and initiatives. BOAD is also closely engaged in the Senegalese energy market,
managing an aggregate amount of XOF 239.9 billion in loans to the sector, equivalent to 23.3 per
cent of all outstanding loans to the Senegalese Government. From this information, it can be
7
8 UUNniFtCedC CN (a2t0io1n8s) FSreanmegeawl oRrukr aClo Enlveectnrtiifoicna otino nC lPimroagtrea Cmh. aCnDgMe (p2r0o1g5ra) mComnet rdiobcuutmioenn Ptarétivoune i sD aévtearilmabinleé eh earue .N Nivoetea uth at
noNnaet ioofn tahle. grids to be developed under this project will be included in the CDM PoA.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 89
concluded that it is equipped, prepared and has the experience to perform the roles earmarked
f 1 o .5 r .3 i . t in Ethxiesc purtoinpogs ceadp parcoitjeyc ot.f the executing entity
37.
The executing entity for this project will be ASER, an agency of the Government of
Senegal. ASER was formally created by decree in 1999 as an autonomous body with the sole aim
of promoting rural electrification in Senegal. The agency functions under the oversight of the
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy and the Ministry of Economy and Finance while also
reporting to the Senegalese Electricity Sector Regulatory Commission (CRSE). During the period
2005–2019, ASER coordinated about 174 mini-grids in Senegal, which were mostly funded by
bilateral donors. During the period 2000–2019, ASER was responsible for more than 12 grid
extension projects that enabled the electrification of more than 3,000 villages. Many of the mini-
grid projects, whose implementations were managed by ASER during the period mentioned
above, used fossil fuel (diesel). ASER can therefore be said to have demonstrated competency in
the planning and management of mini-grids supplied electricity by diesel fuel, but it does not
have much experience when the generation asset of a mini-grid is dominated by solar PV. This
weakness will, however, be ameliorated through carefully designed capacity-building measures
that will involve key personnel from ASER, who will eventually serve as the PMU of this planned
project. This PMU will be an important department in ASER at the end of the implementation of
thi s project.
38.
The project has been designed through a consultative process involving state and
federal government agencies, non-government organizations, representatives of trade
organizations and professional bodies, and a host of local-level stakeholders, including women,
representing the target communities where the mini-grids will be implemented. The gender-
specific interventions in the project are a mere reflection of thorough consultations that have
been organized at the grassroots level. The federal-level stakeholders who participated from the
early conceptualization of this project will consist of personnel representing several key
ministries, who will ensure that the project is provided with the right institutional guidance and
government counterpart funding as and when needed. This is also a strong indication of country
ow nership.
39.
The national designated authority, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development, sent a no-objection letter to the Secretariat to convey that the Government of
Senegal supports the project to the highest extent on 27 March 2020. This is more strong
ev idence of country ownership.
40.
Based on the above analysis, the independent TAP considers the country ownership of
the project to be “high”.
Scale: Moderately high
11.6.6.1. EFifnfaicniceianlc sytr auncudr ee ffectiveness
41.
The project seeks debt and grant financing from GCF to implement mini-grid facilities in
about 1,000 rural communities in Senegal as part of the country’s electricity access activities,
and to carry out capacity-building activities at the institutional and stakeholder levels. The GCF
concessional debt contribution request will be combined with co-financing from KfW and BOAD
at a co-financing ratio of 1:1.60, considering only the debt portion. The total funding for this
project of EUR 198.692 million is expected to be provided by GCF and co-financing from KfW,
BOAD and the Government of Senegal. The breakdown of funding contributions from these
sources, the types of funding and the total that will be provided for the project are presented in
table 2.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 90
Table 2: Project funding details
S/N Source Type of fund Amount (EUR million)
1. GCF
Loan 73.623
2. KfW Grant 1.822
3. West African Loan 102.396
Development Bank
Loan 15.245
4. Government of
Senegal
Contribution 5.606
TOTAL 198.692
42.
About 37 per cent of the total funding of the project is requested from GCF as a senior
loan (EUR 73.623 million) while about 1 per cent (EUR 1.822 million) is required for grant
funding. The senior loan from GCF will come with a 40-year tenor, a 10-year grace period and a
concessional interest rate of 0.0 per cent per annum. The required grant funding (EUR. 1.822
million, slightly <1 per cent of the total project fund) has been earmarked to build the capacity
of stakeholders in the country, which is expected to serve as one of the several actions that will
be delivered by the project intervention to mitigate many of the barriers identified earlier as the
cause of the sluggish delivery of electricity access in the status quo. The capacity built by this
proposed project will help create an enabling environment in-country to plan and implement
m
1.6
o
.2
r
.
e eleCcot-rfiicnitayn accicnegs/sl emvienrigargiidnsg i n the country in the future.
43.
The effectiveness of the concessional loan from GCF can be measured by the fact that
each EUR 1.0 from GCF will crowd in about EUR 1.6 of co-financing. The co-financing that will be
crowded in will include: a senior loan (EUR 102.396 million) with a 10-year tenor, a 0.5-year
grace period and an annual interest rate of 6.14 per cent; and another senior loan (EUR 15.245
million) with a 10-year tenor, a 3-year grace period and an annual fixed interest rate of 7.6 per
cent. The counterpart funding contribution of about 3 per cent the total project cost from the
Go vernment of Senegal is tangible evidence of its support for the project.
44.
The successful implementation of this proposed project will benefit all the consumers
currently connected to the mini-grids and those who will be connected after the commissioning
of the project. It will also establish a platform for the replication of the proven concept
(engineering, financing and management) in other villages in Senegal that are not included in
1 th .6 i . s 3 . proFjeicnta. n cial viability and best practices
45.
The financial viability of the project during and beyond GCF support has been designed
around the proper implementation of the infrastructure of the mini-grids and the building of the
capacities needed in-country for different aspects of project planning and implementation.
Th ese capacities will include:
(a)
ASER (PMU): the ability to finance, plan and implement such projects, which is expected
to be built into the capabilities of the professionals who will form the core of the PMU.
The continuity of their work is expected to be enhanced by their becoming a special
project unit within ASER at the close of this GCF support. It is expected that best

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
S/N | Source | Type of fund | Amount (EUR million)
1. | GCF |  | 
 |  | Loan | 73.623
2. | KfW | Grant | 1.822
3. | West African
Development Bank | Loan
Loan | 102.396
15.245
4. | Government of
Senegal | Contribution | 5.606
TOTAL |  |  | 198.692

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 91
practices in project financing and execution will be acquired by these PMU professionals
during the implementation of the microgrid systems at each of the sites covered by this
intervention; and
(b)
ASER and the concessionairres: these will be funded through a loan from the blended
financing to implement the solar PV microgrid system and carry out O&M duties in close
collaboration with and supervised by the PMU under a well structured O&M contract
with ASER, the entity with national mandate for the development of baseline off-
grid/rural electrification projects in Senegal.
46.
The capacity of ASER to design, build and implement the solar PV system – probably
through the PMU – will also be part of the capacity-building programme for this proposed
project. The training that professionals from ASER/PMU will receive during component 1 of this
project will include international best practices in all aspects of their work. The now better
trained, financially stronger and more technically equipped concessionaires – thanks to the
financial support incorporated into this GCF-led funding under a better structured O&M
contract with the Government of Senegal through ASER – will be contracted to operate and
maintain the minigrid systems that will inject clean electricity into the minigrid facility in each
of the covered villages and dispatch it to connected consumers. The independent TAP believes
that this setup will deliver effective and efficient minigrid facilities in each of the villages.
Lessons learned from this practical proof of concept will, if properly documented and
disseminated, play a role in fostering the replicability of the concept for other villages not
covered under this project in Senegal. It will also play a role in the replication of the project in
oth er countries in the subregion.
47.
The interconnected structure of working together described above, the capacity-
building activities that will be carried out as part of this proposed project, and the fact that
international best practices will be followed in all the activities will ensure that the project, as
planned and presented in the funding proposal, will deliver the targeted objectives. The
independent TAP therefore concludes that the efficiency and effectiveness of this proposed
project implementation will be “high”.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
48.
The independent TAP recommends that the Board approve the project.
49.
The independent TAP recommends that the Secretariat include in the funded activity
ag reement with the AE the requirement:
(a)
For the AE to report to the GCF in the annual performance reports (APRs) on the lessons
learned by the key stakeholders who will be involved and/or carry out all project
activities, in order to ensure that the lessons learned can be applied during the
implementation of this project as well as in any subsequent replication of the project in
Senegal or outside Senegal;
(b)
For the AE to report annually to the GCF onthe GHG emission reductions (ER) achieved
by the operating project covering the duration of the project lifetime. This ER reporting
sh ould cover:
;
(i)
Project parameters monitored by name, value and confidence interval
(ii)
ER calculation methodologies utilized;
(iii)
The procedures used to achieve the; and
(iv)
The quality assurance/quality control methods used in preparing and reporting
the data and the emission reduction calculations.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.26/02/Add.10
Page 92
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP138)
Proposal name: ASER Rural Electrification Project
Accredited entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD)
Country/(ies): Senegal
Project/programme size: Medium
Impact potential
Thank you for this assessment
Paradigm shift potential
Thank you for this assessment
Sustainable development potential
Thank you for this assessment
Needs of the recipient
TCohuannktr yyo ouw fonre trhsihs iaps sessment
Thank you for this assessment
Efficiency and effectiveness
Thank you for this assessment
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
Thanks for the remarks.

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
Impact potential

Thank you for this assessment
Paradigm shift potential

Thank you for this assessment
Sustainable development potential

Thank you for this assessment
Needs of the recipient

TCohuannktr yyo ouw fonre trhsihs iaps sessment

Thank you for this assessment
Efficiency and effectiveness

Thank you for this assessment
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
Thanks for the remarks.

=== PAGE 93 ===
Gender documentation for FP138
République d u Sénégal
-------
Un Peuple – Un But – Une Foi
------------
ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
-------------------
Rural Electrification Project by Mini-grids of 1000 villages in seven
(07) regions of SENEGAL.
-------------------
Fatick, Kaffrine, Kaolack, Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda and
Saint-Louis
-------------------
Gender Action Plan
Revised Version
PREPARED BY:
PYRAMIDE ENVIRONNEMENTAL CONSULTANTS
Cité Keur DAMEL 3e étage – Appt 3, Dakar- SÉNÉGAL /
Tél. : 77 645 38 73 /
E-mail : pyramideconsultants@gmail.com
March 2020

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
République d u Sénégal
-------
Un Peuple – Un But – Une Foi
------------ | 

--- Table 2 on Page 93 ---
 | ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project | 
 | ------------------- | 
 |  | 
 | Rural Electrification Project by Mini-grids of 1000 villages in seven | 
 | (07) regions of SENEGAL. | 
 | ------------------- | 
 | Fatick, Kaffrine, Kaolack, Kolda, Kédougou, Tambacounda and | 
 | Saint-Louis | 
 | ------------------- | 
 | Gender Action Plan | 

=== PAGE 94 ===
AGENCE SENEGALAISE D’ELECTRIFICATION RURALE
SENEGALESE AGENCY FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
(ASER)
Incorporating the gender dimension into
ASER Solar Rural Electrification Project
2

=== PAGE 95 ===
Table
I. Introduction 4
II. Reminder of the context of gender mainstreaming in energy
development policies and strategies in Senegal 4
II.1 The policy framework 4
II.2 Operationalisation of policies 5
III. Diagnosis of gender 6
III.1 Gender situation in Senegal 6
III.1.1 The vision and institutional mechanisms 6
III.1.2. Gender disparities in Senegal 7
III.2 Gender in Energy Policy 9
III.3 Gender in the National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER) 10
III.4 The socio-cultural underpinnings of gender inequalities in the energy
sector, discriminatory factors and their socio-economic implications 11
III.4.1 Access to energy in the face of socio-cultural realities 11
III.4.2 Socio-economic and environmental impacts 11
III.5 Gender in implementation at household and community level 13
IV. Constraints and opportunities for gender mainstreaming 16
V. Challenges to achieving gender equality 18
VI. Gender Plan of Action 19
VII. Logical Framework of the Project Action Plan 23
3

=== PAGE 96 ===
I. Introduction
Senegal's National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER), piloted by ASER, aims to make
electricity an instrument in the fight against poverty through the creation of wealth and jobs in
rural areas. To achieve this, it wants to adopt a dynamic strategy, particularly with regard to
alternative energies to hydrocarbons, which have an invaluable potential.
Statistics show that the share of renewable energy in Senegal's total energy production is still very
low: 10.66% in 2017, with a target of 40% in 2030. In a context of climate change, it is important
to develop strategies including the installation of mini-solar networks for the benefit, in
particular, of vulnerable groups that tend to take more wood resources than nature is capable of
regenerating.
However, when formulating the programme, ASER did not take into account from the outset a
differentiation between groups of men and women and their needs, taking as a reference the
neutrality of energy policy. Projects have been designed specifically for women's groups to
respond to the lightening of work, without this being part of a gender mainstreaming logic.
To remedy this, ASER, following a diagnosis of the level of gender mainstreaming in the PNER,
recently decided to systematize gender mainstreaming in all its projects and programmes.
To this end, an action plan for the integration of gender in the national rural electrification
programme using mini-solar grids has been drawn up accordingly.
For ASER, gender mainstreaming is a means of contributing to the achievement of sustainable
development objectives by Senegal, through the PES, which considers rural electrification among
its priority programmes.
II. Reminder of the context of gender mainstreaming in
energy development policies and strategies in Senegal
II.1 The policy framework
Energy occupies a central place in the national development strategy up to 2035 and
electricity is one of the most effective factors of production for reducing poverty among
the population.
Senegal, like the international community, has committed itself to a new agenda setting
out the SDGs (Sustainable Development Goals) towards 2030 after the evaluation of the
MDGs in 2015. These SDGs cover all the development issues, including climate change,
biodiversity, energy, water, poverty, gender equality, etc. There are 17 SDGs, all of which
are well articulated with the three strategic axes of the Emerging Senegal Plan (ESP).
SDGs 5 and 7 converge in terms of a good management of gender and energy aspects.
In addition, Senegal has ratified international treaties on gender equality, namely the
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
4

=== PAGE 97 ===
Women. Thus, several legislative and regulatory provisions have been adopted to punish
gender-based violence, the most recent of which relating to the criminalization of rape
and paedophilia was passed by the National Assembly in December 2019 and the
promulgation decree was signed on 10 January 2020.
As for the empowerment of women, a number of prerequisites for the fulfilment of needs
must be met in order to achieve this. Four types of needs exist: (i) practical needs, the
satisfaction of which contributes to domestic well-being; the provision of mini-solar kits
could well contribute to the improvement of women's living conditions; (ii) social needs,
which refer to education, health, transport and training; (iii) productive needs which
contribute to the integration of the target groups into the economic fabric, generally
through income-generating activities such as product processing. For these three types of
needs, energy can prove to be more than a service but a factor of production and
development entering the process of the value chain; it ensures the operation of cold
chains by guaranteeing the quality required for their good start-up; (iv) the fourth type
of need is strategic because it is inherent to decision-making, participation in the life of
associations or environmental protection. In our case, management committees of
women and young people could be set up in the target villages of our project for a co-
management of the solar networks. Several studies carried out in Senegal have shown
the primordial place of women in the governance of natural resources based on the
concept of gender and development.
II.2 The operationalization of policies
To operationalize the orientations and policies, the State of Senegal has developed
framework documents (PSE 1 and 2; SNEEG 1 and 2) and LPSDs (sectoral development
policy letters).
The challenge is to understand that energy in all its forms offers a wide choice to the
population in terms of the technologies to be used and that its absence reinforces
inequalities between men and women.
Currently, there is a timidity in taking gender into account in the energy sector.
Admittedly, practical needs were taken into account in the National Action Plan for
Women (PANAF 1997 - 2001), but it is with its evaluation in 2003 that the
recommendations of Beijing (1995) were recorded in the national strategy: the SNEEG
which today serves as a reference document on gender (SNEEG 1 and 2).
In this platform – PANAF 1997-2001, adopted as part of the implementation of the 9th
Economic and Social Development Plan (PODES 1996-2001), whose Strategic Orientation
No. 9 took the gender dimension into account – the use of improved cookstoves by rural
women was mentioned instead. Performance was also achieved in the use of butane gas
for cooking, but it was found that this programme had benefited urban rather than rural
populations that use traditional energy (wood and charcoal), which greatly increases
their vulnerability by exposing them to health problems related to smoke that is harmful
to women and their children.
5

=== PAGE 98 ===
Ultimately, the concerns of men and women in vulnerable communities to access reliable,
low-cost energy services and productive uses of energy are compounded by the lack of
gender mainstreaming in the design, planning and implementation of most projects.
(Example: Local Rural Electrification Plan of the concession of "Matam - Ranerou -Bakel",
Project of Sustainable Development through Renewable Energies - South East Senegal -
DPER-SE Senegal).
ASER wants to take up the challenge of gender and energy issues by proposing a
programme including mini-solar grids for the benefit of 1000 villages far from existing
power lines. This programme aims to reach 340,000 men and women disadvantaged by
their isolation and affected by poverty by improving their living conditions through
productive uses of electricity managed by women and young people.
III. Gender analysis
III.1 Gender situation in Senegal
III.1.1 The vision and institutional mechanisms
By signing international conventions, Senegal has committed to incorporate the gender
dimension into policies, standards and programmes. The aim is to recognise gender
mainstreaming as a cross-cutting issue at the institutional level. A Ministry of Gender1 was
created for the first time in 2010 and during the same year,2 the law instituting absolute parity in
the totally- or partially-elective assemblies was adopted. This law was tested for the first time
during the elections for the deputies on 1 July 2012, during which there was a high representation
of women. From 22% (33 deputies) for the 2007-2012 legislature, the number of women deputies
increased to 43.3% (64 deputies) for the 2012-2017 legislature.
The institutionalization of the gender dimension in public policies is effective through Decree No.
2017-313 of 13 February 2017 which creates and attaches gender units to the General Secretariat
of each ministry. Moreover, in 2016, a gender-sensitive budget document will be annexed to the
Initial Finance Act. In 2017, 12 sectoral ministries adopted the gender-sensitive budget, compared
to 4 ministries in 2016.
However, despites these highly political decisions, women are still affected by inequality at all
levels and gender issues affect poverty, health, education, access to finance, employment, access
to land and means of production among others. Women are active in the productive sectors, the
small market economy and the informal sector. Any action aimed at supporting them in these
sectors has an impact on their economic power, their participation at the strategic level and the
well-being of the family. Access to electricity can therefore be an important input, but also a
bulwark against the constraints that affect gender relations.
1 Within the same government, three ministries were in charge of women's issues: the Ministry of Gender; the Ministry of Family,
Women's Groups and Child Protection; and the Ministry of Women's Entrepreneurship and Microfinance. However, the multiplicity
of mechanisms has not always been conducive to decision-making on women's expectations and gender.
2 14 May 2010
6

=== PAGE 99 ===
III.1.2 Gender inequalities in Senegal
Senegal has made great strides in mainstreaming gender in the various development
sectors, but there is still a long way to go, particularly in terms of translating intentions
into practice.
Nevertheless, it must be noted that some achievements have been made, particularly
with the adoption of the National Strategy for Gender Equity and Equality (SNEEG),
which has seen many programmes initiated with a view to contributing to the alleviation
of women's work. For example, in terms of women's access to modern energy services,
the Multifunctional Platform Programme in Senegal, launched in 2002 for the period up
to 2015, has helped to strengthen women's The programme has also supported them in
the economic management of a processing unit. During the pilot phase started in 2001,
40 units were installed throughout the regions of Kédougou, Tambacounda and Thiès.
To this end, women have been able to benefit from the allowance: (i) equipment for
processing agricultural products (millet mills, rice huskers, threshers, oil presses and
groundnut paste mills); (ii) hydraulic equipment (motor pump units, sinking and
rehabilitation of wells, water supply, boreholes, water towers, standpipes and electric
pumps); (iii) equipment to support income-generating activities (sewing machines, carts
and equipment, market gardening equipment). In parallel with these initiatives, access
to land, credit, information, capacity-building, economic promotion, etc., have been
strengthened through other partners such as NGOs. These initiatives have helped to
strengthen women's participation in sustainable development.
Notwithstanding these improvements, it must be recognized that some approaches are
still the concern of development partners, rather than a well-thought-out, well-
considered national strategy integrated into the process of implementing a coherent
policy. Gender mainstreaming as well as the march towards women's empowerment
still suffer from certain constraints, in particular:
- weak gender mainstreaming in policies and programmes ;
- the inadequacy of sex-disaggregated data at all levels of activity for the
development of indicators;
- the weak involvement of the private sector and professional associations in the
advancement of women;
- the low level of education, training and literacy among women;
- high maternal mortality and morbidity;
- the high vulnerability of women and adolescent girls to STIs/HIV/AIDS.
The table below provides an overview of gender disparities in Senegal with respect to
several socio-economic variables relating to the productive sectors, basic social services,
well-being and quality of life.
Determinants Women (%) Men (%)
Access to property 13,40 86,603
Agricultural exploitation 21 79
Rural activities (agriculture, livestock 82,6 79,4
farming, fishing)
3 Senegal - FAO, National agricultural census 1998-99
7

--- Table 1 on Page 99 ---
Determinants | Women (%) | Men (%)
Access to property | 13,40 | 86,603
Agricultural exploitation | 21 | 79
Rural activities (agriculture, livestock
farming, fishing) | 82,6 | 79,4

=== PAGE 100 ===
Literacy rate 15-24 y/o 48,8 65,74
Net attendance rate in primary school 56,1 52,3
Gross primary school enrolment rate 83,30 (2011) 80,50
Completion rate in primary school 58,5 (2011) 60,2
Unemployment rate 28,2 - 13,3 (2011) 17 - 7,7 (2011)
Working population 45 54,91
Employer positions 0,7 1,2
Female employees in the non-agricultural 21,6 (2001) - 26,5 -
sectors (2005)
Maternal mortality rate (‰) 401 (2005) -
HIV-AIDS prevalence rate (15-49 y/o) 0,8 0,5 (National)
Members of Parliament 19,2 (2005) - 42,6 80,8 - 57,3 (2012)5
(2012)
Source: OMD II and OMD 2011, ESPS 2005, Labo genre-Unifem
III.2 Gender mainstreaming in energy policy
Senegal's energy policy considers the population as a whole and it uses as references the
indicators relating to the rates of access, service and rural electrification. The household is the
basic reference that unites gender and energy as it is the first level of collection and use of energy
data and the first level of gender analysis.
The proportion of the population with access to electricity has changed significantly; in 2017 -
2018, it is 68% (88% in urban areas and 38% in rural areas) against 62% in 2015 and 26% in 1990.
Important steps have been taken with the implementation of concessionaires that have made it
possible to connect 14941 rural households by the end of 2017.
In spite of the lack of proven attention to gender, the government has adopted the strategy of
linking economic growth, human development and poverty alleviation through increased access
to modern forms of energy, in particular electricity.
In addition, with the Emerging Senegal Plan, particular emphasis has been placed on increasing
human capital through job creation and reducing inequalities through the potential of
individuals, grassroots communities and regions. Connecting the target villages to solar grids
would open up job opportunities for young people in various electricity using trades such as
metal carpentry and electrical repairs.
For rural women, cooking and motive power remain the main gender issues in the energy sector.
Wood collection is their exclusive domain and the use of biomass has adverse effects on their
health and that of children, hence measures to modernize cooking fuels. As for electricity, its
weight in mitigating gender inequalities is important because of the opportunities in access to
modern energy services against the use of motive power. The programme would pave the way
for productive uses of energy based on the gender-specific needs of households; it will no longer
be a question of simple access to electricity for lighting but rather of a dynamic of individual and
community development associated with improved energy efficiency.
III.3 Gender mainstreaming in the National Rural Electrification Programme (PNER)
4 OMD Indicators, EDS-MICS Senegal 2010-2011
5 Legislative elections, July 2012
8

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
Literacy rate 15-24 y/o | 48,8 | 65,74
Net attendance rate in primary school | 56,1 | 52,3
Gross primary school enrolment rate | 83,30 (2011) | 80,50
Completion rate in primary school | 58,5 (2011) | 60,2
Unemployment rate | 28,2 - 13,3 (2011) | 17 - 7,7 (2011)
Working population | 45 | 54,91
Employer positions | 0,7 | 1,2
Female employees in the non-agricultural
sectors | 21,6 (2001) - 26,5
(2005) | -
Maternal mortality rate (‰) | 401 (2005) | -
HIV-AIDS prevalence rate (15-49 y/o) | 0,8 | 0,5 (National)
Members of Parliament | 19,2 (2005) - 42,6
(2012) | 80,8 - 57,3 (2012)5

=== PAGE 101 ===
Gender mainstreaming was not taken into consideration in the design of the national rural
electrification programme, which provides for all forms of electrification (grid and off-grid).
Energy documents have remained silent on the issue and individuals, both men and women, are
not cited. At the institutional level, gender and social issues are not integrated into the more
technically- and financially-oriented missions of ASER, something confirmed by indicators6 that
do not provide information on the real impacts of the programme in communities and
households. Moreover, it is not discussed in the course of the activities and there is no defined
strategy on the participation of target groups. These groups are considered as passive
beneficiaries who therefore do not contribute to the decision-making process on the setting up of
projects. The organisation and its implementing partners (concessionaires) do not have sufficient
expertise to take gender mainstreaming into account in its action strategy. ASER’s staff is very
unbalanced according to gender, with twice as many men as women and very few women in
decision-making positions.
The table above provides an overview of the distribution of ASER staff by status in relation to
gender issues.
Breakdown of staff by status as of 31 December 2012
Status of staff with a permanent contract Men Women Total
Employees 24 03 27
Supervisors 06 14 20
Executives 28 06 34
TOTAL 58 23 81
Source: ASER
III.4 The socio-cultural underpinnings of gender inequalities in the energy sector,
discriminatory factors and their socio-economic implications
III.4.1 Access to energy in the face of socio-cultural realities
There is a very strong inequality in access to energy because the needs of men and women are
not the same and the roles are not the same either. The sexual division of labour by society assigns
women different social roles from those of men. Thus, women are confined to the reproductive
role, i.e. the management of the household: cooking, fetching water, looking after and educating
children, maintaining the home, health, and participating as labourers in agricultural production.
In community life, she rarely occupies decision-making positions. And it is influential factors
such as socio-cultural, religious, legal and political beliefs that justify this state of affairs. There is
also the economic dimension: if we look at the profile of access and control, we notice that women,
given the roles assigned to them, have very little access to energy in a global way and to
productive energy in a specific way.
In other words, men and women use energy differently because their roles, needs and
responsibilities in society are different. Also, depending on whether one is in the rural or peri-
urban or urban environment, the production factor "energy" does not intervene in the same way
in the functions that men and women occupy; men have more of an economic role which allows
them to access and control resources, in this case energy; they determine the allocation of energy
6 Rural electrification rate, coverage rate and geographical coverage rate, calculated on the basis of the number of electrified
households, households in electrified rural localities and households in rural localities. (Mission letter of the ASER Director General
2007-2012.)
9

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
Status of staff with a permanent contract | Men | Women | Total
Employees | 24 | 03 | 27
Supervisors | 06 | 14 | 20
Executives | 28 | 06 | 34
TOTAL | 58 | 23 | 81

=== PAGE 102 ===
which, more than a production factor, is a development factor in the implementation of activities.
Men's activities are generally remunerative (in Senegal, men are present in the production of cash
crops: groundnuts, market gardening, fruit trees: mangoes, while women are in the domestic
sphere and engage in arduous and low-valued tasks.
A specific category is made up of women heads of households who, apart from their traditional
functions linked to their social status and the role assigned to women in society, in relation to the
sexual division of labour, may find themselves assuming productive functions for the upkeep of
the household, which makes them more vulnerable. However, there may be differences between
them in terms of access to energy, which may arise from their location (town/country; whether
they are connected to the electrification grid or not), levels of income, employment, age,
dependents, financial support by family members or relatives, etc.
III.4.2 Socio-economic and environmental impacts
- Socially:
In terms of socio-economic consequences, the first constraint for women is the lack of time to
carry out heavy and repetitive tasks using only their muscular strength. Thus, they devote
themselves successively to milling cereals, collecting firewood, fetching water, working in the
fields, preparing meals, etc., for 13 to 16 hours during the day. These tasks are unpaid and
contribute to the lack of balance between the activities of men and women in society.
In the absence of services to facilitate these activities, women completely lack autonomy. The only
alternative for them remains the support of their daughters who accompany them in carrying out
these tasks. Girls are no longer able to attend school regularly, if they are enrolled, and thus find
themselves in a situation of dropping out of school.
The heavy workload of women's activities leads to real health problems in a context where the
health needs of the population are still very poorly met. Women are at risk of abortion and are
exposed to fumes from the use of wood, cow dung, crop residues and other alternatives, at a time
when the use of gas is widespread in urban centres.
The lack of time and services to facilitate women's activities leads to their exclusion from local
decision-making spheres and obscures the development of productive activities to enable them
in the long run to acquire income. However, the trend is evolving positively due to the gender
dynamic.
- On the economic level :
In Senegal, women are very active in the agricultural value chain, as shown in Table 1, and
increasingly, they are found in the processing and petty trade segments. In the processing chain,
they are organized into women's promotion groups (GPF) or economic interest groups (GIE) or
micro enterprises to jointly address the challenges and issues of empowerment. They face many
constraints, especially those related to the correct supply of inputs and other factors of production
such as energy.
This poor access to productive energy limits their activities of transformation, storage of raw
materials, conservation and packaging of finished products.
10

=== PAGE 103 ===
There is interference or even complementarity between the different sectors and the high cost of
energy is a burden on the operating accounts of many women's microenterprises, which
inevitably limits their market share.
- On the environmental front:
The predominance of biomass in the satisfaction of household energy needs cannot evolve
without consequences on the environment, whose regeneration capacities have been largely
hampered by a number of factors, including: large forest extraction, successive droughts, soil
degradation, reduced rainfall and the unsustainable practices of populations.
III.5 Gender mainstreaming in the implementation at the household and community levels
Gender mainstreaming is not taken into consideration in rural electrification concessions, which
are characterized by a diversity of electrification modes and managed by private operators. Here,
the beneficiaries' preference is for continuous electricity service guaranteed by the grid. The needs
for electricity services are varied and huge.
In the places selected by our study, the process of rural electrification raises specific gender issues,
notably on:
- the priority given to technical aspects in household access to electricity;
- the difficulties encountered in accessing electricity to stimulate regional development at
the productive, economic, entrepreneurial and social levels;
- the lack of electricity for certain services and infrastructure in electrified localities;
- difficulties in accessing finance to strengthen the economic capacities of women and men
through electricity;
- the lack of participation of the beneficiary populations in the electrification process due to
the lack of a predefined role, with women feeling less concerned because they assume that
men should take care of electricity-related issues;
- the privileged position of men to be the interlocutors of technicians and their decision-
making power on taking out subscriptions because of their status as heads of the
households;
- the very limited number of women heads of households and their economic situation, a
parameter to be considered when it comes to connecting households and payment of bills;
- the travel made by women to electrified villages to meet the needs for milling, sewing,
ice, etc., and the arrival of men because of the establishment of their professional activities
(metallurgy, carpentry, vulcanization, etc.);
- the need for capacity building of men, women and youth, interested in the maintenance
of indoor facilities, participation in infrastructure management, and the role of the focal
point to ensure proximity between ASER and the beneficiaries;
- the pricing of electricity in off-grid areas, considered expensive by the beneficiaries
because of the discontinuity of the service and the very low level of development of
services and economic activities;
- the scope of ASER's actions limited to access to electricity for the population without
taking into account paramount needs not related to electricity such as domestic fuel for
women;
11

=== PAGE 104 ===
- the incomplete coverage of some villages by the network, which does not reach outlying
neighbourhoods.
Therefore, a good key to the distribution of productive uses of energy among men, women, young
people and even communities needs to be defined. Within the framework of the project, positive
discrimination should be made against women's microenterprises by setting up mechanisms to
take better advantage of the energy opportunities that will arise: training of target groups in
trades, design of business plans around activities identified beforehand and search for financing
(credits, subsidies), capacity building in equipment and provision of connection coupons to the
most vulnerable, support for a good organizational and institutional structuring of women's
organizations.
In addition, in view of the energy issues contained in the SDGs, the guidelines of the PES (Senegal
Emerging Plan) and the letters of the Sectoral Policy for the Development of the Energy Sector
(LPDSE), several measures have been taken since 2013 to improve the performance of the energy
sector at lower cost, even though households still consider energy to be too expensive. In the rural
world, faced with the problem of deforestation, several strategies have been designed with the
popularisation of improved stoves, solar cookers or bio-digesters through programmes such as
biogas or with the support of NGOs. The prepayment meters (commonly called Woyofal)
instituted in recent years are working towards a good rationalization of electricity charges. If
household members want to engage in economic activities, they usually use this option to better
manage their electricity consumption and thus avoid resorting to loans that can be costly or to
moratoria on bill payments.
Furthermore, taking into account current issues such as sustainable development, climate change,
and gender issues related to energy in a dynamic of poverty reduction, it is important in energy
communities to increase the resilience of women and girls. They must access and control energy
services to better play their part in economic and social development. Hence the opportunity to
study the multisectoral nature of energy with a cross-cutting approach that would consist in
meeting both the practical needs related to the tedious nature of certain works and strategies
(health, education/training/learning, business development, access to credit, transport, product
marketing, leadership etc.).
Local energy communities have emerged all over the world both technically (use of renewable
energy) and organisationally (definition of a mode of governance of the resource) involving all
households in energy production; the motivations are both economic and environmental. It is a
trend towards energy transition that facilitates local cooperation and the involvement of all
citizens in the fight against climate change. In our project, the technologies based on mini-solar
grids, once implemented and operational, will make the price per kWh produced competitive.
And women grouped in micro enterprises should make important investments in order to reduce
costs and risks and to add value to local products.
A reinforcement of the capacities of the system that will be put in place and will include :
- Energy networks; in our case, it will be mini-solar networks interconnected by cables;
- A system of governance in which women and girls will play a key role; their specific needs listed
above will be prioritized and the card will be played of optimization in the productive uses of
12

=== PAGE 105 ===
energy. With such a model, energy communities will expect to improve living conditions by
meeting productive needs.
In addition, it would be advisable before the intervention of the project to carry out popular
consultations in order to better integrate women and young people in the governance of this
project. Like the local natural resource management committees that define the different uses of
wood in the communities and where rural women have an important role to play, within the
framework of this project, inequalities in terms of access to and control of energy must be
discussed so that :
- Men and women no longer resort to abusive wood cutting (timber and firewood) and that this
renewable energy is the right alternative ;
- All gender-specific needs are taken care of and met.
As a strategy, much emphasis will have to be placed on advocacy, awareness-
raising/communication and training on gender issues in particular:
➢ Advocacy by administrative (governors, prefects, sub-prefects) and local (mayors)
authorities in favour of the most vulnerable groups for a good distribution of energy is
necessary;
➢ Awareness raising of the men and women concerned by the project on the differences, the
position of people in relation to decision-making bodies, the roles and potential impacts
of project interventions on the lives of populations in general. In a gender mainstreaming
dynamic, for each category of resources likely to be concerned and on which inequalities
of access such as factors of production (including modern energy) weigh, awareness
sessions on equitable distribution will be conducted. Also, in order to better manage
possible disputes arising from the provision of this modern type of energy, a complaints
management mechanism will have to be put in place; this is a relevant tool for correcting
gender inequalities;
➢ Technical training on the different types of economic activities listed should be provided
to women, as well as training on gender & development, gender & energy issues.
Finally, it should be noted that Senegalese society has been hit hard in recent years by recurrent
acts of violence perpetrated against women and girls. Women who are victims of violence are
very weakened psychologically. As such, both families and society should support them and help
them to meet the challenges at all levels. However, it should be noted that, given the socio-cultural
realities, these cases of violence are very rarely known to the public when they do not reach a
certain level of seriousness. Consequently, it would be advisable to establish a complaints
management mechanism that would make it possible to identify this category and to include it
in awareness-raising programmes, in order to ensure positive discrimination in favour of these
persons.
However, the intervention of the project could have advantages related to :
➢ education of children;
➢ lighting and security in public and private spaces;
13

=== PAGE 106 ===
➢ the promotion of economic activities of women's groups and
consequently the strengthening of their leadership/participation in
decision-making bodies;
➢ a proper water supply for the population (rural hydraulics) and other
social actions that could be taken care of (electricity supply for health centres:
maternity, paediatrics, etc.).
IV. Constraints and opportunities to incorporate gender
considerations
Prior to the conduct of the analysis of gender mainstreaming in the national rural electrification
programme, ASER was part of the audit of gender mainstreaming in energy policies and
programmes conducted in 2005-2007. The audit exercise was initiated by the International
Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy (ENERGIA) in 5 pilot countries for the adoption of
a more gender-oriented approach in the energy sector, which is known for its high degree of
neutrality. Previously, two of its executives had been involved in discussions and all activities on
gender and energy at the national level. After several attempts to develop a framework for
monitoring programme impacts, a gender-sensitive manual to strengthen the results-based
management of electrification programmes was produced in 2012. It is also a good opportunity
for the institutionalization of gender in the agency.
The appropriate tool is the web that allows, from a diagnosis of the problems of a target group,
to make a declination of gender management at the macro, meso and micro social levels taking
into account the different spheres of influence.
From the perspective of our programme, ASER must use this tool (the gender institutionalization
web). In our case, it will be necessary to question the gender roles of men and women who will
be impacted by the connection to the mini-grids; To this end, ASER must ask itself a certain
number of questions in this case: with the change that will take place, how will the situations of
men and women evolve and how will the various actors in the villages concerned interfere? Faced
with the stakes, what will be the pressure groups at the community level in relation to access and
control of the electricity generated?
Also, at the household level, what will be the price to be paid to be able to widen the range of
priority activities born of the opportunity (energy) offered? These are all sensitive gender issues
that will challenge ASER and to which solutions must be sought by strengthening the
intervention teams in terms of gender.
In addition, it should be noted that the ASER has recently (in 2019) completed its Strategic
Development Plan (SDP) 2020-2023 where gender mainstreaming becomes a reality in the
formulation of planned intervention axes.
However, many factors still prevent ASER from achieving effective gender mainstreaming. These
include the following:
- lack of sustained collaboration between ASER and the institutions in charge of gender
issues; At this level, it is important to create a synergy of actions between ASER, the
programme's implementing agency, and the projects initiated by the Ministry of Family
and Gender and the Ministry of Agriculture (women and young people are very present
in agricultural production, artisanal dairy and fisheries processing and throughout the
value chain.
14

=== PAGE 107 ===
- lack of means of the beneficiaries for the initial investment necessary to start up
professional activities and IGAs; the pooling of means between the various stakeholders
is necessary.
- electricity pricing that does not include special tariffs for women and the poor;
- lack of energy services for an optimized use of electricity at the productive and
professional level.
During workshop which presented the initial results of the analysis to the ASER management
and technical staff7, a gender target identification exercise was carried out. The exercise was
carried out in groups using defined indicators8 correlated to ASER’s implementation tools.9
Compared to the missions of the agency, it emerged that the achievement of the well-being of the
populations, which obtained the score of 42%, constitutes a primary objective to be achieved
through access to electricity. Moreover, the increase in productivity (26%) and the efficiency of
the project (25%) clearly raise more concern than promotion of gender equality, which only
obtained 7% of the scores.
ASER's gender goals
●Improve life quality and
wellbeing
●Increase productivity and
25%
revenues
42%
●Promote gender equality
7%
●Ensure efficiency and viability
26%
of the project
V. Challenges to incorporating gender mainstreaming into
ASER’s energy projects
ASER will focus on the effects and impacts of electrification on households, groups and the
community at large. Significant imbalances still exist in gender relations, particularly in terms of
access to work opportunities, employment and access to electricity. The process of gender
mainstreaming poses several challenges to ASER:
• Collaborate closely with institutions (decentralized and deconcentrated) support and
advisory structures; Producer Organizations, men and women, CSAs, resource persons,
local NGOs in charge of gender issues for an overall vision of the gender roles and needs
of women, men and vulnerable groups in relation to energy, for a local approach to
development sensitive to priorities.
• Increasing women's leadership as a prerequisite for women's socio-economic
empowerment.
7 The workshop was attended by 17 people, including 10 executives from ASER and the Director.
8 Practical Handbook, Volume 2: Resource Pack. Elizabeth Cecelsky and Soma Dutta, ENERGIA International Network on Gender
and Sustainable Energy. Draft May 2010.
9 Local initiative electrification projects (ERILs), priority rural electrification programmes (PPER), multisectoral projects (PREMs) and
the State Emergency Programme (PUE).
15

=== PAGE 108 ===
• Strengthen the gender capacity of ASER staff, implementing partners, CIMES members,
focal points, and social organizations with a focus on gender mainstreaming throughout
the project cycle and gender-sensitive indicators.
• Strengthen the communication strategy in the different stages of project implementation
and identify a contact or focal point, intermediary between ASER and rural populations
for continuous information of actors with appropriate supports (in local languages using
community radio).
• Collect and appropriately use disaggregated statistics (gender, age, income) on men,
women and youth in all areas.
• Put into practice the monitoring framework and gender-sensitive indicators with a
disaggregated database and reconsider each time the unsatisfied demand in electrified
localities;
• Manage from upstream to downstream the entire technical process up to the indoor
installations for household access to electricity by respecting the programming for the
rapid promotion of productive uses at the community level in order to accelerate the
changes that can eradicate poverty and give added value to electricity.
• Create multi-stakeholder committees responsible for supervision in the management of
the networks.
• Promote energy sectors according to the economic potential of each region and support
the establishment of a mechanism for access to microcredit for the development of
productive activities.
Based on the identified constraints and challenges, a gender action plan for the rural
electrification programme using solar mini-grids was developed. It will focus on three main
outputs for which a series of actions to be implemented were identified: (i) gender is
institutionalized in ASER; (ii) the energy needs of men and women are understood and met; (iii)
access to finance for the development of economic and professional activities for access to income
is supported. The implementation of this action plan calls for the active involvement of ASER and
a synergy between all development partners and actors.
VI. Gender Action Plan for the solar mini-grids programme
• General objective
Improve access to clean energy from mini-solar grids to meet the differentiated productive use
needs of men and women in the target villages and increase their resilience.
• Results
R1: Capacity building with the following activities on the technical, organizational and
managerial levels:
✓ Training and sensitization of ASER and other project entities on Gender & Development,
Gender & Energy and gender institutionalization issues.
✓ Elaboration of a gender sensitive communication strategy with emphasis on information
and sensitization campaigns;
✓ Sensitization of men, women and young people on the existing energy potential, on the
existing opportunities for : (i) meet the gender needs of different groups and the
community, (ii) set up preferential tariffs for households below the poverty line, (iii)
16

=== PAGE 109 ===
support the introduction of easy metering and payment systems, (iv) raise awareness
among the public on security issues related to the risks of tampering with lines (or
batteries) or fraud.
✓ Sensitization of management committees and women's umbrella organizations on all
cross-cutting issues such as gender, local governance of electricity services, climate change
in order to achieve productive uses of mini-grids that can meet gender and community
infrastructure demands.
R2: the Community's energy needs, in particular :
✓ health centres with the induced effects of reducing maternal and infant mortality and
population morbidity;
✓ schools impacting on the education of boys and girls, training ;
✓ water works such as boreholes and households are satisfied.
R3: the energy needs of vulnerable men and women are understood and met :
✓ Installation of meters for poor female-headed households and for young people exposed
to clandestine emigration: provide them with training, trainers in trades such as food
processing, metal carpentry, silk-screen printing etc.; provide them with subsidies for
adequate equipment for economic and professional activities
✓ Improved business opportunities for X energy efficiency enterprises owned by women's
groups with agro-processing units; provide subsidies for solar kits and equipment to
encourage them to increase their production and market share.
The implementation of this action plan calls for the active involvement of ASER and synergy
between all partners and development actors (see action plan in the form of a logical framework in the
Excel table).
R4: A program management unit is set up and is functional, namely :
✓ Updating the ASER monitoring and evaluation system and integrating and monitoring
the project's gender indicators;
✓ To carry out the follow-up of the implementation of the gender action plan;
✓ Carry out an evaluation of the project's gender action plan.
17

=== PAGE 110 ===
Gender Action Plan
Baselin Targe Budge
Components Results Activities Indicators e t Calendar Roles t
the solar rural electrification project using mini-grids targets a total of 1,000 villages remote from existing power lines where mini-grids will be installed to provide access to
electricity to 344,000 persons among which 50.2% {ANSD, 2017] of women disadvantaged by their isolation and affected by poverty. 3,739 productive uses managed by women will
have access to electricity (including boreholes, schools and health infrastructures), thus improving the living conditions of women and young people.
Gender results: * Gender is intitutionalized in ASER and other implementing entities of the programme
* the energy needs of men and women are understood and taken into account in the dimensioning of equipment
* access to facilitated financing for the development of economic and professional activities
Establish a
sectoral
committee
headed by a
focal point
responsible
for Memorandum establishing committee 0 10 000
monitoring all
activities
related to
gender
The mainstreamin
capacities g 1 2020, T1 ASER
of ASER and - Targeting
Capacity Building its partners women and
are girls as a
strengthene priority,
d during
training
sessions in At least half of the enrolments per
the trades region in the vocational training
0 2020, T4 -
proposed by programmes offered as part of ASER/Local
the Project's capacity-building are women and girls. stakeholders
capacity (local
building authorities,
programme, administrative
in order to authorities,
enable them beneficiaries'
to apply for associations)

--- Table 1 on Page 110 ---
Components |  | Activities |  | Baselin
e | Targe
t | Calendar |  | Budge
t
 | Results |  | Indicators |  |  |  | Roles | 
the solar rural electrification project using mini-grids targets a total of 1,000 villages remote from existing power lines where mini-grids will be installed to provide access to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
electricity to 344,000 persons among which 50.2% {ANSD, 2017] of women disadvantaged by their isolation and affected by poverty. 3,739 productive uses managed by women will |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
have access to electricity (including boreholes, schools and health infrastructures), thus improving the living conditions of women and young people. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Gender results: | * Gender is intitutionalized in ASER and other implementing entities of the programme |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | * the energy needs of men and women are understood and taken into account in the dimensioning of equipment |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | * access to facilitated financing for the development of economic and professional activities |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Capacity Building |  | Establish a
sectoral
committee
headed by a
focal point
responsible
for
monitoring all
activities
related to
gender
mainstreamin
g |  | 0 | 1 | 2020, T1 |  | 10 000
 |  |  | Memorandum establishing committee |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | capacities |  |  |  |  |  | ASER | 
 | of ASER and | - Targeting
women and
girls as a
priority,
during
training
sessions in
the trades
proposed by
the Project's
capacity
building
programme,
in order to
enable them
to apply for |  | 0 |  | 2020, T4 |  | -
 | its partners |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | are |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | strengthene |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | d |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | At least half of the enrolments per |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | region in the vocational training |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | programmes offered as part of |  |  |  | ASER/Local | 
 |  |  | capacity-building are women and girls. |  |  |  | stakeholders | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | (local | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | authorities, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | administrative | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | authorities, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries' | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | associations) | 

=== PAGE 111 ===
jobs, during
works and
commissionin
g.
- To set up a
recruitment
mechanism
favouring
young people
and women ;
-
Representatio
n of women
and youth in
local
recruitment
committees ;
- Identify and
support CBOs
managed by
women and
young people
in the villages
targeted by
the program.
- Set up
- List of CBOs identified by village
management
- 100% of the communes have local
committees of
committees or structures that give a
women and 0 85 000
large place to women and young
young people
people, created among the target
in the target
villages and their operationality.
villages or
local
structures
with a strong
focus on
women and
young people,
in line with
the TBD 2020, T4 ASER
19

--- Table 1 on Page 111 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | - Identify and
support CBOs
managed by
women and
young people
in the villages
targeted by
the program.
- Set up
management
committees of
women and
young people
in the target
villages or
local
structures
with a strong
focus on
women and
young people,
in line with
the | - List of CBOs identified by village
- 100% of the communes have local
committees or structures that give a
large place to women and young
people, created among the target
villages and their operationality. | 0 | TBD | 2020, T4 | ASER | 85 000

--- Table 2 on Page 111 ---
- List of CBOs identified by village
- 100% of the communes have local
committees or structures that give a
large place to women and young
people, created among the target
villages and their operationality.

=== PAGE 112 ===
organizational
and
operational
mechanism
defined in the
stakeholder
engagement
plan, in which
vulnerability
aspects are
given special
attention.
A training
programme
for all
stakeholders
(ASER, Training programme and number of durant le 132
0
operators, people trained projet 000
CBOs, etc.) is
developed
and
implemented. TBD ASER
Develop and
implement a
gender-
sensitive
Communication strategy and number of durant le
communicatio 0 50 000
campaigns carried out projet
n campaign
on the project
and its various
components. TBD ASER
The Gender-
Community sensitive
's energy survey forms - Standard Gender Mainstreaming Form
needs for are used for - Gender mainstreaming in the
Detail engineering study (execution) 0 -
improved demand technical design and implementation
access to analysis modalities of the project
basic social A detailed
services are preliminary 2 2020, T4 ASER, UGP
20

--- Table 1 on Page 112 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  | A training
programme
for all
stakeholders
(ASER,
operators,
CBOs, etc.) is
developed
and
implemented. | Training programme and number of
people trained | 0 | TBD | durant le
projet | ASER | 132
000
 |  |  | Develop and
implement a
gender-
sensitive
communicatio
n campaign
on the project
and its various
components. | Communication strategy and number of
campaigns carried out | 0 | TBD | durant le
projet | ASER | 50 000
Detail engineering study (execution) | The |  | Gender-
sensitive
survey forms
are used for
demand
analysis
A detailed
preliminary | - Standard Gender Mainstreaming Form
- Gender mainstreaming in the
technical design and implementation
modalities of the project | 0 | 2 | 2020, T4 | ASER, UGP | -
 | Community |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 's energy |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | needs for |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | improved |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | access to |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | basic social |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | services are |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 112 ---
Training programme and number of
people trained

--- Table 3 on Page 112 ---
Communication strategy and number of
campaigns carried out

--- Table 4 on Page 112 ---
- Standard Gender Mainstreaming Form
- Gender mainstreaming in the
technical design and implementation
modalities of the project

=== PAGE 113 ===
understood design and
, taken into specifications
account for the
and met. creation of
1,000 mini-
solar arrays,
integrating
gender-
specific needs
is produced
Mini solar
power plants
and LV
networks are
designed to
meet the
energy needs Planned plant capacity vs. demand 0 -
of households
and
productive
and socio-
community Consultant,
uses. TBD 2020, T4 Aser
In the
targeted
households,
Realization men and
of 1,000 women are
mini-grids consulted The number of positively impacted
0 -
and during the female heads of household subscribing
connection construction
Carrying out the work and connecting
of 39,000 of indoor
customers
households, facilities and
and 4,500 the
productive subscription TBD 2021, 2022 opérateur, Aser
and social A mechanism
uses to facilitate
The number of connected productive
the 0 -
usgers
subscription
of productive TBD 2021, 2022 opérateur, Aser
21

--- Table 1 on Page 113 ---
understood
, taken into
account
and met.

--- Table 2 on Page 113 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | Mini solar
power plants
and LV
networks are
designed to
meet the
energy needs
of households
and
productive
and socio-
community
uses. | Planned plant capacity vs. demand | 0 | TBD | 2020, T4 | Consultant,
Aser | -
Carrying out the work and connecting
customers | Realization
of 1,000
mini-grids
and
connection
of 39,000
households,
and 4,500
productive
and social
uses | In the
targeted
households,
men and
women are
consulted
during the
construction
of indoor
facilities and
the
subscription | The number of positively impacted
female heads of household subscribing | 0 | TBD | 2021, 2022 | opérateur, Aser | -
 |  | A mechanism
to facilitate
the
subscription
of productive | The number of connected productive
usgers | 0 | TBD | 2021, 2022 | opérateur, Aser | -

--- Table 3 on Page 113 ---
Consultant,
Aser

--- Table 4 on Page 113 ---
Realization
of 1,000
mini-grids
and
connection
of 39,000
households,
and 4,500
productive
and social
uses

--- Table 5 on Page 113 ---
The number of positively impacted
female heads of household subscribing

--- Table 6 on Page 113 ---
The number of connected productive
usgers

=== PAGE 114 ===
uses managed
by women is
set up
(Coupon
system).
An easy
access to
financing
allowing
productive
Number of productive users benefiting,
users to 225
60% of whom are women and young 0
acquire 000
people.
production
equipment is
set up and
operational
with the MFIs. TBD 2021, 2022 Aser, IMF
The ASER
monitoring
and
evaluation
system is
updated and
the 0
programme's
A
gender
programme
indicators are ASER Monitoring & Evaluation System
manageme
integrated is updated
Programme management, monitoring and nt unit is
and - Existence of a performance
evaluation set up and
monitored. framework 1 2021, T1 ASER -
is
Monitoring of
operational
the
.
implementati
on of the 0
gender action
plan is being Periodic monitoring reports
carried out - Updated Performance Framework 6 2021, 2022 ASER 43 000
A gender
action plan 0 ASER
evaluation of Program evaluation report 1 2023 Consultants 70 000
22

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  | An easy
access to
financing
allowing
productive
users to
acquire
production
equipment is
set up and
operational
with the MFIs. | Number of productive users benefiting,
60% of whom are women and young
people. | 0 | TBD | 2021, 2022 | Aser, IMF | 225
000
Programme management, monitoring and
evaluation | A
programme
manageme
nt unit is
set up and
is
operational
. | The ASER
monitoring
and
evaluation
system is
updated and
the
programme's
gender
indicators are
integrated
and
monitored. | ASER Monitoring & Evaluation System
is updated
- Existence of a performance
framework | 0 | 1 | 2021, T1 | ASER | -
 |  | Monitoring of
the
implementati
on of the
gender action
plan is being
carried out | Periodic monitoring reports
- Updated Performance Framework | 0 | 6 | 2021, 2022 | ASER | 43 000
 |  | A gender
action plan
evaluation of | Program evaluation report | 0 | 1 | 2023 | ASER
Consultants | 70 000

--- Table 2 on Page 114 ---
Number of productive users benefiting,
60% of whom are women and young
people.

--- Table 3 on Page 114 ---
225
000

--- Table 4 on Page 114 ---
A
programme
manageme
nt unit is
set up and
is
operational
.

--- Table 5 on Page 114 ---
ASER Monitoring & Evaluation System
is updated
- Existence of a performance
framework

--- Table 6 on Page 114 ---
Periodic monitoring reports
- Updated Performance Framework

--- Table 7 on Page 114 ---
ASER
Consultants

=== PAGE 115 ===
the
programme is
carried out.
____________________
23
