=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
Author: Sanghyun Kim
CreationDate: D:20250127163614+09'00'
Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.5.20392
ModDate: D:20250127181917+09'00'
Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.5.20392
Title: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
17 – 20 February 2025
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea
Provisional agenda item 11
27 January 2025
Consideration of funding proposals –
Addendum VI
Funding proposal package for FP258
Summary
This addendum contains the following six parts:
a) A funding proposal titled "Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All
(EW4All)";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
’
point(s);
’
c) Secretariats assessment;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panels assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
f) Gender documentation.
This document is prepared and transmitted for consideration by the GCF Board at a Board meeting. It is published on the GCF public
website in that context, which does not imply a presumed outcome. Decisions taken in relation to this document and updates to it, if any,
will be made publicly available in accordance with applicable GCF policies.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page b
Table of Content
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 3
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 142
Secretariat’s assessment 150
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 165
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory
180
Panel's assessment
Gender documentation 184
Disclaimer:
The designations and the presentation of the materials used in this document, including their respective
citations, maps and references, have been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Green Climate Fund concerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. Also, the boundaries and names shown, and the designations used in this document have
been included by the relevant Accredited Entity and do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by
the Green Climate Fund.

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All (EW4All)
Antigua and Barbuda | Chad | Cambodia | Ecuador | Ethiopia | Fiji | Somalia
Country(ies):
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Date of first submission: [2024/09/20]
Date of current submission [2025/01/23]
Version number [V.11]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0
Contents
Section A PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION
Section C FINANCING INFORMATION
Section D EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section E LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section G GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Section H ANNEXES
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all
relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60.
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard
time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

--- Table 1 on Page 4 ---
 | Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template | 
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all
relevant documents.
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60.
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard
time.
• The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
• Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4. |  | 

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2
B
PROGRAMME SUMMARY
A.2. Public or private
A.1. Project or programme Programme Public
sector
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
A.3. Request for Proposals
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
(RFP)
Not applicable
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively.
GCF contribution Co-financers’
contribution1
Mitigation total Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Energy generation and access Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Low-emission transport Enter number % Enter number %
A.4. Result area(s)
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances Enter number % Enter number %
☐ Forestry and land use Enter number % Enter number %
Adaptation total Enter number % Enter number %
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 85 % 85 %
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 5 % 5 %
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 5 % 5 %
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 5 % 5 %
A.5. Expected mitigation A.6. Expected
Indicate total number of direct and
outcome Not Applicable adaptation outcome
indirect beneficiaries
(Core indicator 1: GHG emissions (Core indicator 2: direct
reduced, avoided or removed / and indirect
sequestered) beneficiaries reached)
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF contribution (i.e.
GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding proposal.

--- Table 1 on Page 5 ---
 | PROGRAMME SUMMARY |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.1. Project or programme |  |  | Programme |  | A.2. Public or private |  | Public |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | sector |  |  |  | 
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP) |  |  | If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals,
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.
Not applicable |  |  |  |  |  | 
A.4. Result area(s) |  |  | Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | GCF contribution | Co-financers’
contribution1 | 
 |  |  | Mitigation total |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | ☐ Energy generation and access |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | ☐ Low-emission transport |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | ☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | ☐ Forestry and land use |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | Adaptation total |  |  |  | Enter number % | Enter number % | 
 |  |  | ☒ Most vulnerable people and communities |  |  |  | 85 % | 85 % | 
 |  |  | ☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security |  |  |  | 5 % | 5 % | 
 |  |  | ☒ Infrastructure and built environment |  |  |  | 5 % | 5 % | 
 |  |  | ☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services |  |  |  | 5 % | 5 % | 
 | A.5. Expected mitigation |  | Not Applicable |  | A.6. Expected |  |  |  | 
 | outcome |  |  |  | adaptation outcome |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 5 ---
A.3. Request for Proposals
(RFP)

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3
B
Indicate number
Indicate number of indirect
of direct beneficiaries
beneficiaries Cambodia:
Cambodia: 2,153,028
514,098 Antigua and
Antigua and Barbuda:
Barbuda: 91,500 114,000
Chad: 1,200,000 Chad: 5,500,000
Ecuador: 513,900 Ecuador:
Ethiopia: 14,000,000
16,000,000 Ethiopia:
Fiji: 416,282 21,600,000
Somalia: 7,600,000 Fiji: 488,308
Somalia: 7,800,000
Indicate % of Indicate % of
direct indirect
beneficiaries vis- beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total à-vis total
population population
Cambodia: 2.91% Cambodia:
Antigua and 12.21%
Barbuda: 100% Antigua and
Chad: 6% Barbuda: N/A2
Ecuador: 2.6% Chad: 28%
Ethiopia: 12.12% Ecuador: 72%
Fiji: 46% Ethiopia: 15.9%
Somalia: 40.9% Fiji: 54%
Somalia: 42%
A.7. Total financing (GCF + co-
114,586,309 USD
finance3)
103,246,722 USD
A.9. Project size Medium (Upto USD 250 million)
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17.
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
☒ Grant 103,246,722
requested for the GCF ☐ Equity Enter number
funding ☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number
A.11. Implementation period 5 years (60 months) A.12. Total lifespan 30 years (360 months)
2 Indirect beneficiaries for Antigua and Barbuda are considered the significant number of tourists that visit the country during the hurricane season.
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

--- Table 1 on Page 6 ---
 |  |  |  |  | Indicate number
of direct
beneficiaries
Cambodia:
514,098
Antigua and
Barbuda: 91,500
Chad: 1,200,000
Ecuador: 513,900
Ethiopia:
16,000,000
Fiji: 416,282
Somalia: 7,600,000 | Indicate number
of indirect
beneficiaries
Cambodia:
2,153,028
Antigua and
Barbuda:
114,000
Chad: 5,500,000
Ecuador:
14,000,000
Ethiopia:
21,600,000
Fiji: 488,308
Somalia: 7,800,000
 |  |  |  |  | Indicate % of
direct
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total
population
Cambodia: 2.91%
Antigua and
Barbuda: 100%
Chad: 6%
Ecuador: 2.6%
Ethiopia: 12.12%
Fiji: 46%
Somalia: 40.9% | Indicate % of
indirect
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total
population
Cambodia:
12.21%
Antigua and
Barbuda: N/A2
Chad: 28%
Ecuador: 72%
Ethiopia: 15.9%
Fiji: 54%
Somalia: 42%
 | A.7. Total financing (GCF + co- |  | 114,586,309 USD | A.9. Project size |  | 
 | finance3) |  |  |  |  | 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested |  |  | 103,246,722 USD
For multi-country proposals,
please fill out annex 17. |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 6 ---
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested

--- Table 3 on Page 6 ---
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding | Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent
with A.8.
☒ Grant 103,246,722
☐ Equity Enter number
☐ Loan Enter number
☐ Results-based payment Enter number
☐ Guarantee Enter number |  | 
A.11. Implementation period | 5 years (60 months) | A.12. Total lifespan | 30 years (360 months)

--- Table 4 on Page 6 ---
A.10. Financial instrument(s)
requested for the GCF
funding

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4
B
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy
and GCF ESS Standards to assess
A.13. Expected date of AE 9/20/2024 your FP category.
A.14. ESS category
internal approval
C
A.16. Has Readiness or
A.15. Has this FP been PPF support been
Yes ☒ No ☐ Yes ☒ No ☐
submitted as a CN before? used to prepare this
FP?
A.18. Is this FP
A.17. Is this FP included in the
Yes ☐ No ☐ included in the Yes ☐ No ☐
entity work programme?
country programme?
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence
Yes ☒ No ☐
A.20. Executing Entity
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
information

--- Table 1 on Page 7 ---
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval | 9/20/2024 | A.14. ESS category |  | Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy | 
 |  |  |  | and GCF ESS Standards to assess | 
 |  |  |  | your FP category. | 
 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | C | 
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before? | Yes ☒ No ☐ | A.16. Has Readiness or
PPF support been
used to prepare this
FP? | Yes ☒ No ☐ |  | 
A.17. Is this FP included in the
entity work programme? | Yes ☐ No ☐ | A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country programme? | Yes ☐ No ☐ |  | 
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence | Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF,
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.
Yes ☒ No ☐ |  |  |  | 
A.20. Executing Entity
information | United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 7 ---

9/20/2024


--- Table 3 on Page 7 ---
A.13. Expected date of AE
internal approval

--- Table 4 on Page 7 ---
A.16. Has Readiness or
PPF support been
used to prepare this
FP?

--- Table 5 on Page 7 ---
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN before?

--- Table 6 on Page 7 ---
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country programme?

--- Table 7 on Page 7 ---
A.17. Is this FP included in the
entity work programme?

--- Table 8 on Page 7 ---
A.19. Complementarity and
coherence

--- Table 9 on Page 7 ---
A.20. Executing Entity
information

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5
B
A.21. Executive summary
1 This Multi-country Project (MCP) proposal is part of a global initiative to advance Early Warnings for All (EW4All) as
announced by the United Nations Secretary General in March 20224 and articulated in the EW4All Executive Action Plan
(EAP).5 The project will improve the production, dissemination and effective use of Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems
(MHEWS), aiming to reach the most vulnerable communities in the targeted seven countries, namely Antigua and
Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, and Somalia. National projects tailored to each participating country's
needs will establish Early Warning Systems (EWS) infrastructure, set up systems for its long term operation, support local
capacities in the generation and dissemination of early warnings products and help institute relevant policies and
governance mechanisms for end-to end MHEWS. This MCP aims to accelerate the delivery of EAP priority actions by
stimulating the design and funding of multiple regional delivery mechanisms to support the financial and technical needs
of the targeted countries.
2 The project will follow the approach of the ADB CRPP project6. An EW4All Global Funding Proposal (FP) serves to provide
details on the global program and financing architecture, its theory of change, alignment with the GCF investment
criteria, and other relevant information common to all participating countries. Eligibility criteria for the selection of
interventions, activities, sites and beneficiaries are provided in Appendix 3.
Climate change problem
3 Rising annual global near-surface temperatures associated with anthropogenic climate change have already exceeded 1.5
°C above pre-industrial levels,7 exacerbating disaster risk triggered by different types of hazardous events. Societies and
the natural systems on which they depend are unable to cope with and adapt to the effects of climate change, some of
which are irreversible.8 The intensity, geographic extent and frequency of both slow and rapid onset disasters has
increased, exacerbated by changes in the weather and climate, including increases in temperature (leading to heat-
waves, damages to agriculture and human health) and the intensity of rainfall, storms and cyclones (causing floods,
landslides and coastal inundation), as well as decreases in rainfall (leading to agricultural and hydrological droughts).
4 These changes in climate increase the risks faced by communities and the livelihoods on which they depend. They create
food and water insecurity for millions of people by reducing production from agriculture and natural resources and
disrupting ecosystem services.9 These impacts are reflected within National Determined Contributions (NDCs) which
identify freshwater resources, food production and nutritional security and terrestrial and wetland ecosystems as the top
priority areas and sectors. National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) 10 submitted by 48 countries identified drought, floods, heat
waves, increasing temperatures, sea level rise, and land and forest degradation as critical impacts of climate change, with
cyclones, typhoons and storm surges major concerns in most of the SIDS. The impacts of these hazards are numerous and
include reduced crop yield, soil degradation, animal diseases, loss of livestock, reduction of water supplies, salinization of
water resources, human migration, ecosystem and biodiversity loss, increased coastal erosion, damage to infrastructure
4 World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), “Statement of Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,” March 2022.
5 The UN Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation, “Early Warnings for All - Executive Action Plan 2023-2027”
(World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 2023).
6 FP215: Community Resilience Partnership Program Multiple Countries: Asia and Pacific Region | Asian Development Bank | Decision B.37/12, 24
November 2023
7 WMO. ‘State of the Climate 2024-Update for COP29’. World Meteorological Organization, 2024. https://library.wmo.int/idurl/4/69075.
8 David I. Armstrong McKay et al., “Exceeding 1.5°C Global Warming Could Trigger Multiple Climate Tipping Points,” Science, September 2022.
9 Valérie Masson-Delmotte et al., “Global Warming of 1.5 C,” An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5°C above Pre-Industrial
Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change,
Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty, 2019.
10 UNFCCC LDC Expert Group. “National Adaptation Plans 2023: Progress in the Formulation and Implementation of NAPs”. Bonn, Germany: United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2023.

--- Table 1 on Page 8 ---
 | A.21. Executive summary | 

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6
B
and increases in forest fires. They further highlight the need for establishing national MHEWS, including community-
based systems, or sector specific systems 11.
5 EWS(EWS) to monitor climate and weather variability and change are a critical investment that can warn against
impending shocks and enhance climate resilience of governments and communities by providing critical information to
guide risk management, including anticipatory action and make informed long-term decisions that help avoid otherwise
crippling damages and losses to communities and livelihoods. Early warnings furthermore save lives and assets and can
be worth more than ten times the investments and can also mitigate millions of cases of morbidity (cholera, dengue,
diarrhea, malaria, etc.). Twenty-four hours warning of a coming storm or heat wave can cut the ensuing damage by 30%,
while spending USD 800 million on such systems in developing countries could avoid losses of $3–16 billion per year.12
Key climate change induced risks in participating countries
A summary of key climate change risks in each of the seven participating countries in the MCP is provided below. Antigua
and Barbuda
6 Ranked as the 5th highest in the World Risk Index in 2023, Antigua and Barbuda is highly exposed to an array of baseline
hazards, including hurricanes, extreme rainfall, droughts, and rising sea levels. Hurricanes are considered the country’s
main climate hazard, having faced 15 hurricanes and 14 tropical storms between 1995 and 2021. By 2030, the general
building stock in Antigua and Barbuda, using the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5, will experience direct
losses from storm surges and wind in the amount of USD 451M for a historic event, USD 4.03 billion for a 1:100-year
event, and USD 9.4 billion for a maximum credible event13. Additionally, the islands endured 14 drought episodes
between 2000 and 2020, resulting in droughts being considered the 2nd major climate threat. 14
7 Rising sea levels and increasing land and sea surface temperatures are expected in the future. The low-lying geography of
Antigua and Barbuda makes it particularly susceptible to land loss due to sea-level rise, as projected under all future
scenarios assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Moreover, hurricane intensity is
anticipated to increase by 18% for category 4 and 5 hurricanes over the next 30 years, based on General Circulation
Models. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, models predict nine drought years for the period 2040–2069, representing an 8%
increase.
Chad
8 Chad faces severe environmental degradation, and climate change is aggravating already challenging climatic conditions
by increasing the frequency and magnitude of extreme events. The current and projected warming is increasing
evapotranspiration, and while rainfall projections for the region are very uncertain, they suggest that extreme rainfall will
increase while overall precipitation decreases. As a result, both floods and longer droughts are very likely15.
9 The food production and livelihood systems in Chad are highly dependent on climatic factors, particularly rainfall patterns
and distribution. Extreme heat, heavy rainfall and flooding pose risks to crops, health, farmers’ and herders’ livelihoods,
food security and farm workers’ productivity. Since 1995, Chad has been ranked at the bottom of the ND-GAIN Country
Index (the country ranked 184th from 1995-2004 and 185th from 2005-2021) due to a combination of high poverty,
frequent conflicts, and the risk of both droughts and floods. This underlines the country’s great need for investment and
innovations to improve readiness, and a great urgency for action.
Ecuador
11 UNFCCC, “Report of the Conference of the Parties Serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on Its Third Session, Held in Glasgow
from 31 October to 13 November 2021 Addendum Part Two: Action Taken by the Conference of the Parties Serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the
Paris Agreement at Its Third Session,” March 2022.
12 Global Commission on Adaptation. ‘Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience’, September 2019.
13 GoAB 2022. Adaptation Communication for Antigua and Barbuda
14 GoAB 2022. Adaptation Communication for Antigua and Barbuda.
15 https://dicf.unepgrid.ch/chad/climate-change

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7
B
10 In Ecuador, projections foresee changes in the frequency and magnitude of precipitation and temperature, both for
average and extreme values16. Climate change is project to increase melting of glacier cover, increase variations in sea
surface temperature, cause spatial and temporal changes precipitation regimes, increase flood-prone areas, intensify
droughts, reduce water quantity and quality, expand the range of disease-transmitting vectors (dengue and malaria), and
increase loss of biodiversity17. The increased intensity and frequency of extreme and slow-onset climatic events is
projected to cause economic and non-economic losses and damages to goods and services18.
Fiji
11 Daily maximum temperatures in Fiji have increased at the rate of about 0.2°C per decade. There has been a clear shift
towards more years being warmer than average during the warm/wet season, especially since the 2000s. Fiji is becoming
hotter, with more intense temperatures occurring more frequently. An increase in the frequency and intensity of
extreme rainfall events is also projected. The 1-in-20-year daily rainfall is projected to increase by approximately 5-7 mm
by 2030 and by 36 mm by 2090. Whilst climate projections suggest a decrease in the total number of cyclones, their
severity is expected to increase19. This is expected to result in increased floods, flash floods and landslides. Coupled with
projected changes in sea level rise, increased storm surges and coastal erosion is expected. The increased temperatures
are expected to contribute to drought and together with changes in precipitation result in accelerated ecosystem
degradation leading to bleached coral reefs and saline water intrusion into aquifers.
Ethiopia
12 Projections20 indicate that temperatures in Ethiopia will rise by 1.5-2.5°C by mid-century under RCP4.5 and up to 3-4°C
under RCP8.5. Rainfall will become more erratic, with prolonged dry spells worsening drought conditions, wild land and
forest fires, and intensified rainfall events leading to severe flooding, land and mudslides. Significant impacts of climate
change in Ethiopia include reduced water availability, frequent crop failures, and heightened food insecurity. South-West
Ethiopia is facing devastating floods causing widespread destruction of homes, public infrastructure and affecting
essential services like water, sanitation, and hygiene.
13 In July 2024, torrential rains in the Gambella region triggered floods and landslides severely affecting 143,000 people and
causing more than 2,300 fatalities. Wildfires have ravaged ecosystems, including humid forests and protected areas. The
International Organization for Migration (IOM) Displacement Tracing Matrix DTM, 2024 reports that drought in the
Somali region is causing the highest number of displacements caused by climate-induced events (17% of Internally
Displaced Persons (IDPs)), followed by floods, landslides and fires (9% of IDPs).
Cambodia
14 Cambodia faces a high level of disaster risk, ranking 58th out of 191 countries in the 2024 INFORM Risk Index. The
country is especially vulnerable to flood and drought events, with about 80% of its land in the Mekong River and Tonle
Sap regions. Underlying vulnerabilities such as economic and environ-mental challenges further heighten the risk from
climate hazards for disadvantaged populations.
15 Climate change is projected to exacerbate flooding and drought risks and decrease Cambodia’s GDP by as much as 10%
by 2050 compared to projected GDP in 2050 in the absence of climate change21. Agriculture, infrastructure, forestry,
human health, and coastal areas are most affected by climate change. The observed impacts of climate change include
16 Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador (MAATE). (2022). Fourth National Communication to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. MAATE, Quito, Ecuador
17 ibid
18 ibid
19 CSIRO and SPREP. ‘Current and Future Climate for Fiji: Enhanced “NextGen” Projections Technical Report’. CSIRO Technical Report. Melbourne,
Australia: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme
(SPREP), 2021. https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP2021-2149.
20 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/ethiopia/climate-data-projections
21 UNDRR. ‘Disaster Risk Reduction in Cambodia: Status Report 2019’. Bangkok, Thailand, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, 2019. https://www.undrr.org/publication/disaster-risk-reduction-cambodia-status-report-2019.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8
B
more intense rains leading to floods, delayed rainy season and longer dry seasons affecting rain-fed and irrigated crops,
unexpected dry periods during the rainy season, and untimely rains which affect agricultural planning. Dams and poor
river management exacerbate climate change related impacts, increasing vulnerabilities and risks, especially near
waterways such as the Mekong River.
Somalia
16 Critical climate change impacts in Somalia are drought and flood.22 Drought affects nomadic and agro-pastoral
communities who are more vulnerable to prolonged dry seasons and consequent water scarcity and reduced pasture.
Droughts in Somalia result in reduced livestock production and agricultural productivity, livestock loss, food insecurity,
and ultimately, famine and the loss of human life.23 Somalia experiences regular river floods and flash flooding that result
in human casualties and major impacts on the economy and damage to infrastructure. Riverine flooding typically occurs
along the Juba and Shabelle Rivers in southern Somalia and flash floods, in the north along intermittent watercourses.24
Intense rainfall events and subsequent floods have become more frequent, washing away fertile soil and causing
widespread devastation.
Proposed Interventions
17 The project interventions, delivered through two Outputs, intend to assist vulnerable countries in making continuous
strides towards meeting the EW4All vision. This will be achieved by supporting concrete investments in the seven
countries in Output 2, and by establishing a sustainable architecture at the global and regional levels to continuously
support more countries in promoting country-level actions towards EW4All (Output 1).
18 The project addresses critical barriers that prevent the effective generation, dissemination, communication, and use of
early warnings for climate change adaptation, preparedness and response to warnings, through two broad outputs
tailored to specific country needs.
19 Output 1 aims to accelerate and scale up national access to global and regional technical and operational support for
countries to develop comprehensive MHEWS and respective capabilities. Recognizing the need for continuous and
significant efforts to achieve the goal on universal access to early warnings, enabling conditions will be enhanced globally
and regionally to promote country-level actions toward a global coordination and support architecture for EW4All that
will be sustained beyond the project implementation period. The output will be led by the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) and United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR).
20 Output 2 addresses barriers that prevent the implementation of a comprehensive and end-to-end MHEWS in the seven
countries including: 1) Gaps in policies, inter-agency coordination and lack of coherent strategies; 2) Inadequate technical
and scientific capacities; 3) Missing observations particularly in SIDS and Least Developed Countries (LDCs); and 4)
Barriers that prevent effective local actions. The activities will mirror the four pillars of the EW4All EAP and will be
implemented through the national governments with support from UNDP, the EW4All Pillar leads (WMO, UNDRR, ITU,
IFRC) and their in-country national offices and other partner agencies where relevant.
21 The two outputs will work in tandem to accelerate the delivery of the EW4All EAP and provide long-term and
uninterrupted support to critical baseline capacities on which MHEWS are built. These are: i) robust scientific information
and analytics on weather, water and climate hazards and vulnerabilities within National Meteorological and Hydrological
Services (NMHSs), National Disaster Risk Management Authorities (NDMAs) and relevant sectors to support greater and
more diverse understanding of disaster risk and its underlying factors, with greater Impact Based Forecasting (IbF) to
inform decision-making and planning; ii) effective internal coordination among various government entities that are
responsible for different elements of managing a national EWS; and iii) a long-term financing plan to maintain the
necessary hydrometeorological infrastructure, and community level capacities to receive, understand and respond to
EWS thus enhancing adaptive capacities at national levels to protect lives and livelihoods.
22 GFDRR 2024, Somalia Coastal Flood: https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/226-somalia/CF
23 National Drought Plan For Somalia, 2020.
https://www.unccd.int/sites/default/files/country_profile_documents/FINAL%20NATIONAL%20DROUGHT%20PLAN%20FOR%20SOMALIA%28final%29%2016%20
Dec%202020%28%20PDF%20version%29.pdf
24 FAO 2022. Somalia water and land information management. Food and Agriculture Organization. http://www.faoswalim. org

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9
B
22 Summary of proposed interventions in participating countries
23 To be able to address the climate change induced and exacerbated risks highlighted above, through MHEWS and
associated early actions/responses ahead of an anticipated weather/climate event, each country will need to develop
and strengthen their existing MHEWS, strategies, policies and protocols to mobilize resources and people. This MCP will
address these country-specific requirements, which are given below and based on extensive consultations with national
stakeholders (government, NGOs and CSOs), as well as the EW4ALL Pillar leads (UNDRR, WMO, ITU, IFRC).
Antigua and Barbuda
24 This project will update and align disaster management legislation and policies with international standards, including
modernizing the Disaster Management Act, integrating disaster risk reduction (DRR) into sectoral policies, and
strengthening EWS for pandemics. The nationally defined EW4All implementation plan emphasizes improving national
strategic plans for emergency management agencies and promoting data-sharing collaborations. Enhancing public
awareness and understanding of hazards and disaster risk, including exposure and vulnerability, through a
comprehensive communication strategy is also proposed. An online risk data platform will be created which is accessible
to stakeholders and the public. Hazard maps will be updated along with exposure and vulnerability models and climate
change analyses for critical sectors covering both hazards and risks across multiple scenarios will be conducted. The
project will incorporate indigenous knowledge and practices into the national EWS and improve disaster risk knowledge
in schools.
25 The project will strengthen the Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Services (ABMS) by improving infrastructure for real-
time monitoring of hydro-meteorological data, for hydrological and marine monitoring and for routine operations and
broadcasting activities. It will improve telecommunications and broadcasting infrastructure, conduct country assessments
on network infrastructure resilience, and set up communication campaigns to raise awareness of EWS. Under the project,
a National Emergency Telecommunication Plan (NETP) will be developed and adoption of the Common Alert Protocol
(CAP) will be supported. The project will implement networks configured to respond to assistive technologies for people
with disabilities. It will also support the adoption of the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA)
Model MHEWS Policy 2020, and integrating CAP procedures and impact-based forecasting (IbF) into local response
systems. Finally, the project will enhance community disaster response teams, providing training and equipment for first
responders, and will support the government to adopt a dedicated financing mechanisms and structured early action
measures for pre-impact actions based on the needs of vulnerable groups.
Cambodia
26 The project proposes to improve and update platforms for data integration by enhancing data management protocols
and security and generating risk knowledge at the national level. It will develop a comprehensive approach to disaster
management, focusing on human resource development in EWS, particularly for women and those with disabilities.
Additionally, early warning dissemination strategies and platforms will be developed to ensure timely and accurate
information reaches all stakeholders.
27 At the sub-national level, the project will develop DRR capacities and implement community-based EWS for floods and
lightning to ensure access to improved weather information. It will provide training for community members in
emergency preparedness and response, focusing on the most vulnerable populations using the government's Shock
Resistant Social Protection frameworks. By strengthening local capacities and integrating community-focused strategies,
the project aims to build a more resilient and prepared Cambodia at all levels.
Chad
28 The intervention in Chad will cover the four pillars of EW4ALL and address underlying institutional and regulatory barriers
through a cross-pillar approach to governance and coordination issues, considering the critical need for data
interoperability and holistic, multi-hazard knowledge generation and management. It will complement existing
programmes including the Systematic Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) Investment Funding and will build on
community based early warning initiatives by bringing in innovations allowing the dissemination of intelligible and
actionable alerts, risk education and preparedness information to the public.

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10
B
29 The intervention will promote a people-centered approach by strengthening risk knowledge, gender analysis, and
community-based research to identify and act on trust and perception issues. It will support local and devolved
authorities responsible for crisis management while integrating anticipatory action into response frameworks. Significant
stakeholder engagement, and preparatory work on institutional and regulatory frameworks, will be needed to ensure
that coordination and governance approaches are set in motion to support these activities and outcomes.
Ecuador
30 Strengthened governance and coordination will be established through a robust regulatory and institutional framework
for MHEWS. The project will support the establishment of a functional regulatory framework for MHEWSs and the
development of a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS), including coordination with National Gender and
Development (GAD) initiatives. A National Climate Finance Framework will be developed to ensure sustainable climate
services and create a comprehensive climate data management strategy with standardized data frameworks, including a
climate data centre with a user interface. Governance capacities will be enhanced through the definition of Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for each hazard. A harmonized Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning (MEAL)
strategy will ensure effective tracking of project outcomes and integration of lessons learned.
31 Disaster risk knowledge and observations will be enhanced through developing methodologies for risk assessments and
implementing these assessments to create a robust data collection and risk database. Specific actions include conducting
hazard and risk assessments and establishing a Multi-Hazard Risk Platform for the dissemination of risk information.
Observations and monitoring networks will be strengthened by rehabilitating and integrating existing monitoring systems
and improving data management and telemetry capabilities. Strengthening MHEWS forecasting capacity through
improving access to, and use of Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models will focus on extending forecasting
capacity, enhancing now-casting, improving assimilation processes, and adopting ensemble forecasting techniques. IbF
will be developed for specific hazards such as floods, landslides, droughts, and extreme temperatures, including pilot
projects to test these forecasts.
32 Warning dissemination systems will be strengthened through mapping stakeholders and focal points for receiving and
disseminating alerts, establishing a multi-level and inter-institutional communication protocol, and generating binding
documents to ensure effective communication. Permanent operational mechanisms will be set up for warning
dissemination and activation of necessary actions. The project will enhance message dissemination by identifying priority
alert mechanisms, implementing cell broadcasting, strengthening alternative communication means, and developing a
warning platform using CAP. The project will analyze existing warning content, standardize communication bulletins, and
generate alerts and notices in various languages with an inclusive approach. Raising awareness through educational
communication strategies and drills at national and local levels will also be emphasized, along with integrating Indigenous
Knowledge Systems (IKSs) into MHEWS Preparedness protocols will be developed by assessing regulatory frameworks
and standardizing methodologies for Community Emergency Plans and supporting their implementation. The project
aims to strengthen disaster response capacities by assessing and enhancing municipal disaster management units,
including improving technical capacities and equipment. Anticipatory action protocols will be developed, including
reviewing and implementing existing protocols for El Niño and droughts.
Ethiopia
33 The project will address gaps in the implementation of each of the four EW4All pillars, identified in the Ethiopia Impact-
Based Multi-Hazard Early Warning Early Action National Roadmap 2023-2030, complementing existing programmes and
projects and contributing to the EW4All objectives. The project will support and ensure coordination with national Pillar
leads and stakeholders, and relevant UN, non-governmental organizations (NGO) international organizations and civil
society organizations (CSO) supporting the EW4All initiative in Ethiopia.
34 A national disaster risk database will be created, coordinated by the Ethiopian Disaster Risk Management Commission
(EDRMC), with contributions from all sector Agencies/Ministries to collect and develop multi-hazard data and risk
analyses and strengthening the Woredas risk profiles in priority areas with compilation and analysis of hazard, exposure
and vulnerability data. The Ethiopia Meteorological Institute (EMI) will upgrade observing stations and coverage in East
and South-East areas of the country, improve data sharing, and develop specific gender-based EWS focusing on women,
elderly and children.

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11
B
35 Media communications channels will be developed according to types of audience, including vulnerability and gender-
based issues. The project will build capacities of communications specialists to address media, and of journalists to
communicate about disaster risk, produce media content about disaster risk, identify mitigation measures and
anticipatory actions and put in place an Emergency Call short code. Disaster responses will be coordinated jointly by the
Ethiopian Red Cross Society (ERCS) and EDRMC who will develop multi-hazard Anticipatory Action plans linked to a
national financing mechanism (funding reserve) at national and local levels. This will include inter-sectoral/ministerial
agreement on multi-hazard alert thresholds, development of community-based early-warning systems in priority areas,
stockpiling and preposition of essential emergency stock at national level and in identified priority areas (food and non-
food), in cooperation with private sectors and mainstream Anticipatory Action as part of emergency preparedness and
response planning, integrated into social protection mechanisms.
Fiji
36 The project will strengthen governance and coordination through development and implementation of protocols and
relevant mechanisms, including protocols and SOPs for data sharing among MHEWS agencies to enhance collaboration
and legal frameworks. It will establish interagency working group for data exchange, analyze laws related to data
exchange, establish Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) between authorities for early warnings, and create protocols
for data sharing. The project will additionally enhance coordination among stakeholders in developing MHEWS plans and
establish collaboration mechanisms among government, non-government, and community levels. Training workshops for
national and sub-national trainers will be undertaken along with strengthening of community disaster management
committees.
37 A robust tracking system for assessing hazard impacts and future risks will be established. It will expand the necessary
location-specific and targeted forecasting to all areas are affected by hazards. The project will address challenges in
accessing and sharing disaster data by improving infrastructure and data utilization. It will standardize risk assessment
methodologies and parameters in Fiji, including disaster data; creating a centralized database system to store risk
information across sectors and disaggregated by gender, age, and disability; and improving infrastructure to collect and
analyze data for climate projection applications. The project will improve the expansion of river gauges to un-gauged
locations. The project will upgrade observation networks, including Automatic Weather Station (AWS) installation,
spares, and training. It will upgrade TB3 and AWS data loggers to utilize historical climate data for enhancing EWS and
expand location-specific predictions and develop a scientifically based drought risk map for Fiji. A drought monitoring
system for health and food security will be established. It will strengthen the use of AI and a centralized database for
forecasting and early warning.
38 The project will support the implementation of cell broadcasts and help establish a regulatory framework for mobile
manufacturers to support it, specifically focusing on automated systems and mobile coverage in rural areas and for
fishermen at sea. The project will activate the National Emergency Telecom Cluster, develop SoPs/contingency plans,
automate EWS communication dissemination and improve warnings through mass messaging, utilize traditional
knowledge and enhance national and regional communications. Communities based response plans will be developed to
respond to early warnings based on previous successful implementations, focusing on how they access and act on
received messages. Traditional and local knowledge will be incorporated into the local level EWS, as well as reviewing and
integrating anticipatory actions into national and community-based disaster management plans.
Somalia
39 Somalia’s EW4ALL project activities contribute directly to the realisation of the proposed activities under Somalia’s
National Roadmap for Implementation of EW4All 2024-2027. The project will develop a comprehensive Risk Assessment
Framework including hazard risk assessment methodology harmonised with regional approaches and international
framework-based targets and indicators. Using the framework, hazard risk assessments will be undertaken for national
and local levels and applied/interpreted and translated for critical considerations of key vulnerability factors. A database
of disaster impact data and loss and damage tracking is also to be established. The project will develop disaster risk
knowledge materials and communication for national and local levels, which include maps of multiple hazards that
identify specific geographic areas, sectors and groups, tailored for EWS and DRR plans and local risk management plans.
Climate risk summaries of key vulnerability factors will be developed which are accessible for national and local levels.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12
B
The project will support building capacity and coordination for applying improved disaster risk knowledge at national and
local levels through key training and enhancing public awareness and education through a national campaign to
empower communities.
40 The project will also strengthen the harmonization of early warning data collection, analysis and exchange between
federal line ministries, sectorial offices and regional bodies, as well as improving data automation, modelling and
forecasting of early warning. It will undertake activities to improve the interoperability and early warning information
exchange between sectors. The project will invest in accessible nationwide warning dissemination and communication.
These will include early warning communication strategies and SOPs being established for early warning information,
communication and dissemination governance, functions, roles and responsibilities, impact-based forecast and warning
services (IBFWS), and CAP. It will establish comprehensive infrastructure networks and early warning dissemination
services and equipment which cover simulation exercises, CAP adoption, telecommunication service provider
agreements, automated system setups and protocols for AA and communication strategies and feedback mechanisms,
amongst others.
41 The project will emphasize the building of local preparedness capacities. The project will support inclusive, people-
centred EW4All by bolstering local networks to receive and disseminate information and last-mile connectivity. Finally,
the project will enhance preparedness for timely responses and early actions by improving response and recovery;
disaster preparedness measures for early actions. This includes developing participatory, gender-responsive disaster
preparedness measures and plans for district levels, as well as engaging policy, legislation and strategies to integrate
Anticipatory Action and preparedness, forecast based plans and protocols/EAPs and SOPS.
Climate results/benefits
42 The MCP will establish and strengthen the role of MHEWS in informing decision as a foundation for risk informed
development processes. It is aligned with the Agenda for Sustainable Development,25 specifically SDG 13 and SDGs 1, 2,
9, 11, 12 and 15. The project will reduce disaster risk and the impacts of shocks and hazard events by supporting national
strategic guidelines and frameworks towards achievement of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
203026, and create a regional support framework as well as direct action in selected countries to address the four
priorities of the Sendai call for action.27 It contributes specifically to target G of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction.28 The project contributes to the priorities identified in Article 8 of the Paris Agreement29 by supporting the
following areas of cooperation: i) EWS; ii) emergency preparedness; iii) slow onset events; iv) events that may involve
irreversible and permanent loss and damage; v) comprehensive risk assessment and management; and vi) resilience of
communities, livelihoods and ecosystems.
43 In sum, the project supports achieving global targets in reducing exposure to climate changes impacts, with a strong
focus on those most vulnerable. It will lay the foundations for further projects and the supporting mechanisms that are
needed by countries in establishing, operating and expanding the coverage of effective, end-to-end MHEWS. Regional
and global facilities and networks for technical and financial support will be strengthened. Implementation strategies and
approaches from past projects and initiatives will feed into effective and pragmatic project design, which address the
unique constraints under which NMHS, NDMA and other stakeholders operate. This will specifically include the
challenges and contexts of SIDS and LDCs, those with limited infrastructure or in fragile and conflict affected states.
25 United Nations, “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,” 2015.
26 UN, “Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 - 2030” (United Nations, 2015); UNFCCC, “The Cancun Adaptation Framework” (Cancun,
2010); International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, “Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disasters” (United Nations, 2007); World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, “Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World:
Guidelines for Natural Disaster Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation” (Yokohama, Japan: United Nations, 1994).
27 UNISDR, “Build Back Better in Recovery, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction,” 2017.
28 UNDRR and WMO, “Global Status of Multi-Hazard Early Warning System: Target G,” 2022.
29 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Paris Agreement,” 2015.

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13
B
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION
B.1. Climate context
44 Climate hazards and associated risks (impacts, exposures and vulnerabilities)
45 Approximately half the global population of 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in countries or regions that are highly sensitive
to climate change30. Most live in LDCs, SIDS and Africa with limited MHEWS and are unable to undertake anticipatory
action and risk reducing measures at scale.31 The acceleration of climate risks is outpacing the financial flows towards
adaptation, the requirements of which are estimated to be 5-10 times higher and will increase to USD 160-340 billion by
2030 and USD 315-565 billion by 2050.32 Human populations will be exposed to the highest magnitude of one to three
climate hazards concurrently by the turn of the century. Some coastal regions will face up to six different hazards
concurrently.33
46 The Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region has seen the strongest warming trend of about 0.2 °C per decade on
record, warming faster than global averages with temperatures projected to rise by 1.5 to 2.5 °C by 2050. Prolonged
droughts have affected multiple sectors, including agriculture, energy, transportation, and water supply. Droughts
combined with higher temperatures and lower humidity have triggered wildfires in the region. Sea levels have risen at a
higher rate than the global mean and tropical storms such as Fiona, Lisa and Ian caused extensive damage as did floods
and landslides triggered by heavy rain which also caused hundreds of deaths.34 Climate change-driven impacts and risks
are amplified for small islands, where more severe and frequent hurricanes compound the impacts of sea level rise,
storm surge and coastal erosion, flooding and salinisation of water bodies and aquifers, threatening coastal communities
and infrastructure.35 In Central and South America, changes in the timing and magnitude of precipitation and extreme
temperatures are affecting agricultural production among subsistence farmers. This includes more frequent long dry
spells, reduced precipitation and altered rainfall during the start and end of the rainy season. Warming temperatures
have further increased the transmission of vector borne diseases.36
47 In Antigua and Barbuda these regional changes lead to (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• Increases in the frequency of high intensity (category 4 and 5 hurricanes), leading to increases in storm surge,
coastal flooding and high winds;
• Increases in drought intensity, reducing freshwater in groundwater and increasing saline intrusion;
• Rising sea levels lead to increases in coastal flooding, exacerbated by low-lying geography.
48 In Ecuador climate risks include (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• Increases in rainfall and temperature extremes which increase the risk of flooding, landslides and mudflows
compounded with volcanic ash;
• Intensification of droughts reduce water quantity and quality;
• Increasing temperatures expand the range of disease-transmitting vectors (dengue and malaria).
30 The UN Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation, “Early Warnings for All - Executive Action Plan 2023-2027”
(World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 2023).
31 IFRC, “IFRC Operational Framework for Anticipatory Action 2021-2025,” 2022.
32 UNEP, “Adaptation Gap Report 2022: Too Little, Too Slow. Climate Adaptation Failure Puts World at Risk,” 2022.
33 Camilo Mora et al., “Broad Threat to Humanity from Cumulative Climate Hazards Intensified by Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Nature Climate Change
8, no. 12 (December 2018): 1062–71, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0315-6.
34 World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), State of the Climate in Latin America and the Caribbean 2022, WMO-No. 1322 (Geneva, Switzerland:
WMO, 2023).
35 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), ed., “Small Islands,” in Climate Change 2022 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: Working
Group II Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023),
2043–2122, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325844.017.
36 Castellanos, Edwin J., Maria Fernanda Lemos, Laura Astigarraga, Noemí Chacón, Nicolás Cuvi, Christian Huggel, Liliana Miranda, et al. ‘Central and
South America’. In Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by Hans-Otto Pörtner, Debra Cynthia Roberts, Melinda M. B. Tignor, Elvira S. Poloczanska, Katja
Mintenbeck, Andrès Alegría, Marlies Craig, et al. Cambridge University Press, 2022.

--- Table 1 on Page 16 ---
 | PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION | 
 | B.1. Climate context | 

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14
B
49 In the South-West Pacific, TCs, floods, droughts, sea level rise and ocean acidification have had significant impacts on
people, economies and ecosystems. The region is influenced by both the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the
Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD)37. Most of the South-West Pacific shows upper-ocean (0–700 m) warming since 1993, with
rates exceeding 2–3 times the global average in the tropical Pacific. Sea-level rise in the eastern Indian Ocean, western
tropical Pacific, and south and north mid-latitude Pacific are also higher than the global mean. Observed sea surface
temperatures have increased in tropical western Pacific Ocean and Rainfall has decreased in parts of the Pacific islands.
This drying trend is expected to continue in the coming decades, except in parts of western and equatorial Pacific. Heavy
rainfall events will increase in the western tropical Pacific and the higher evapotranspiration is expected to amplify or
partially offset the effect of decreases or increases in rainfall respectively, resulting in increased aridity in parts of the
Pacific under the 2°C global warming and above scenario. The intensity and frequency of TCs will increase and, together
with sea level rise will contribute to storm-surges leading to extreme coastal water levels in most regions in the Pacific
islands38.
50 In Fiji these regional changes lead to (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• Current warming of 0.2C per decade is expected to accelerate, reaching 1.3-2.5C above pre-industrial
temperatures by 2070;
• Greatest impacts are due to typhoons (F$500 million in annual expected losses – 5% GDP), the most intense of
which are expected to increase in frequency due to climate change;
• Increases in rainfall intensity will increase the likelihood of 1/100 yr floods with expected losses of F$ 2 billion;
• Drought and coastal salinization due to SLR and storm surge affects crop production, leading to food imports.
51 Climate hazards in sub-Saharan Africa include floods, droughts, storms and landslides. Floods have caused widespread
damage to infrastructure and crops and have contributed to waterborne diseases. Droughts have resulted in crop failures
leading to food and water insecurity while storms have damaged infrastructure and crops and lead to loss of lives.
Landslides, which are linked to heavy rain have also contributed to deaths and damages to infrastructure and crops. Most
African countries will face increasingly high temperature climates, with increased mean and extreme temperatures,
including increased heat waves as a consequence of climate change. Increased droughts are expected over large parts of
southern Africa, decreased precipitation in Northern Africa at 2°C global warming. The intensity of heavy rainfall is also
expected to increase, increasing exposure to pluvial and riverine flooding across all but north and southwestern Africa39.
52 In Chad these regional changes lead to (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• Successive droughts have affected the food security and livelihoods of households across large swathes of the
country, with 1.5 million people affected in 1981-85, and 2.4 million people affected in 2009-2010. The most
recent drought in 2022 affected 2.1 million people;
• Floods (riverine and pluvial) rendered 121,088 people homeless. These disasters led to a total of 10,556
recorded deaths, of which 67% were a result of viral or bacterial disease epidemics such as cholera, meningitis
and measles;
• Climate change is expected to increase temperatures 2.1°C to 4.3°C (very likely range) by 2080, with more very
hot days leading to greater incidences of heat stress and reduced agricultural labour production;
• More variable rainfall is likely to lead to great extremes of drought and flood, with reductions in yields of maize
and other crops.
53 In Ethiopia climate risks include (see Appendix 1 for further details):
37 World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), State of the Climate in South-West Pacific, WMO-No. 1324 (Geneva, Switzerland: WMO, 2023).
38 Valérie Masson-Delmotte et al., eds. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896.
39Christopher H. Trisos et al., ‘Africa’. In Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by Hans-Otto Pörtner et al. Cambridge University Press, 2022.

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15
B
• Droughts cause substantial economic damage, with a 1/5 yr return period leading to losses exceeding US$1
billion, and a 1-in-100 year drought event resulting in losses of over US$3 billion;
• Flooding also has a severe impact on GDP, with a flood event with a 1/25 yr return period causing a 3.3%
deviation in GDP baselines, and a 1/100 yr flood leading to a 7% deviation;
• Heat stress results in significant losses due to its impact on labour productivity and livestock yields.
Infrastructure damage, particularly to roads and bridges, can incur annual costs of up to US$755 million;
• Climate change is expected to increase the damages from all three risks due to increases in temperatures and
extreme rainfall, coupled with seasonally dependent reductions in average rainfall.
54 Somalia is considered to have the least capacity to respond and recover from extreme weather events.40 Climate risks for
Somalia include (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events are projected to increase with potential impacts of
flooding and soil erosion.41 The higher rainfall and runoff expected across the various climate scenarios, are
likely to lead to increased flash flooding.42 In 2023 around 2.48 million people were affected, with over 1.2
million displaced. 43 The 2023 floods also resulted in the loss of 188 lives.44
• Increased frequency, persistence and intensity of droughts in Somalia are likely.45 Climate change projections
suggest that the duration, frequency and intensity of droughts will increase by the end of the 21st Century under
all scenarios and that drought areas will increase by 16 per cent, 36 per cent and 54 per cent under increasing
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) (2.6, 4.6, 8.5 respectively).46 Prolonged dry seasons result in
water scarcity, reduced grazing land, reduced livestock production, livestock perishes, reduced agricultural
productivity, food insecurity, and ultimately, famine and the loss of human life.47 During 2015 – 2022, 6.1 million
people were affected by drought, and 760,000 - 1.2 million people were displaced by drought.48
• Daily temperature maximums have also increased over the last two decades49 and are projected to continue
over the next decade.50 The very southern areas of Somalia are projected to experience extreme heat, and the
southern and some parts of the northern areas are projected to experience very high heat.51
40 ND-GAIN Index Country Rankings, Somalia. https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/somalia [accessed 7 July 2024]
41 Seneviratne, S. I. & Zhang, X. (2021) Chapter 11: Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate [MassonDelmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L.
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi,
R. Yu & B. Zhou. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change In Press, Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/ wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Chapter_11.pdf.
42 Government of Somalia. (2021). National Water Resource Strategy 2021–2025. Ministry of Energy and Water Resources. https://www.climate-
laws.org/geographies/somalia/policies/national-water-resource-strategy-2021-2025
43 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-
pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf
44 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-
pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf
45 Somalia: Drought Situation Report No.2 (As of 21 December 2021), https://www.unocha.org/publications/report/somalia/somalia-drought-situation-report-
no2-21-december-2021
46 Haile, G.G., Tang, Q., Hosseini-Moghari, S., Liu, X., Gebremicael, T.G., Leng, G., Kebede, A., Xu, X., & Yun, X. (2020). ‘Projected impacts of climate change on
drought patterns over East Africa’, Earth’s Future, 8(7). https://doi. org/10.1029/2020EF001502
47 National Drought Plan For Somalia, 2020.
https://www.unccd.int/sites/default/files/country_profile_documents/FINAL%20NATIONAL%20DROUGHT%20PLAN%20FOR%20SOMALIA%28final%29%2016%20
Dec%202020%28%20PDF%20version%29.pdf
48 IOM, OCHA, UNHCR 2022 Somalia: Drought and Famine Displacement Monitoring Dashboard (September 2022), https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-
drought-and-famine-displacement-monitoring-dashboard-september-2022
49 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, II – Variability and Change in Variability
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/trends-variability-historical
50 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, I – Trends within Variability
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/trends-variability-projections
51 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, High-level Summary: Compound Heat Risk
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/heat-risk

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16
B
55 In Asia, surface temperature has increased in the past century with large increases and extremes in West and Central
Asia, resulting in an increasing trend of growing-season length across the continent and causing strong, more frequent
and longer heat-waves in South and East Asia. There is a decreasing trend of the South Asian summer monsoon
precipitation during the second half of the 20th century. On the other hand decreased precipitation and increased
evapotranspiration in West and Central Asia have contributed to drought conditions and decreased surface runoff52.
56 Climate projections suggest rising temperatures increase the likelihood of the threat of heat-waves across Asia, droughts
in arid and semiarid areas of West, Central and South Asia, floods in monsoon regions in South, Southeast and East Asia,
and glacier melting in the Hindu Kush Himalaya region. A greater warming in North Asia, including the Tibetan Plateau,
Central Asia and West Asia are also projected. The highest levels of warming for extremely hot days are expected to occur
in West and Central Asia with increased dryness of land. Elevation-dependent warming is expected to continue and
leading to glaciers shrinking at varying rates among regions, Temperature rise will be strongest in winter in most regions,
while it will be the strongest on summer in the northern part of West Asia and some parts of South Asia where a desert
climate prevails. The wet-bulb temperature, a measure of heat stress, is likely to approach critical health thresholds in
West and South Asia under the RCP4.5 scenario and in East Asia, under the RCP8.5 scenario. The occurrence of extreme
heat-waves is likely to increase in Asia with a sizeable part of South Asia experiencing heat stress conditions in the future.
A large percentage increase in annual precipitation is projected in South and North Asia, but decrease over the northwest
part of the Arabian Peninsula and increase over its southern part. Both heavy and intense precipitation are projected to
intensify and become more frequent in South, Southeast and East Asia. Monsoon land precipitation is likely to increase in
East, Southeast and South Asia due to increasing moisture convergence by elevated temperature53. There will be a large
increase in flood frequency in monsoon regions in Southeast Asia, Peninsular India, eastern Africa and the northern half
of the Andes54 which without further mitigation efforts, will lead to continued loss of lives and infrastructure55. On the
other hand, the warming in higher latitudes in the Himalayas is likely to adversely affect glacial melt, increasing the
likelihood of glacial lake outbursts and significantly affecting water resources over time56.
57 In Cambodia these regional changes have resulted in the following (see Appendix 1 for further details):
• Over the past 25 years riverine and flash floods have caused the most deaths, with droughts and lightning
causing fewer deaths but higher damages;
• Rising temperatures and decreases in average rainfall during the dry season are expected to increase the
demand for irrigation for most crops, including rice;
• Increases in extreme rainfall during the monsoon are likely to increase riverine and flash flood risks;
• Whilst it is not clear if lightning risk will change, the availability of more moisture, energy and a deeper
convective monsoon under climate change may potentially increase the risk.
MHEWS as an adaptation solution to address the Impacts of climate change amongst the most vulnerable
58 The adverse impacts of climate change and resulting risks often cascade across sectors and regions through multiple
pathways that impact human health, water stress, food systems, economic resilience, infrastructure, and security, as well
as ecosystem structure, species ranges and phenology.57 Insecurity in fragile and conflict affected states, including
conflicts over rights and access to natural resources and water particularly for pastoral communities, raises the risks due
52 R Shaw et al. ‘Asia’. In Climate Change 2022 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: Working Group II Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 1457–1580. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325844.012.
53 ibid
54 Yukiko Hirabayashi et al., ‘Global Flood Risk under Climate Change’. Nature Climate Change 3, no. 9 (September 2013): 816–21.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1911.
55 Oppenheimer, Michael, and Amro Abd-Elgawad. ‘Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities 2’. Notes 23 (2018).
https://www.academia.edu/download/78648590/SROCC_FOD_Ch04_Final.pdf.
56 Wester, Philippus, Arabinda Mishra, Aditi Mukherji, and Arun Bhakta Shrestha, eds. The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment: Mountains, Climate
Change, Sustainability and People. Springer Nature, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92288-1.
57 Hans-O. Pörtner et al., Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability (IPCC Geneva, Switzerland:, 2022).

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17
B
to climate hazards and the need for humanitarian and development assistance.58 Furthermore the expansion, shifts and
intensification of climate hazards due to climate change, leads to the exposure of rural communities and rapidly growing
informal urban settlements, to both higher existing risks and novel risks they have never previously experienced.59 The
case of small islands provides a useful example where geopolitical, environmental, socioeconomic and cultural factors are
interconnected and are likely to increase exposure and vulnerability to the impact of climate change induced sea level
rise, increasingly intense cyclones, coastal flooding and coastal erosion60.
59 Climate change has a disproportional impact on the poor and vulnerable who lack assets and access to information and
resources and are therefore less able to anticipate, adapt or mitigate these impacts.61 Often these communities are
reliant on livelihoods linked to climate sensitive sectors such as agriculture, or are located in regions more exposed to
climate risks, including on small islands, along coastlines and in flood and land-slide prone regions. Many live in un-
planned settlements and shanty-towns and lack basic facilities and infrastructure. Furthermore, vulnerable groups within
communities, including women, women-headed households,62 households with infants, children and elderly, people with
disabilities,63 often lack the means to receive information and respond to climate related disasters.
Well-functioning MHEWSMHEWS allow people, institutions and businesses to prepare for and respond to multiple
hazards (see Table 1), including those occurring simultaneously or whose impact accumulates over time, and their
potential interrelated impacts.64
60 Disaster impacts in countries with high risk and high poverty can negatively affect welfare and cause major setbacks in
human and economic development, with long-term consequences65 to resilience building and well-being. MHEWS are a
proven, effective and feasible climate change adaptation measure that saves lives and provides at least a tenfold return
on investment66. The socio-economic benefits of weather prediction are approximately USD 160 billion per year and
improvements in forecasting and EWS could provide additional annual benefits of US$30 billion67. Economic assessments
in several countries have found strong positive cost-benefit ratios for investment in weather and climate services
between 1:4 to 1:36 from reduction in weather-related economic losses, reduced humanitarian relief costs and
maladaptive risk-coping strategies68.
58 C. Mbow et al., et al. ‘Food Security’. In Climate Change and Land: IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation,
Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems, edited by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), 437–550. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157988.007.
59 ibid.
60 M. Mycoo et.al., ‘Small Islands’. In Climate Change 2022 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: Working Group II Contribution to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2043–2122.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325844.017.
61 Aleksandra Kosanic et al., “An Inclusive Future: Disabled Populations in the Context of Climate and Environmental Change,” Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability 55 (April 2022): 101159, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2022.101159.
62 Yvonne Corcoran-Nantes and Snighda Roy, “Gender, Climate Change, and Sustainable Development in Bangladesh,” ed. Janet McIntyre-Mills, Norma
Romm, and Yvonne Corcoran-Nantes, Balancing Individualism and Collectivism, Contemporary Systems Thinking (Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2018), http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-58014-2_8; Debashish Sarker Dev and Jaime A. Manalo IV, “Gender and Adaptive
Capacity in Climate Change Scholarship of Developing Countries: A Systematic Review of Literature,” Climate and Development, 2023, 1–12; Houria
Djoudi, Maria Brockhaus, and Bruno Locatelli, “Once There Was a Lake: Vulnerability to Environmental Changes in Northern Mali,” Regional
Environmental Change 13, no. 3 (June 2013): 493–508, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-011-0262-5; Alicea Garcia, Petra Tschakert, and Nana Afia
Karikari, “Less Able: How Gendered Subjectivities Warp Climate Change Adaptation in Ghana’s Central Region,” Gender, Place & Culture 27, no. 11
(November 2020): 1602–27, https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369X.2020.1786017.
63 Paul S. Davies and Jeffrey Hemmeter, “Supplemental Security Income Recipients Affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita: An Analysis of Two Years of
Administrative Data,” Population and Environment 31, no. 1-3 (January 2010): 87–120, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-009-0093-1.
64 WMO, “Climate Services for Supporting Climate Change Adaptation Supplement to the Technical Guidelines for The National Adaptation Plan
Process,” Provisional Edition, 2021.
65 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR). ‘Words into Action: A Guide to Multi-Hazard EWSs’. Geneva, 2023.
https://www.undrr.org/media/87690/download?startDownload=20240523.
66 The UN Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation. ‘Early Warnings for All - Executive Action Plan 2023-2027’.
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 2023.
67 SOFF. ‘The Value of Surface-Based Meteorological Observation Data: Costs and Benefits of the Global Basic Observing Network’. Information Brief.
Systematic Observations Financing Facility, October 2020.
68 WMO. ‘Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological and Hydrological Services’. World Meteorological Organization, 2015.

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18
B
Table 1: Summary of how hydrometeorological observations and MHEWS can help in adapting, mitigating and responding to climate
change induced hazards
Hazard Hydrometerological Observations Type of Early Warning Adaptation, Disaster Preparedness
and indices and Response
Drought Standardized Precipitation Index Drought monitoring, seasonal Water conservation, drought-
(SPI), Palmer Drought Severity forecasts, anticipatory/early resistant crop varieties,
Index (PDSI), soil moisture content action triggers, IbFs emergency response plans
Heat Wave Temperature and humidity indices Heat wave warnings, heat Urban green spaces, cooling
(e.g., Heat Index, Wet Bulb Globe health watch/warning centers, public awareness
Temperature), urban heat island systems campaigns, emergency medical
intensity services
Shortened Growing Degree Days (GDD) Phenological models, pasture Crop variety selection, planting
Growing availability assessments date adjustments, agricultural
Season extension services, crop insurance
Flood River stage, discharge, rainfall Flood forecasting, flood Floodplain zoning, evacuation
intensity, soil moisture warning systems, flood plans, flood insurance
inundation mapping
Flash Flood Real-time rainfall intensity, radar- Flash flood warning systems, Emergency response plans, public
estimated rainfall, streamflow nowcasting education, land use planning,
infrastructure resilience
Extreme Rainfall intensity, duration, return Extreme precipitation Storm water management
Precipitation period forecasting, landslide systems, evacuation plans,
Event monitoring infrastructure resilience
Rainfall Precipitation time series, trend Climate change projections, Water storage infrastructure,
Variability analysis seasonal precipitation diversified cropping systems,
forecasts agricultural extension services
Thunderstorm Radar reflectivity, Doppler velocity, Severe thunderstorm Lightning protection, public
lightning detection warnings, nowcasting awareness campaigns, emergency
response plans, building codes
Tropical Satellite imagery, wind speed, Tropical cyclone track and Coastal zone management,
Cyclone atmospheric pressure intensity forecasts, storm evacuation plans, building codes
surge models
Storm Surge Tide gauge data, wind speed, Storm surge forecasting, Coastal protection measures,
atmospheric pressure warning systems evacuation plans, disaster
recovery planning
Sea Level Rise Tide gauge data, satellite altimetry, Sea level rise projections, Coastal retreat, infrastructure
coastal inundation models coastal vulnerability elevation, ecosystem-based
assessments adaptation,
Scenario in the absence of proposed interventions
61 Global warming is on track to cross the 1.5 °C threshold, even if greenhouse gas emissions are substantially reduced in
the near-term.69 This can have unprecedented and potentially catastrophic outcomes on societal wellbeing.70 Local to
regional changes in the intensity and frequency of weather and climate extremes generally scale with global warming and
new evidence strengthens the conclusion that even relatively small incremental increases in global warming cause
significant changes in extremes on the global scale and for large regions.71
62 About 13 million people lose their lives annually due to climate-related impacts on health through pollution, extreme
weather events, forced displacement, food insecurity and pressures on mental health.72 By 2050, the world economy
may lose up to 14% (USD 23 trillion) compared to what world GDP is projected to be in 2050, on account of climate
69 Amy McNally, “FLDAS Noah Land Surface Model L4 Global Monthly 0.1 X 0.1 Degree (MERRA-2 and CHIRPS),” 2018,
https://doi.org/10.5067/5NHC22T9375G.
70 Luke Kemp et al., “Climate Endgame: Exploring Catastrophic Climate Change Scenarios,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, no. 34
(August 2022): e2108146119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108146119.
71 Sonia I. Seneviratne et al., “Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate,” 2021.
72 WHO, “Health and Climate Change,” COP24 Special Report (World Health Organisation, 2018).

--- Table 1 on Page 21 ---
Hazard | Hydrometerological Observations
and indices | Type of Early Warning | Adaptation, Disaster Preparedness
and Response
Drought | Standardized Precipitation Index
(SPI), Palmer Drought Severity
Index (PDSI), soil moisture content | Drought monitoring, seasonal
forecasts, anticipatory/early
action triggers, IbFs | Water conservation, drought-
resistant crop varieties,
emergency response plans
Heat Wave | Temperature and humidity indices
(e.g., Heat Index, Wet Bulb Globe
Temperature), urban heat island
intensity | Heat wave warnings, heat
health watch/warning
systems | Urban green spaces, cooling
centers, public awareness
campaigns, emergency medical
services
Shortened
Growing
Season | Growing Degree Days (GDD) | Phenological models, pasture
availability assessments | Crop variety selection, planting
date adjustments, agricultural
extension services, crop insurance
Flood | River stage, discharge, rainfall
intensity, soil moisture | Flood forecasting, flood
warning systems, flood
inundation mapping | Floodplain zoning, evacuation
plans, flood insurance
Flash Flood | Real-time rainfall intensity, radar-
estimated rainfall, streamflow | Flash flood warning systems,
nowcasting | Emergency response plans, public
education, land use planning,
infrastructure resilience
Extreme
Precipitation
Event | Rainfall intensity, duration, return
period | Extreme precipitation
forecasting, landslide
monitoring | Storm water management
systems, evacuation plans,
infrastructure resilience
Rainfall
Variability | Precipitation time series, trend
analysis | Climate change projections,
seasonal precipitation
forecasts | Water storage infrastructure,
diversified cropping systems,
agricultural extension services
Thunderstorm | Radar reflectivity, Doppler velocity,
lightning detection | Severe thunderstorm
warnings, nowcasting | Lightning protection, public
awareness campaigns, emergency
response plans, building codes
Tropical
Cyclone | Satellite imagery, wind speed,
atmospheric pressure | Tropical cyclone track and
intensity forecasts, storm
surge models | Coastal zone management,
evacuation plans, building codes
Storm Surge | Tide gauge data, wind speed,
atmospheric pressure | Storm surge forecasting,
warning systems | Coastal protection measures,
evacuation plans, disaster
recovery planning
Sea Level Rise | Tide gauge data, satellite altimetry,
coastal inundation models | Sea level rise projections,
coastal vulnerability
assessments | Coastal retreat, infrastructure
elevation, ecosystem-based
adaptation,

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19
B
change, unless decisive action on reducing greenhouse emissions is taken.73 The IPCC report highlights the acute food
insecurity, malnutrition, displacement and insecurity faced by communities in LDCs, who are disproportionally affected
due to poverty, governance challenges, limited access to basic resources and high levels of climate-sensitive livelihoods.74
63 Differences in regional climate between the present day and warming between 1.5 °C and 2 °C are expected to be
widespread across temperature increases and extremes, heavy precipitation events, significant increases in runoff and
flood hazard. There is an increased probability of extreme drought, precipitation deficits, and risks associated with water
availability. Global mean sea level rise between 0.04 – 0.16 m is projected along with an overall increase in multiple and
compounded risks.75, 76 There is a 66% likelihood that the annual average near-surface global temperature between 2023
and 2027 will be more than 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels for at least one year and it is possible that we have already
exceeded the 1.5 °C levels.77 This highlights the need for global coverage of MHEWS and response systems which allow
preparedness activities and preventative and anticipatory action to attenuate the impacts of climate-induced shocks.78
Goal outputs and activities
64 The objective of this MCP is to accelerate the design and implementation of the EW4All initiative through coordinated
global support involving all the key actors across the early warnings value chain. This project, through its country
interventions, will target communities whose livelihoods depend on climate sensitive sectors, those with greater physical
exposure to climate hazards, with clear emphasis on women, poor and vulnerable groups within these communities. It
will lead to the enhanced production of actionable multi-hazard early warnings and IbFs to inform and trigger
preparedness, early and anticipatory actions. It will strengthen multiple channels of communication to ensure timely and
effective dissemination of these warnings and information to the last mile. The project will also prepare disaster
management and supporting agencies at national and the sub-national level as well as communities to make effective use
of these early warnings and advisories for early and anticipatory action which allows them to adapt to, avoid and
facilitate recovery from climate change hazards. Finally it will address barriers to mobilizing financial resources that
prevent many countries from translating early warnings into on-ground action.
65 The underlying assumption for the theory of change of the project is: IF generation, delivery and adoption of multi-hazard
early warning information is improved for effective early and anticipatory action, THEN avoidance of and adaptation to
climate induced natural hazards will be enhanced and the loss of lives and disruption of livelihoods, services and
productive assets will be reduced BECAUSE of improved, effective and timely disaster mitigation and response by
national and sub-national governments, communities and businesses supported by multilateral agencies and private
entities.
Barriers to establishing robust and effective end-to-end MHEWSs
66 The GCF Sector Guidance note on Climate Information and EWS identifies key barriers for effective EWS ranging from a
lack of enabling environments, coordinated interventions, well-managed hydrometeorological operations, to budgetary
constraints and resource mobilization.79 The effective development, generation and use of MHEWS is challenged by the
absence of consistent, reliable and robust sources of technical, human and financial support to and within countries. In
73 Swiss Re Institute, “The Economics of Climate Change: No Action Not an Option,” 2021.
74 Hans-Otto Pörtner et al., eds., “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge University Press, 2022); Hans-Otto Pörtner et al.,
“IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,” Ipcc Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: Geneva, Switzerland 1, no.
3 (2019).
75 Masson-Delmotte, Valérie, Panmao Zhai, Anna Pirani, Sarah L. Connors, Clotilde Péan, Sophie Berger, Nada Caud, et al., eds. Climate Change 2021:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896.; Pörtner, Hans-O.,
Debra C. Roberts, Helen Adams, Carolina Adler, Paulina Aldunce, Elham Ali, Rawshan Ara Begum, Richard Betts, Rachel Bezner Kerr, and Robbert
Biesbroek. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. IPCC Geneva, Switzerland:, 2022.
76 Ove Hoegh Guldberg et al., “Impacts of 1.5 C Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems” (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2018).
77 McCulloch et al., “300 Years of Sclerosponge Thermometry Shows Global Warming Has Exceeded 1.5°C,” 2024.; ‘European State of the Climate 2023 |
Copernicus’. Accessed 23 May 2024. https://climate.copernicus.eu/esotc/2023.
78 World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), “Statement of Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,” March 2022.
79 GCF, “Climate Information and EWSs Sectoral Guide” (Yeonsu: Green Climate Fund, September 2022).

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20
B
this regard, it is important to strengthen the internal mechanisms and capacities by which institutions at the national
level develop and communicate early warning messages, and how these messages are received, understood and utilized
by local responders, communities and populations. These barriers often limit countries’ capacities to provide climate
information services in a manner that effectively reaches all vulnerable communities, economic sectors and livelihoods.
Some of the root causes and barriers associated with these aspects of MHEWS and that need to be addressed are
described below.
Poor strategic planning for long term financial support to MHEWS
67 There is insufficient capital at the global, country and community levels to establish and maintain the observation
networks and equipment needed to generate meaningful weather, climate and hydrological forecasts. Critical socio-
economic observations are also difficult to gather in real time because suitable crowd sourcing and other technologies
are underutilized. These observations are needed to improve our understanding of multi-hazard exposure and
vulnerability and hence risks faced by people and communities. Resources at national, sub-national, and community
levels are not enough to translate forecasts into warnings, share these warnings effectively, and prepare communities,
especially those at risk and vulnerable, to use and respond to them through mitigative actions that have been proven
effective.
68 Limited financial resources and human/institutional capacity to establish and maintain observation networks has led to
gaps in data needed to meet the requirements of the WMO Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS) and the Global
Basic Observing Network (GBON) systems. These systems are used to generate early warning products at the regional
and global levels. The SOFF has been established to address this resource constraint in SIDS and LDCs, and this project will
ensure that investments through SOFF are leveraged and coordinated through additional GCF investments. Many
countries face similar challenges in operating and maintaining their hydro-meteorological and communication
networks.80 Limited awareness about the value of hydrometeorological and communication networks in reducing climate
risks constrains opportunities to raise necessary public budgets. This often leads to the deterioration of existing
installations or the use of equipment that fails to meet required standards, creating challenges in quality control and
interoperability.
69 Efficiency and efficacy of preparedness and early response efforts is constrained by lack of forecast-based planning and
financial resources at the grassroots and municipal levels. This is critical as local governments are often mandated with
maintaining local EWS, particularly last mile access. The inadequacy of mechanisms through which necessary funds and
other resources can be rapidly released before and during emergencies is a significant barrier to early response and
anticipatory action to early warnings needed to mitigate disasters. There is a lack of financing to put in place and
maintain the mechanisms, systems and capacities needed for anticipatory action. Funding is also needed for the actual
implementation of anticipatory action, including within national systems81.
70 Many countries lack a coherent and long-term financing strategy for establishing, rehabilitating and/or maintaining their
soft and hard infrastructure for early warning services. In some countries, it has become challenging to effectively
coordinate available resources to ensure end-to-end systems. Even fewer have the fiscal frameworks to allow for funding
of EWS, particularly those that are maintained by local actors. Such strategies should explore raising resources from
private sources. They need to enhance the capacities and resources to develop comprehensive and compelling proposals
that help unlock funding for projects to set up EWS and address different national priorities and vulnerabilities and
contexts. The absence of a comprehensive gap analysis at the national level prevents these countries from benefiting
from the global and regional support architecture and facilities, such as GCF or the Global Environment Facility (GEF), or
from global financing campaigns which targets donors across different sectors.
80 Alliance for Hydromet Development, “Country Hydromet Diagnostics,” n.d., accessed April 1, 2024; WMO. ‘Hydromet Gap Report 2021’. Alliance for
Hydromet Development, 2021.
81 Also referred to as “build funding” and “fuel funding”, respectively.

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21
B
Limited global, regional and national support for country level actions for a comprehensive MHEWS
71 Technical, scientific and institutional barriers prevent the generation and development of reliable, meaningful and
actionable weather and climate information, as well as its effective communication and use by people, government,
communities and businesses. Absence of such information contributes to the low level of awareness and appreciation of
the value of MHEWS and its associated components, including among policy makers. Many LDCs and SIDS fail to leverage
regional facilities and partnerships for necessary and sustained technical assistance due to limited human capital and
capacities. Consequently, they are excluded from the knowledge exchange, peer-to-peer learning, coordination and
collaboration with key initiatives and frameworks which provide contextual operational support across a wide range of
hazards. This is a barrier to access technical support and information services from regional climate centres, regional
centres of excellence including national and regional academic institutions, initiatives and projects.82.
Inadequate policies and strategies for inter-agency coordination, data sharing and governance for preparedness and
response
72 Inconsistencies in policies, institutional structure and mechanisms that govern the collection and sharing of
hydrometeorological, vulnerability and exposure data can pose a barrier to implementation of international agreements
and frameworks for EWS and DRR.83 National policies often fall short of a comprehensive framework to facilitate private
financing and fail to provide suitable structures to strengthen inclusive, people-centred approaches to early warnings.
Capacity gaps exist in transformational planning for such approaches which would address each country’s unique
"paradigm shift" needs. There are barriers within regions and countries which prevent the effective use of available
climate information and EWS (CIEWS) by line agencies for different sectors, and those responsible for national disaster
response, relief and recovery, particularly civil protection organizations at the district and community levels.
73 In most countries, ministries or departments with independent administrative structures and procedures are involved in
the generation, analysis and use of climate information. Meteorological and hydrological services often reside in different
ministries or departments from those whose expertise is needed in co-developing advisories and provide the sectoral
expertise, for example health and agriculture. Inadequate and inefficient mechanisms for data sharing and coordinated
action between these agencies prevents the development of targeted and IbF84 and scenarios for triggers to inform early
and Anticipatory Action85 or Forecast based Financing86 for relevant sectors and areas87. Furthermore, the Information
and Communication Technology Ministry and telecommunication regulatory authority and private telecommunication
companies are not actively involved or consulted in the design of communications strategies which includes data
transmission from observation stations, dissemination of early warnings and advisories and obtaining feedback from
targeted stakeholders. Insights from behavioral science about how end-users respond to early warnings are also neither
contextualized nor institutionalized in national EWS. Their exclusion results in missed opportunities to take advantage of
the growth in networks and services.
74 The NMHSs often do not have staff or facilities below the provincial or district level, de-linking the generation and use of
CIEWS. The inadequacies and deficiencies in SoPs is a barrier to the dissemination of CIEW using public and private
communications infrastructure. SoPs are often lacking in the development of easily understood, targeted, tailored and
82 These include the IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC), Fully Optimized User Centric Climate Services Value Chain for Southern
Africa (FOCUS-Africa, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC), Pacific Community (SPC), the EU-horizon project and the Mediterranean
and pan-European forecast and EWS against natural hazards (MedEWSa).
83 Jonathan Raikes et al., “The Influence of International Agreements on Disaster Risk Reduction,” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 76
(June 2022): 102999, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2022.102999.
84 Melanie Harrowsmith et al., “The Future of Forecasts: Impact-Based Forecasting for Early Action” (International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies; UK Met Office; World Meteorological Organisation, 2020); Rochelle Campbell, Daniel Beardsley, and Sezin Tokar, “Impact-Based
Forecasting and Warning: Weather Ready Nations” (November 2018); World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), WMO Guidelines on Multi-hazard Impact-based Forecast and Warning Services, WMO (Geneva: WMO, 2015).
85 IFRC, “IFRC Operational Framework for Anticipatory Action 2021-2025,” 2022.
86 WFP, “Forecast-Based Financing - Anticipatory Actions for Food Security,” Sdg Integration (https://sdgintegration.undp.org/forecast-based-financing-
anticipatory-actions-food-security, n.d.), accessed February 10, 2023.
87 UNDRR, “Introductory Guide for Anticipatory Finance”, 2024, https://www.undrr.org/publication/anticipatory-finance-introductory-guide

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22
B
actionable CIEWS for different audiences. Sub-national agencies are often excluded from the dissemination or the use of
CIEWS. There are very few sub-national agencies where procedures exist for the use of CIEWS by communities, for who
they are intended, this is particularly the case in un-planned settlements and remote areas where national services may
not available. Institutional structures at the settlement, village or community level are often weak, have limited roles in
governance and weak linkages with government agencies. Consequently, the mechanisms needed to effectively prepare
for disasters and to implement mitigation and adaptive action at the grassroots are not enabled and/or do not exist.
Inadequate technical and scientific capacities
75 NMHS in developing countries, face a number of technical and scientific challenges and constraints in the generation and
delivery of timely, targeted and contextual CIEWS. The transition to IbF, Anticipatory Action / Forecast Based Financing
increase the requirement for higher resolution spatio-temporal data, technical and scientific expertise as well as facilities
for statistical downscaling, and the ability to develop models and interpreting model outcomes to build scenarios and
triggers to activate early and anticipatory action, including through scalable social protection systems88.
76 NMHS often have insufficient training and capacities required to develop and run models locally. There is therefore a
need to develop in-house skills in these areas, but also, to have the parallel development of CIEWS through regional and
global support arrangements. There is an urgent need for regional centres and relevant academic and research
institutions to support weather and seasonal forecasts as much as possible through provision of data to NHMS and other
agencies involved in the early warning/early action value chain, who in turn need to use those data in conjunction with
other forecasts available through global producing centres, for e.g. the UK Met Office (UKMO), the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecast (ECMWF), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
77 Many countries have a shortage of staff with field data collection, analytical and modelling skills required for the
generation of IbF to inform anticipatory and early action. In many countries the subject course for hydrometeorology is
not existent, resulting in a systemic barrier in the development of skilled professionals to support met services, much less
at a sub national level. The localised nature of CIEWS, creates a greater need to develop national and sub-national
systems as they have better access to local information and contexts. Agencies need to be in a position to conduct local
level monitoring and data gathering on factors that are important for impact-forecasting, such as the changing dynamics
of hazard exposure, social vulnerabilities and disaggregated distribution of assets, access to services and infrastructure at
risk. While regional centres have a role in making first order estimates, it is national institutions that must undertake
more detailed risk mapping and assessments based on both historic loss and damage data as well as risk data that
enables outlook and foresight on the possible impacts of climate change. The number of countries that have accessible,
understandable, usable, and relevant disaster risk information and risk assessments available at the national and local
levels represents the lowest of all Sendai Framework Target G indicators. In large part this is a result of a lack of field
capacities within hydrometeorological systems as well as those related to data processing through new technologies. For
example the field data required for IbF include multidisciplinary vulnerability assessments and tracking of bio-physical
and hydrologic variables such as those pertaining to vegetation (land use and cover), soil properties (saturated
conductivity, erosivity) and hydrology (flow-generation/accumulation and discharge). Processing and visualising this data
require programming skills and use of programming languages and tools. Skills are also required in analysing spatial data
and hydrologic modelling using tools/software and cloud-based tools which leverage large data infrastructure without
the costs associated with setting up such systems locally. Capacities to link forecasts with hydrologic models and the use
of Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools are also lacking. It is these new innovative technologies that paradoxically would allow
met services to address in a more a cost-efficient manner existing gaps in CIEWS coverage and in some cases can provide
solutions to data gaps.
78 Gaps in observational data are particularly severe and persistent in SIDS and LDCs and even in middle income economies.
This is a bottleneck at the start of the EWS value chain about which the international community has been concerned
88 UNDRR, “Analysis of Barriers to Financing and Operationalizing Linkages between Anticipatory Action and Social Protection Systems”, 2023,
https://www.undrr.org/publication/analysis-barriers-financing-and-operationalizing-linkages-between-anticipatory-action

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23
B
about for decades. Many attempts have been made to address the problem. However, substantial investments in
observing systems have not translated into increased observational data sharing or in addressing data gaps effectively.
79 The lack of technical and financial capacities at a national level has acted as a barrier to adoption of innovative digital
technologies. These technologies can enable a transformational shift towards solutions that address the lack of
consistent and reliable field monitoring such as the use of IoT based sensors to autonomously measure and transmit data
using mobile networks. Generation of timely early warnings, particularly in remote areas, requires use of sensors and
systems which are autonomous and "off-grid". Many of these, such as water level recorders, have dual channels for real-
time warnings to local communities as well as transmission of data to NMHS for further analysis and interpretation.
Nonetheless, operation and maintenance (O&M) of these systems can present challenges for NMHS who have a shortage
of ground personnel and for communities without the necessary technical skills.
80 Effective local actions based on MHEWS are prevented by a number of barriers.
Ineffective or absence of dissemination to the last mile
81 Many countries have significant gaps in telecommunication networks which exclude some of the most climate vulnerable
communities in rural areas, especially nomadic and migratory pastoral groups and forest dwelling communities. Access to
early warnings and advisories can also be a serious constraint among poor rural communities who may not own phones
or have electricity to power radios. Insufficient capacities for translation, contextual rephrasing and packaging of early
warning information and advisories for multiple channels can prevent end-users from receiving such information. Most
MHEWS are developed through a centralized process. In large and diverse countries, this fail to sufficiently address local
contexts and tailor risk communications to diverse audiences, and tend to use technical terms in major national
languages. They are not adequately designed around end-users, are not people-centred and warning messages are often
not timely, actionable or understood by local actors. Warning messages and advisories usually lack the local context and
are not tailored to the different needs of targeted communities, including the elderly, persons with disabilities and health
impairments, female-headed households, ethnic minorities and IDPs, and vulnerable children. The design and content of
early warnings often fail to address the differential needs of end-users arising from differential access to information,
resources and representation. This prevents the most vulnerable members of communities to access early warnings or
take appropriate action.
Insufficient national and local level disaster preparedness and anticipatory action planning
82 There is a major gap in terms of national and/or local plans setting out anticipatory action and development and use of
triggers which determine when to act, roles of different actors in the early warning value chain, to define the relevant
and most appropriate and effective types of anticipatory actions for these actors. Under one third of countries globally
have reported on the percentage of local governments that have plans to act on early warnings (Sendai Framework
Monitor, Target G indicator G4 ), suggesting they may not have these plans. Furthermore, the percentage of local
governments that have a plan to act is very low even among the countries that have reported on this indicator. Few
governments have integrated anticipatory action into their national systems, although their number is growing.
83 Equitable and meaningful decision-making opportunities and roles for women in the design and management of MHEWS
and related areas are significantly limited.89 There are gender gaps in access to information, technology and digital
services. For example, in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa where, more than half a million women are excluded from
the mobile connection and the gender gap scores are 41% and 37%, respectively.90 Inadequate resources at the local
institution level often prevent women from leading preparedness and coordinating effective inter-agency responses to
follow up warning messages with local action. Barriers that limit effective use of CIEWS by first responders and
communities include local socio-cultural and economic contexts, infrastructure and services that determine the ability of
communities to adopt measures that mitigate the impact of climate-induced disasters.91 First responders and
communities include technical limitations in accessing CIEWS, their contextual interpretation, particularly in the case if
89 UNDRR, “Inclusive and Accessible Multi-Hazard Early-Warning Systems: Learning from Women-Led Early-Warning Systems in the Pacific,” 2022.
90 GSMA, “The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2022,” Mobile for Development, June 2022.
91 Pörtner et al., Climate Change 2022, 2022.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24
B
indigenous and minority populations, and inadequate procedures and plans to take anticipatory action or to mitigate
impacts of disasters. There is almost a complete absence of information on dissemination and evacuation procedures
that consider people with visual or hearing impairments, physical disabilities. In the few cases where evacuation
procedures and facilities exist, they are male-centred and designed for persons without disabilities.
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram
84 Addressing the barriers to effective end-to-end MHEWS require engagements at different levels of organisation,
governance systems and across multiple institutions. The project will need to operate at different scales and leverage
new and innovative technologies while ensuring the interventions engage meaningfully with local communities, their
own knowledge, understanding and coping strategies for climate related disasters.
85 The project is structured so that Output 1 provides support at the regional and global levels to set up, scale up and
accelerate technical and operational support to countries with the ambition to enhance their MHEWS coverage and
capacities. This output will catalyze regional and global collaboration among actors active in EWS support, including
through regular coordination, joint action, and exchanges to reduce duplication, save scarce resources, and better
leverage the comparative advantage of diverse actors to deliver shared value to countries aligned to the EW4All call to
action. The output will strengthen strategic planning for long term financing for maintaining such a support architecture
to avoid fragmented, discontinuous, and uncoordinated support to countries in improving end-to-end MHEWS.
86 Output 2 ties together the four key components of the EW4All EAP by addressing barriers in observations, risk
knowledge, dissemination and disaster preparedness and response at the country level. Activities under Output 2 address
gaps at the national level, these are designed to ensure effective use of MHEWS for disaster preparedness and response.
Hence the investments in observations will be guided by the vulnerability analysis and specifically seek to facilitate
development of impact based and actionable early warnings for early and anticipatory action by national actors on the
ground. Engagements with the governments will also seek strengthening of institutional mechanisms and governance for
more effective preparedness and response to attenuate the scale of recovery needs. Dissemination systems will be
improved to ensure usable multi-hazard risk information is transferred to end-users, including women and vulnerable
groups within communities, along with guidance on effective mitigation actions to reduce impacts (loss and damage).
Finally, the work with communities will ensure disaster planning and preparedness as well as community-based systems
that hybridize new technologies and local knowledge.
87 The project will improve technical support mechanisms and financial flows to meet the needs of countries (particularly
LDCs and SIDS) to establish, operate and maintain their national end-to-end MHEWS. To do so, it will establish regional
and national collaborations, multiple funding instruments and complementary mechanisms that maximize country
ownership and impact. The project will facilitate national investment planning into the MHEWS value chain, including the
development of national roadmaps, investment pipelines, and approaches to sustain national EWS through state and
private sector resources, and innovative finance. This will help address gaps across the continuum of country-specific
technical and financial support needs for end-to-end MHEWS, translating country visions into concrete investments.
88 The project has two broad outputs and associated activities which address the barriers described above. These outputs
and activities are mutually supportive and reinforcing (Figure 1).

--- Table 1 on Page 27 ---
 | B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram | 

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25
B
Figure 1: Interactions between the two proposed outputs
89
90 Output 1: Enhancing enabling conditions, both globally and regionally, to promote country-level actions towards the
EW4All goals. This output will address barriers pertaining to both support for country level actions as well as gaps in
global and regional policies, standards and inter-agency coordination to scale up coherent national strategies for end-to-
end MHEWS. The output will improve existing global support architecture to scale-up access to technical expertise,
operational support, collaboration and knowledge sharing and the existing global support architecture and will be led by
WMO and UNDRR in collaboration with global and regional organizations.
91 Output 2: Accelerating actions towards EW4All goals, will implement national level projects and priority investments
listed under the four pillars in the EAP, based on the context of each participating country. This will be led by UNDP,
WMO, UNDRR, ITU, IFRC, in collaboration with other key partners.

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26
B

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27
B
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)
MRA 1 MRA 2 MRA 3 MRA 4 ARA 1 ARA 2 ARA 3 ARA 4
Outcome Energy Low-emission Building, Forestry and Most Health, well- Infrastructure Ecosystems
number generation transport citiies, land use vulnerable being, food and built and
and access industries, people and and water environment ecosystem
appliances communities security services
Outcome 1 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒
Outcome 2 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒
Outcome 3 ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
Co-benefit Co-benefit
number Environmental Social Economic Gender Adaptation Mitigation
Co-benefit 1 ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐
Co-benefit 2 ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐
Co-benefit 3 ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐
B.3. Project/programme description
92 This project addresses the four key elements of MHEWS, i) disaster risk knowledge; ii) detection, observation, monitoring,
analysis and forecasting of hazards; iii) warning dissemination mechanisms and communication; and iv) preparedness and
response capabilities.92
93 Effective MHEWS depend on coordination with and across different sectors and at multiple levels and require feedback
mechanisms which allow for their improvement.93 The involvement of both national and local institutions and
communities in dissemination of warnings and response is a critical component of successful MHEWS.94
94 Addressing persistent gaps in establishing and managing an end-to-end MHEWS at the country level is a key requirement.
The proposal recognises that there are multiple on-going initiatives and mechanisms that aim to enhance countries'
climate information and EWS. These programmes and initiatives in the participating countries is summarized in Table 2 in
the appendices. The proposal also recognizes that an effective end-to-end MHEWS can only be built on timely and long-
term support for critical baseline capacities such as: i) robust scientific risk information and analytics on weather,
hydrology, environmental conditions, climate hazards and socio-economic, infrastructure and other dynamic
vulnerabilities; ii) optimised internal coordination among various government entities that are responsible for managing
different elements of a national EWS value chain; and iii) a long-term financing plan to maintain the necessary
hydrometeorological infrastructure, and community level capacities to receive, understand and respond to EWS through
risk-informed preparedness and response actions. These baseline capacities in many countries, especially in LDCs and
SIDS, can be built only through long-term support; the project will therefore strengthen the existing architecture and
create the environment in which countries can better utilise timely, long-term, uninterrupted support.
92 UNDRR, “EWS”; The UN Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation, “Early Warnings for All - Executive Action Plan
2023-2027,” 2023.
93 UNDRR and WMO, “Global Status of Multi-Hazard EWSs: Target G,” 2022.
94 Matthew L. Collins and Naim Kapucu, “EWSs and Disaster Preparedness and Response in Local Government,” Disaster Prevention and Management:
An International Journal, 2008.

--- Table 1 on Page 30 ---
 | B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization | 

--- Table 2 on Page 30 ---
 | GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) |  |  |  | GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) |  |  | 
 | MRA 1 | MRA 2 | MRA 3 | MRA 4 | ARA 1 | ARA 2 | ARA 3 | ARA 4
Outcome |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Energy | Low-emission | Building, | Forestry and | Most | Health, well- | Infrastructure | Ecosystems
number | generation | transport | citiies, | land use | vulnerable | being, food | and built | and
 | and access |  | industries, |  | people and | and water | environment | ecosystem
 |  |  | appliances |  | communities | security |  | services
Outcome 1 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒
Outcome 2 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒ | ☒
Outcome 3 | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ | ☐ |  |  |  | 

--- Table 3 on Page 30 ---
 | Co-benefit |  |  | Co-benefit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | number |  |  | Environmental |  |  | Social |  |  | Economic |  |  | Gender |  |  | Adaptation |  |  | Mitigation | 
Co-benefit 1 |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  | 
Co-benefit 2 |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 
Co-benefit 3 |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☒ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  |  | ☐ |  | 

--- Table 4 on Page 30 ---
 | B.3. Project/programme description | 

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28
B
95 Additionally, there is recognition that the scale and speed required to deliver universal early warning coverage by 2027
requires an “all-hands-on-deck” approach which utilises support available from all partners. Achieving this will require
sustained assistance to maintain effectiveness and sustainability. Furthermore, the support architecture described above
cannot be solely dependent on a single project or programme and this project will include activities in which a long-term
financing and management strategy is developed.
96 Targeted countries will be provided global and regional assistance to mobilise technological resources for upgrading and
sustaining their MHEWS. A comprehensive assessment of climate-related risks required improvements in capacities for
early action, which includes local level disaster planning, will be conducted in all countries. National policies, procedures
and mechanisms will be instituted to coordinate and collaborate between NMHS, NDMAs, government ministries
(including agriculture, water and health) and non-government agencies. The capacities of critical agencies and institutions
at all levels along the early warnings/Anticipatory Action value chain will be enhanced.
GCF proceeds will be used to provide technical assistance to the beneficiaries or finance limited improvements to existing
infrastructure / equipment purchases and there will be no transfers of cash or funds to the beneficiaries.
Component/Output 1: Enhancing enabling conditions globally and regionally to promote country-level actions towards
the EW4All goals
97 Output 1 aims to scale up and accelerate global and regional support for national efforts to increase Multi-Hazard EWS
(MHEWS) capacity, coverage and performance. Three key activities are envisaged: Activity 1.1 focuses on enhancing
global and regional coordination and providing coordinated technical support for the implementation of the EW4All
initiative; Activity 1.2 emphasizes the strengthening of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes to support EW4All
implementation; and Activity 1.3 aims to reinforce knowledge management, evidence from national practice, and the
dissemination of lessons learned to inform national progress in EWS. Together, these outputs are designed to improve
the effectiveness and reach of EWS, ensuring that more communities are better prepared for multiple hazards.
98 The output will support the global and regional coordination and support architecture for EW4All that will be sustained
beyond the project implementation period. Activities through this output will help the EW4All Pillar leads build on the
Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems Initiative (CREWS), SOFF, and similar financing and coordination mechanisms to;
i) achieve substantive synergies with other partners providing similar support towards the EW4All target; and ii) to help
unlock required funding for sustaining EW4All support architecture to 2027 and beyond. The latter will target
conventional and emerging donors such as bilateral donors, multilateral financing institutions, and philanthropists. A
long-term financing strategy will be developed which is informed by detailed needs assessment from LDCs and SIDS,
including fragile and conflict-affected states. EW4All pillar leads are simultaneously engaged in global advocacy for EWS
finance with the G20 Presidency, the ‘Friends of EW4All’, a coalition of 17 major bilateral donors, MDBs, the private
sector, and non-traditional donors to unlock funding for national EWS. These efforts will also include finance gaps in the 7
countries. The private sector will be prioritized as part of EW4All financing, with several entities already actively engaged
in EW4All through provision of technical services, pro bono cloud bandwidth, and satellite mapping, e.g., Microsoft,
Google, Insurance Development Forum, and representation of the high-level EW4All Advisory Panel.
99 The output will augment on-going support for synthesis of knowledge, experience and lessons by providing operational
and technical assistance aligned with international standards and best practices towards the effective implementation of
the EW4All initiative. This will involve the development, dissemination and application of comprehensive normative
guidance, tools, and methodologies across all four pillars of EWS and at the inter-pillar level. Specifically, this includes the
development of detailed guidelines, strategic orientation documents, and AI-based tools designed to improve processes
along the entire early warning value chain and the provision of tailored technical assistance to strengthen national EWS
capabilities. National and regional DAEs, as well as sectoral representatives and associated ministries will be included in
the knowledge exchange to ensure they can contribute to discussions on practically implementing MHEWS within
different contexts and sharing innovations, lessons, and evidence of national EWS effectiveness.
100 In addition, this output will support the integration of EWS into national priorities, roadmaps, and financing strategies,
including governance and legal frameworks. Technical support will also be provided to facilitate simulations and testing
of national EWS operational effectiveness, develop coordinated funding requests, strengthen the global EW4All M&E
framework and develop a knowledge management system to document and disseminate key learnings. Collectively,

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29
B
these global and regional activities aim to establish robust, sustainable, and effective national EWS globally, ensuring that
countries are well-prepared to respond to and mitigate the impacts of disasters.
101 This component will be led by EW4All Pillar lead agencies and will aim to support enabling conditions at both the global,
regional and national levels, so that countries receive relevant and timely assistance to meet the universal coverage
target of EW4All. Funds from the GCF will flow from the UNDP to the respective Pillar leads who will be the responsible
parties of these activities.
Activity 1.1: Enhanced Coordination and Technical Support for EW4All Implementation
102 Activity 1.1 focuses on enhancing coordination and providing comprehensive joint technical support to ensure the
effective implementation of the EW4All initiative. This involves the development and application of normative guidance,
tools, and methodologies that span across all four pillars of EWS and integrate these efforts at the inter-pillar level. The
four Pillar lead agencies will collaborate to create detailed and standardized guidelines, training materials, and strategic
orientation documents. The goal is to provide countries and partners with the necessary resources to align their national
EWS initiatives with international standards and best practices. This includes integrating EWS into national development
and adaptation plans, roadmaps, and financing strategies, as well as supporting governance and legal frameworks for
EWS. Furthermore, the development and application of AI-based tools will be emphasized, ensuring that advanced
technologies are used responsibly to address gaps and improve the effectiveness of the entire early warning value chain.
Activity 1.1 further aims to accelerate harmonized technical support to countries by providing operational assistance and
facilitating simulations and testing of national EWS operational effectiveness. Capacity-building efforts will also be
undertaken to enable DAEs to fast-track access to GCF financing for early warning initiatives.
Sub- Activity 1.1.1: Develop normative guidance and tools across all four pillars & at the interpillar level
103 This sub-activity will result in the development of pillar-specific and joint inter-pillar guidelines, tools, training curricula
and methodologies, building on what exists and accounting for variations in regional and national contexts. Strategic
Orientation and Policy Guidance will be developed and provided to countries and partners in thematic areas such as:
improved access and harmonization of climate and disaster data and information for application in national EWS; global
standardization of loss and damage accounting for rapid and slow-onset hazard events for inform national tracking;
standardized EWS gap analyses and national EWS roadmaps and financial frameworks; global standards and diagnostics
of national data ecosystems related to risk, climate and disaster loss open-data sharing for IbF; national climate and risk
assessment capacity strengthening; and minimum standards for national climate and disaster risk hotspot mapping,
multi-channel warning dissemination and risk communications; and preparedness and response protocols.
104 This sub-activity will also focus on advancing the application of AI-based tools within the framework of EWS, offering
guidance and support to countries on the responsible and effective use of AI across the entire MHEWS value chain. This
effort aims to address existing gaps and emerging needs, leveraging the expertise and resources of the AI for EW4All sub-
group. AI is a key output identified in the EW4All EAP. The AI for EW4All sub-group will be leveraged to explore AI use
cases that align with the four pillars of EW4All, providing practical examples and identifying opportunities to enhance the
initiative's impact. This sub-activity will include the development of an EW4All Toolkit, which will include tools, models,
applications, and resources designed to enhance EWS. To ensure broad accessibility, a searchable webpage will be
designed to host the Toolkit, enabling countries to effectively leverage these resources for managing risk,
communication, and preparedness. This sub-activity will also involve cultivating strategic partnerships and collaborating
with stakeholders globally to support the implementation of AI in the EW4All initiative. Additionally, it will focus on
developing and delivering capacity-building and awareness-raising sessions. These sessions will demonstrate how AI can
significantly enhance the effectiveness of EWS, improve the flow of critical information during emergency response and
preparedness, and support the achievement of outcomes across all four EW4All Pillars.
105 84% of persons with disabilities reported not having a personal preparedness plan for disasters; 56% (3,549) reported not
being aware of or not having access to disaster risk information in accessible formats in their communities95. The findings
95 According to the 2023 Global Survey on Persons with Disabilities and Disasters: https://www.unwater.org/news/undrr-2023-global-survey-persons-
disabilities-and-disasters

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30
B
underscore the urgent need to invest in accessible risk communication, tailored for the specific needs of persons with
disabilities. The global normative guidance will provide a comprehensive framework to ensure that all individuals,
including persons with disabilities, have equal access to vital information to protect themselves from disasters. The
guidelines will explore how inclusive communication strategies should cater to diverse needs, covering content and
messaging, accessible formats and inclusion of persons with disabilities in the development of risk communication
strategies and products. Regional broadcasting unions will be strengthened to support their national members to: build
operational resilience through SOPs and emergency broadcasting plans; implement CAP (in partnership with ITU);
strengthen editorial capacity to contribute to early warning chain ahead of disasters and cover DRR topics in times of
peace in order to build a culture of preparedness in the context of national EWS. Where relevant, these tools will be
validated and suitably tailored to the context of the seven participating countries to inform the activities under Activity
2.1 and 2.2.
106 In addition to this, WMO will undertake a review of its guidance across hazard types and update as needed to enable the
use of multi-model ensemble and probabilistic forecast to issue warnings and communicate uncertainty. As part of the
review and update emerging technologies and the role of AI will be addressed. Work will also be done to ensure that the
guidance is packaged and disseminated with WMO Members to enable their uptake and use.
Sub-Activity 1.1.2: Accelerate Technical Support to Countries for EWS implementation
107 Building on delivery of normative guidance and tools articulated in the preceding activity, Activity 1.1.2 focuses on
accelerating technical support for countries implementing EWS, focusing on providing operational and technical
assistance for the development and implementation of EW4All national roadmaps, supporting countries to test the
capacities of the MHEWS, and support the financing elements that underpin MHEWS systems and capacities. Efforts will
be focused on scaling up and enhancing the work of the Tropical Cyclone Programme (TCP), the Severe Weather
Forecasting Programme (SWFP), IbF and Warning (IBFW), and the CAP. WMO’s Regional Associations (RAs), working
groups and expert teams will be engaged to reach more countries with the afore mentioned capacity development
programmes to address a broader range of hazards, and provide better support to WMO Members.
108 Under this sub-activity operational and technical assistance will be provided to countries, ensuring alignment with
international standards and best practices outlined in sub-Activity 1.1.1. Pillar leads, WMO Regional Climate Centres
(RCCs), together with other global, regional and national agencies will co-design and implement analytic frameworks and
models for national adoption to scale-up use of data related to critical multi-hazard exposure, vulnerability, loss and
damage, and effective mitigation action to provide the basis of impact-based forecast warning services (IbWFS).
Alignment will also be sought with existing regional and global initiatives around early warning early action. This will
include providing and helping to design systems for climate and multi-hazard risk data sharing, archiving and access and
open-source software and scripts for data cleaning, analysis, visualisation and modelling. Regional centres will also be
responsible for developing models which can be used by the NMHS together with the NDMAs, for IbWFS, scenario
building and triggers to inform early/anticipatory actions . Wherever feasible, the regional centres will explore co-
production of Anticipatory Action protocols involving the NMHS, NDMAs together with research agencies and grassroots
organisations. The capacity of WMO, UNDRR, ITU and IFRC will be augmented to enhance the quality of support to
countries via Output 2. In particular, the existing WMO supportive frameworks such as SWFP, TCP, CAP, IbFW and RAs
will be expanded geographically to provide real time operational support to more countries and also cover a wider range
of hazards to match country needs. These activities will be closely coordinated with SOFF investments which directly
support WMO corporate priorities and frameworks.
109 The sub-activity will support the integration of EWS into national priorities, roadmaps, and financing strategies. Technical
support and coordination across all pillars of the EAP which relate to governance and legal frameworks for EWS and early
warning dissemination will be provided to participating governments. A sustainability strategy for the global support
architecture will be developed by implementing global financing campaigns and consultations with various partners and
donors that will take place throughout the implementation of the project. The sub-activity will also develop methods to
facilitate simulations and testing of national EWS operational effectiveness. It will provide capacity-building and support
to DAEs to fast-track access to GCF financing for EWS strengthening.

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31
B
110 A global strategy will be developed to unlock financing at the global level to deepen or expand support to countries
towards the EW4All target. Countries will be supported in sourcing financing from international financial institutions,
international organisations and vertical funds and corporate donors seeking to support climate adaptation, such as those
participating in the UN Global Compact. Countries will also be facilitated in supporting grant financing for women-led and
women only initiatives.
Activity 1.2: Strengthened M&E to support EW4All Implementation
111 Enhancements to the global M&E framework for EW4All will be implemented and rolled out, including updates and
expanded metrics available on the dedicated dashboard to track progress of the initiative globally and at country levels
across all four pillars. Technical assistance will be provided to the 7 participating countries to improve national capacity
for reporting on EWS performance based on a global reporting framework. The framework will include annual reporting
on progress on the EW4All initiative at the UNFCCC COPs. Work will also be supported on the development of an index
capturing EWS effectiveness and country capacity. The activity will also support countries on Sendai Monitor reporting,
particularly target G. Efforts will focus on: development and implementation of comprehensive tools to evaluate,
continuously monitor, and report on national EWS capacities, development and implementation of the EW4All maturity
index system for benchmarking global progress, strengthening and consolidating the EW4All M&E framework across
pillars, considerate of interpillar elements, updating and validating pillar assessments and score cared to regularly track
country capacities, and integration of country data into the EW4All dashboard and maintain the dashboard, including the
creation of a database.
Sub-Activity 1.1.1: Operationalising the EW4All maturity index
112 This sub-activity will develop and implement the EW4All maturity index system for benchmarking global progress across
all pillars and at the inter-pillar level. It will update and validate assessments and score cards to track country progress
across the EWS value chain, and provide diagnostics support to countries on monitoring EWS effectiveness. This sub-
activity will also enable WMO to complete the rapid assessment of Pillar 2 for new countries entering the initiative. WMO
will also track progress on completed assessments and ensure that country score cards are updated regularly. Moreover,
WMO will undertake the task of updating the methodology for CHD as needed. These activities will strengthen global
information and reporting systems on MHEWS capacities for informed action.
Sub-Activity 1.1.2: Strengthen global EW4All M&E and reporting to enable regular progress updates
113 This sub-activity will strengthen and consolidate the EW4All monitoring and evaluation framework across pillars,
considerate of inter-pillar elements, It will conduct data collection and related monitoring actions on field and develop
and publish studies, reports, other knowledge materials to showcase outcomes of framework monitoring, including
annual Global Status of MHEWS reports.
Sub-Activity 1.1.3: Regular update of EW4All Dashboard
114 Sub-Activity 1.1.3 will improve integration of EW4All implementation progress and country capacities data into the
EW4All dashboard. It will improve analytical and visual functions and maintain the dashboard. It will ensure country-level
tracking and updates to the global database96 respecting measurable improvements in national capacity in areas such as
risk assessment, risk data use and governance for EWS, application of hazard-specific exposure and vulnerability data to
improve IbF, and progress on avoiding and minimizing loss and damage through EWS. In addition the sub-activity will
ensure regular reporting by participating countries on the Sendai Monitor, particularly for target G reporting.
Activity 1.3: Strengthened knowledge management and lessons learned
115 The activity will support knowledge exchange among countries at different stages of implementation of the EW4All EAP
across all Pillars and implementing partners. Countries will be assisted in developing plans to improve their MHEWS and
Anticipatory Action approaches and systems, ensuring that each approach takes a people-centric view with ensured last-
mile communications and including all stakeholders (DAEs, humanitarians, International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and
96 https://earlywarningsforall.org/site/early-warnings-all/early-warnings-all-dashboard

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32
B
sectoral representatives – both government and NGOs). This will be linked to the SOFF community of practice and will
bring together peer advisors and implementing entities to document lessons learned.
Sub-Activity 1.3.1: Development of knowledge management framework that guides learning and exchange
116 This sub-activity will develop a knowledge management framework to systematically capture, document, and
disseminate lessons learned. It will establish processes and protocols for knowledge sharing among stakeholders and
develop a repository that is open access and online for the dissemination of knowledge products. The sub-activity will
contribute to the UN global knowledge bank for EWS to improve easy access by country-level actors to robust tools,
guidance, peer-learning, and reliable technical guidance from multiple UN and non-UN sources on themes cutting across
EWS.
Sub-Activity 1.3.2: Documentation and dissemination of good practices and lessons learned
117 The identification and documentation of good practices, challenges, innovations and solutions encountered in early
warning programming will be done under this sub-activity. Post-disaster forensics will be conducted to learn lessons
related to EWS. Lessons learned on EWS functioning will be integrated in post-disaster needs assessments (PDNA), and
the reinforcement of functional EWS will be included in Recovery Frameworks. The sub-activity will also disseminate early
warning knowledge products, in support of peer-to-peer learning and continuous improvement and informed decision-
making.
118 Under this sub-activity, WMO will develop and maintain an enhanced section on the WMO website which centralizes
information, tools, and guidance materials dedicated to providing resources for the implementation of the EW4All
initiatives.
Sub-Activity 1.3.3: Development of global and regional technical expert working groups
119 This sub-activity will establish global technical expert groups and communities of practice composed of national
representatives to advance collective action in core thematic areas such as open data as a digital public good for EWS,
mobile EWS, early and anticipatory action and finance, preparedness and response planning. It will facilitate the sharing
of implementation expertise and good practices, serve as a platform for capacity building and technical support aligned
with Activity 1.1.2, and augment opportunities for national experts in LDCs and SIDS to influence global dialogue on EWS.
120 The Cell Broadcast Expert Group provides the platform for technical experts to share information on topics such as public
warning systems architecture and regulation, cell broadcast implementation, multi-channel deployment, satellite
adaptation, and standardization for handset and chip manufacturers, to assist countries in their deployment; as well as to
create awareness and share challenges and solutions in international events and workshops.
Component/Output 2: Accelerating actions in select countries towards EW4All
121 This component will roll out national level investment activities in seven countries to address country and local level
needs to achieve the EW4All target. All seven of these countries are from the list of the 30 focal countries identified
under the global EW4All initiative for 202397. Concrete investments will focus on EWS hardware and software, risk
knowledge, disseminating and communicating early warnings and preparedness for local-level actions that reduce
vulnerability of communities. These will be based on a comprehensive analysis of capacities and gaps in each country.
122 Concerted efforts will be made to close gender gaps in access to, control over, and use of MHEWS technology,
communications and services. This includes considerations of needs and challenges facing rural women, ethnic
minorities, men and women who are illiterate, people with disabilities, elderly and households with infants and children.
It will support women’s equitable decision-making opportunities, including in design and management of EWS areas,
laws, policies and operational procedures. Lessons from other countries such as Cambodia will be incorporated to ensure
women play meaningful roles in MHEWS and early action. In a country like Somalia, for example, women and girls have
low levels of understanding about early warning messages and generally have lower access to information than men. The
97 UNDRR. ‘Global Status of Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems 2024’. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 4 December 2023.
https://doi.org/10.18356/9789213587058.

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33
B
project is targeting for 60% of EWs to specifically target women and girls. This will include by taking into account the
constraints they face in accessing and understanding information and building on opportunities. Working with women’s
groups and other outreach opportunities that target women, for example, will be key. If women and girls are able to
access EWs in a way that is understandable and meaningful, this will be transformational as it will mean they can take
adequate measures to protect themselves in times of emergency. Overcoming literacy barriers, traditional roles of
women and lower access to technology are among the challenges that will be encountered. The project mainstreams
gender and all activities essentially have a gender lens which is documented in the country-level GAAPs. In Cambodia, for
example, project activities focused on training of local-level stakeholders on MHEWS will specifically target women. For
example, the project will include the participation of women in capacity development related to impact-based
forecasting and engage in technical areas sessions to build their capacity and representation within the Ministry of Water
Resources and Meteorology. Moreover, the project targets that 70% of training sessions on MHEWS, regardless of
participant's gender, include gender-sensitive content on the differential impacts of hazards and effective communication
strategies for diverse groups. UNDP Cambodia implemented an LDCF financed project on EWS earlier where women in
community-level leadership positions, such as school directors, members of district disaster committees, commune
chiefs, etc, have been trained as gender champions in their respective communities and they played a big part in bringing
other women to participate in project activities while the role they played empowered themselves (see:
https://undpcambodia.exposure.co/). The GCF project will take these lessons in the project implementation.
123 Each country has unique opportunities and barriers to implementing effective EWS, and the activities and sub-activities
described here will be based on the eligibility criteria listed in Appendix 3. However, there are some common needs
related to the barriers mentioned within the project’s theory of change, particularly as they relate to capacity and finance
gaps, CIEWS coverage particularly in remote areas and lack of access to innovative solutions. This component will fulfil
those needs and leverage available opportunities by executing time bound investment activities and allowing for
measuring the impacts on ground. The implementation of the national investment activities will be supported by WMO,
UNDRR, ITU, IFRC, and other partner agencies, depending on the capacity of the host government and in-country
presence and capacities of these agencies. The UNDP and its respective Country Offices will provide technical and
administrative support, coordination and oversight to the implementation of the Output. All activities will coordinate
with and be designed to complement existing work being undertaken by DAEs, NGOs (IFRC, Care, Christian Aid etc.) and
other multilateral (World Bank, GFDRR, FAO, WFP) and bilateral (GIZ, FCDO, SIDA, NORAD etc.) donors. This Output is
designed to mirror the structure of the EAP so that activities within this Output will be fully aligned to it.
124 The implementation of the seven country projects will be supported by a global team of experts and a global Project
Management Unit (PMU). The international expertise will be drawn from the Pillar Leads and other partner agencies and
expertise will span the technical elements of all the four pillars and will include social and environmental safeguards,
gender, inclusion and disability experts who guide and participate in the implementation of project activities in the seven
countries. Most of the international experts will be hired on a part-time basis and will support activities identified and
approved by the national governments for which local expertise is not available. This arrangement will ensure access for
all countries to a wide range of highly qualified and experienced experts on a cost-sharing and therefore, cost-effective
basis.
Activity 2.1: Strengthened Governance and Coordination
125 The activity will focus on legislation and policies governing the exchange of information to facilitate coordinated
dissemination of warnings between different actors. It will establish clear functions, roles and responsibilities of agencies
in the national warning dissemination process with associated updating of the WMO Register of Alerting Authorities
(RAA). Alert dissemination and feedback channels will be expanded to reach end users with targeted and actionable
information by leveraging community-based institutions, civil society and faith-based organisations. Considerations of
differential access to information and resources by women and vulnerable groups will be included in the dissemination
strategy. Partnerships with intermediaries will be established and training provided to local authorities and relevant
agencies for interpretation and dissemination of alerts to ensure delivery of clear and actionable warnings to end users.
This will include extension officers and other government staff in line departments and journalists.

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34
B
126 This activity will also attempt to establish or strengthen existing local Early Warning Committees (EWC) or equivalent
grassroots organisations with representatives from elected/traditional leaders who are linked to govt. development or
DRR structures wherever feasible given the country context. Meaningful involvement and representation of women and
vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities and their representative organizations (OPDs) in these institutions
will be ensured. Each EWC will seek to be a registered entity under the relevant national provisions and will seek to have
a formal structure of office bearers and a bank account, based on the existing governance structure and institutional
arrangements. A clear coordination and reporting structure will be instituted between sub-national agencies from the
lowest level of governance up to the district level. In all countries except Chad and Somalia, each EWC will have direct
access to focal persons in the relevant government agency at the district, NMHS and NDMA. In Chad and Somalia
organizations fulfilling these roles will be engaged. Capacities of these local institutions, from district down to village level
will be enhanced through regular engagements and training programmes that strengthen institutional structures and
procedures.
Sub-Activity 2.1.1: Strengthened coordination mechanisms
127 The sub-activity will advocate for enabling policies, laws and strategies for effective early warning, early action and
preparedness. It will support the development of a strategy and action plan and associated legislation to mainstream
early warning and anticipatory action, while ensuring alignment with best practices and a supportive framework and
legislation to mainstream early warnings and anticipatory action from national to local scales. This will be done through a
comprehensive review of existing disaster risk management (DRM) policies, laws and strategies as well as climate plans.
The establishment of national liability frameworks that hold stakeholders accountable for not acting on warnings will be
explored as mechanism for strong legal incentives for accountability98. The sub-activity will be disability inclusive,
consulting Organizations of Persons with Disabilities (OPDs) in the development, implementation and monitoring of
emergency-related laws and policies, to ensure meaningful participation of persons with disabilities to comprehensively
understand their needs in humanitarian emergencies.
128 The lead government agency of each country in coordination with the NDA, is expected to use existing interministerial
platforms, particularly those established for the NDC and NAP coordination, to inform the long-term sustainability
options, including financial incentives, for maintaining the hydrometeorological network..
129 Data sharing between and within agencies at the national and sub-national levels will be strengthened and a formal
delivery mechanism will be provided for government agencies by providing technical assistance, equipment, and other
support to overcome the barrier that is preventing effective data sharing between national and local authorities, first
responders and other stakeholders involved in early warning on the ground and to better align and activate their
respective response plans to reduce the impact of the hazard (Sub-Activity 2.3.3). Targeted groups include national and
local authorities, businesses, communities, National Red Cross Red Crescent Societies, NGOs, the UN, and community
groups. Mechanisms that will be used include MOUs between relevant agencies combined with standard operating
procedures for user access to data hosted on servers. Data integration frameworks and systems which utilize application
programming interfaces (APIs) to access data across multiple servicers may additionally be required in countries and
agencies where such systems are not currently operational.
130 This activity will additionally ensure policy and financial support for mainstreaming of early earning, early action and
preparedness in government frameworks, systems and plans based on local needs and priorities and using local
knowledge. Committed financing will be critical to anticipatory action and response in the event of a crisis. The success of
the work in this activity hinges on committed financing for disaster preparedness and anticipatory actions ahead of a
crisis. The activity will embed the principles of anticipatory action into social assistance through enhancing shock-
responsive social protection system at the grassroots level.
98 https://www.undrr.org/news/one-step-closer-legal-protection-disasters and resolution 79/128 of the UN General Assembly:
https://undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A/79/476

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35
B
Sub-Activity 2.1.2: Enhanced governance capacities
131 This will include: i) a clear assignment of roles and responsibilities at the national and subnational level for services; ii)
strategic plan and organizational structure; iii) periodic process to assess and evaluate its services; iv) coordination
platform(s) – such as the NFCSs – established; v) inter-institutional arrangements are in place for data sharing, inter-
operability of systems, co-design of services; vi) comprehensive plans are in place for communication, competency
framework, cooperation, studies, quality system and financial resources. Development and updating of national plans,
strategies and legislation for NMHS and DRM agencies in each country will lead to forecasting and warning services being
installed for all priority hazards and meeting Sendai Target G Indicator 4: All countries' local governments have a plan to
act on early warnings.
132 Strengthened governance, collaboration and inclusion. Governance arrangements, particularly for disaster preparedness
and response, will be strengthened to include clear provisions, protocols, roles and responsibilities for early warning and
early action, and will include an emphasis on inclusion of women, persons with disabilities and vulnerable groups within
communities. Collaboration will be strengthened between grassroots organisations including government agencies,
traditional and religious leaders, local schools and health centres and civil society organisations.
• Capacity building and creation of enabling conditions for better integration of relevant ministries and entities
concerned with gender and disability, with the work of NDMAs and NMHS in order to more efficiently use
existing capacity within government structures.
• Raising awareness on crucial intersections of gender inequality, disability social exclusion with success of
MHEWS uptake and use by ensuring the inclusion of gender and inclusion topics in every capacity development
activity to be carried out.
• Strengthened collaboration between key ministries, academia and the private sector, including at the
community level by supporting countries in defining their roles, responsibilities and identify ways of working
which prioritise collective action between the different agencies and institutions.
133 The sub-activity will strengthen risk knowledge capability in these institutions by combining local, traditional, Indigenous,
generational and scientific knowledge that can enable resilience under a range of future risk scenarios. Building on
existing approaches, it will strengthen locally led, people-centred and citizen science-based approaches. It will use
innovative approaches to leverage new and existing technologies to expand risk knowledge capability at all scales,
including continuous monitoring / crowdsourcing of important vulnerability metrics as a basis for responding to and
anticipating emerging crises and disasters.
Sub-Activity 2.1.3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
134 Sub-Activity 2.1.3 ensures continuous monitoring of other project activities and sub-activities based on quantitative and
where possible spatially explicit indicators and means of verification to track project progress and support adaptive
management decisions. This is expected to result in improved monitoring, evaluation and learning systems integrated
within project and national structures to provide up to date status of activities and emerging risks, as well as promoting
adaptive approaches to the implementation of MHEWS. It will promoting institutional arrangements to ensure capacity
and resources (e.g. staff, budget, etc.) to implement, monitor, and report gender-responsive actions and will enhance
capacities of countries to monitor the availability and effectiveness of EWS, to use this to update their approaches and to
report better on Sendai Framework Target G and custom indicators. Specific actions will be taken to set up a formal
mechanism for feedback on the EWS from end-users and communities. This will leverage mobile phone based
technologies (surveys, forms) where available combined with regular consultations for feedback from focal persons in
communities, specifically including representatives of women and vulnerable groups. Specific actions to be taken for
monitoring and assessing project impact are described in the M&E plan (Annex 11 pg. 3). A baseline survey will be
administered in the initial phase of the project with additional surveys at the mid-point and at the end of the project.

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36
B
135 This activity will require assessments and data collection for which digital technologies99 will be leveraged where possible.
The activity will also undertake disability inclusive surveys to assess the efficacy of critical project interventions, for
example, measuring the socio-economic benefits from the use of climate products and advisories at the level of
institutions and communities. The activity will establish formal linkages with academia and institutions at the national
and regional level for collaborating on the impact assessments and also for reviews and evaluations of the products
themselves for their incremental improvement and development. The proposed actions under Sub-Activity 2.1.3 include:
i) M&E survey design, implementation and analysis of results for feedback into project reporting, management and
assessing project impacts. This will be split into monitoring visits undertaken at quarterly intervals and disability inclusive
assessment surveys done annually; ii) Product evaluation which will involve accuracy assessments through field
measurements and validation with target stakeholders, both institutions and communities, with disaggregated analysis
which captures feedback on EWS and its impacts on women, men, youth and vulnerable groups such as elderly and
people with disabilities; iii) M&E and assessing the reach and effect of communication and dissemination strategies. This
will cover: a) monitoring of data sharing and integration protocols at the institutional level, specifically between agencies
involved in observations and those engaged in development of sector specific products using this data; b) monitoring of
reach and c) effectiveness across different channels of dissemination and across both institutions and communities. The
latter including the different vulnerable group; iv) M&E of the gender strategy, assessing the gender indicators for
reporting on a quarterly basis and updating the strategy on an annual basis; and v) M&E of environmental and social
safeguards as per the country specific safeguard plans and strategies on a quarterly basis. This will specifically include any
safeguards put in place for FCAS and for inclusion of marginalized and disadvantaged groups.
Activity 2.2: Disaster risk knowledge and observations
136 This activity will result in the systematic collection of risk data, information and analysis leading to improved awareness
about hazards, exposure populations, services, infrastructure, vulnerabilities of communities, and improved loss and
damage accounting.
137 Existing data collection and repository systems in countries will be strengthened for increased data production,
aggregation and use of risk information to support IbFs. This will include mainstreaming disability-inclusive data
collection tools, including the Washington Group Short Set of Disability Questions and the UNICEF-Washington Group
Child Functioning Module, as well as data related to risks and barriers for persons with disabilities. Relevant authorities
such as NDMA, NMHS and other stakeholders, including sector ministries, and sub-national governments, will benefit
from capacity building. The countries will strengthen their disaster loss accounting systems and monitoring of Sendai
Target G Indicator 5:1 All countries have accessible, understandable, usable and relevant disaster risk information and
assessment available to people at national and local levels. The activity will also establish collaborations with relevant
academic institutions to develop effective communication strategies for contextual and actionable alerts to end users.
Sub-Activity 2.2.1: Develop disaster risk knowledge systems
138 The sub-activity will increase production and access to risk information and effective application of risk information at
national, sub-national and local levels. It will result in improved capability of each country to produce quality, timely and
contextually relevant risk information for EWS which integrates community knowledge through a comprehensive
stakeholder engagement plan. This will result in improved generation of national, sub-national and local risk information
to a minimum defined level of vulnerability, exposure and risk across major climate-related hazards. Capacities of
relevant agencies in data access, metrics and analysis to support decision-making will be built to facilitate access to
updated risk information in standardised, inter-operable formats. Finally, the sub-activity will build institutional capacities
to incorporate risk knowledge into EWS. This will result in high resolution vulnerability (hazard, exposure) datasets for
each participating country and high resolution, forecast linked models for specific hazards (floods, dry-spells, heatwaves,
drought, thunderstorms, landslides, glacial lake outburst floods).
99 Mobile ICT based Kobo/ODK, Interactive Voice Response, interactive mobile quizzes using key-entry and UMTS.

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37
B
Sub-Activity 2.2.2: Broaden observation and monitoring networks
139 This sub-activity will focus on the strengthening and/or establishment of meteorological, hydrological and climate
forecast and monitoring systems for each participating country. This sub-activity will leverage SOFF investments which
support capacity and infrastructure of countries to achieve the GBON and ensure that weather and climate data is shared
internationally in order to improve NWP products which improve the skill of forecasts. Capacities of NMHS will be further
enhanced to address gaps in hydrometeorological data acquisition beyond GBON, through institutional and staff capacity
development, installation of hardware and software leading to improved observations for developing forecasts which in
turn feed into the generation of accurate and timely early warnings. Additionally, the NMHS will adopt a quality
management system for regular review and reporting on the accuracy and timeliness of their services leading to
compliance with GBON. The activities will build on implementation plans of existing programmes such as the Flash Flood
Guidance System (FFGS) or the Hydrological Status and Outlook Systems (HydroSOS) initiative.
140 The sub-activity will result in enhanced national capacities for observations and data exchange by enhancing data sharing
and information exchange infrastructure to support EWS. Implementation of the WMO Information System 2.0 (WIS 2.0)
will be accelerated to enable timely and sustained data access and develop technical capabilities, while ensuring there is
not duplication of investments of SOFF in WIS 2.0 implementation in some countries. This will be coupled with policy
advocacy and development to enable sharing of critical data required for early warnings, based on the WMO Unified Data
Policy. Existing efforts on observation, monitoring and forecasting for EWS led by multilateral agencies will be optimised
through data sharing and sharing of forecasting products.
141 The sub-activity will enhance data sharing between actors involved in the generation of IbFs. It will improve both
infrastructure and develop local capacities to better interpret forecasts for effective use by communities and people.
142 A gap analysis on early warning needs will be conducted at national and regional levels to expand the WMO cataloguing
of hazardous events initiative (WMO-CHE) to all weather and climate driven hazards and their monitoring requirements;
the catalogue will also be deployed to track loss and damage100. Timely access to and use of in-situ observing networks,
satellite observation, radar, lightning detection and other advanced technologies will be used to build detection and
forecasting capabilities. It will close gaps in ocean and cryosphere data in hot spots such as coastal areas and high
mountains and will accelerate the implementation of the WMO action plan for hydrology by establishing regional
hydrological status systems.
143 An assessment of interoperability of different EWSs will be done to identify and address gaps in communication and data
exchange. This will ensure seamless data integration and communication between the different components of the EWS
in the country as well as with external systems.
Sub-Activity 2.2.3: Strengthen MHEWS forecasting capacity
144 The sub-activity will strengthen capabilities for data processing, forecasting and analysis. The network of Regional
Specialised Meteorological Centres (RSMCs) and associated National Meteorological and Hydrological Centres will be
supported to meet region specific needs for severe weather forecasting, flood and flash-flood forecasting, sand and dust
storm forecasting, marine weather forecasts, high resolution weather predictions, now-casting, TCs and IbF. Additionally,
WMO supportive frameworks (WIGOS, WIS and WMO Integrated Processing and Prediction System (WIPPS)) will be
expanded to provide real-time operational support to monitor a wide range of hazards.
Activity 2.3: Warning dissemination, preparedness and response
145 This Activity, corresponding to the third and fourth pillar of the EAP, seeks to ensure that clear, understandable and
actionable warning messages reach everyone at risk, in line with the Sendai Targets101 G, Indicator G-3102, and Indicator
G-6103. This will be achieved by developing and taking advantage of last mile connectivity and by establishing multi-
100 https://www.undrr.org/building-risk-knowledge/disaster-losses-and-damages-tracking-system-dldt
101 UN, “Sendai Framework for DRR 2015-2030,” 2015.
102 All people will be covered and can receive early warning information through local governments or through national dissemination mechanisms
103 Preparedness to Respond translates early warnings into life-saving actions that reduce losses and harm from climate shocks

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38
B
channel EWS using radio, TV, the Internet, mobile and satellite networks, sirens etc. Early warning messages will be
developed in a multitude of accessible formats and languages, including for persons with disabilities in their full diversity,
illiterate persons, etc. Information will be disseminated in a manner which ensures that risks and warnings are
understood, are clear and actionable by their target audience. For persons with disabilities, risk and warning information
will be (i) disseminated (i) in accessible formats, including oral, print, sign language, easy-to-read/plain language, text-to
speech, and (ii) via Organisations of Persons with Disabilities and to locations where persons with disabilities reside, to
ensure that information about what is happening and how to keep safe must be easy for persons with disabilities to
understand.104 The activity will also ensure that participating countries have updated registries of authorities responsible
for alerting communities and are issuing warnings that are compliant with the CAP105 whilst being understandable in
culturally appropriate formats and media and being cognizant of data protection and privacy concerns.
146 The activity will support a spectrum of actions, including integrating clear protocols for early warning and early action in
disaster management/ preparedness plans. It will support actions based on early warnings before disasters hit, such as
evacuation, strengthening of infrastructure, pre-positioning of essential stocks and supplies. This activity will strengthen
the preparedness capacities, systems and procedures of local governments, responders and vulnerable communities
through training and equipping them to respond based on integrated community and national EWS and communications.
The activity will include development of a protocol for the prevention and reduction of risks for persons with disabilities,
which will be validated by persons with disabilities and OPDs.
Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Strengthen early warning dissemination systems
147 The Sub-Activity will lead to expanded and strengthened communication network and services by supporting the
implementation of multi-channel systems for communicating and disseminating early warnings and alerts to the last mile.
Infrastructure and network services will be strategically strengthened by targeting the most efficient, trusted and
preferred communication channels, with at least one channel as backup where feasible. Geo-located mobile early
warning services based on cell-broadcast or location-based SMS systems will be implemented and strengthened by
working with mobile network operators, ICT regulators in countries and the GSM Association (GSMA), the global
association of mobile network operators. Best practices for data privacy will be put in place. Countries will receive
technical assistance to set up and implement mobile EWS. This will be further strengthened by supporting governments
to institute appropriate regulatory approaches and policies that mandate the use of geo-located alerts using satellite in
areas where people are at risk, but mobile networks do not exist (e.g. in remote mountainous areas). Here, alternative
networks, in particular, satellite-based and radio networks will be exploited as the primary dissemination channel. Funds
will be identified to pay for these systems where governments do not have resources to establish a basic satellite/mobile
EWS. Assessments will be carried out to understand how best to reach communities at risk and innovative and emerging
technologies will be used to develop "client profiles" to scale up targeted dissemination of actionable early warnings.
This activity proposes country piloting of the Disaster Connectivity Map and visualization tool to assess connectivity levels
and disaster risks using AI, helping visualise local connectivity, identify risk areas, and enhance national assessments and
communication strategies. Digital Connectivity Mapping (DCM) enables analysis of telecoms infrastructure vulnerabilitu
to extreme weather events and other hazards, enabling national authorities to take preventation action. Digital
connectivity is essential for early warning systems, and DCM visually demonstrates weaknesses that will disable message
disseminations in the event of shocks. This information is produced by ITU and will be shared through a very
detailed/granular map of the entire country to show exactly where people are within/outside of digital networks. This
map is shared with the telecommunication regulatory authority, for feedback and comments. This information on how
and where people have connectivity is critical to understand how many people can be reached via digital networks (such
as on mobile phones) but also to highlight areas where people at risk may be outside connectivity. This will allow
104 Human Rights Council (2015), Thematic Study on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities under article 11 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, on situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies. Report of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, A/HRC/31/30.
105 WMO, “Guidelines for Implementation of Common Alerting Protocol (CAP)-Enabled Emergency Alerting” (Geneva, Switzerland, 2013).

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39
B
governments and operators to take informed policy decisions (for example, to expand networks, or to set up alternative
communication channels such as siren, radio etc to reach those at risk). For more information see here.
148 At the community level, the activity will promote and support inclusive, people-centered co-development of gender
responsive, disability inclusive actionable early warnings by targeted communities in accessible formats and local
languages using and extending approaches such as the Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture
(PICSA).106 Existing community-based systems including Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) and flood and drought
warning systems set up through other agencies such as the IFRC will be leveraged and feedback mechanisms from end
users, including women and vulnerable groups, will be established to facilitate improvements in the development and
delivery of early warning services. Innovative systems that leverage mobile communications and Internet of Things (IoT)
will be used to set up low-latency autonomous systems (described in Activity 2.3.3) with local communities. Communities
will be supported in accessing and interpreting forecasts and weather data to better manage their risks.
Sub-Activity 2.3.2: Develop adaptation and preparedness protocols
149 Actions under this sub-activity will lead to comprehensive procedures and protocols for climate change adaptation and
preparedness, with emphasis on supporting communities most at risk in each country. Its actions will build on the
strengthened coordination mechanisms and governance (Activity 2.1) and better disaster knowledge and observations
(Activity 2.2). Actions under this sub-activity will include: i) Communication protocols and identification of focal persons
for each interest group, including a disability protocol incorporating accessible communication formats; ii) Protocols for
graduated warning levels to have heightened awareness during periods of increased risk exposure; iii) Protocols for
evacuation during disasters; and 4) Protocols for relief, extension and health services to deliver appropriate services to
communities.
Sub-Activity 2.3.3: Strengthen disaster adaptation and response capacity
150 This activity will result in the development of disability inclusive disaster preparedness/contingency plans to ensure
effective response, including provisions for early warning and early/ anticipatory action. Capacities for preparedness
based on risk-informed and impact-based forecasts will be ensured at the local levels to enable local authorities, first
responders and communities to act quickly and effectively based on the early warning alerts. Training of local
governments and first responders including agencies such as National Red Cross or Red Crescent Societies will be done
and their preparedness capacities, systems and procedures will be strengthened based on the integrated community and
national EWS. A National Early Warning Service training programme will be developed and implemented to enhance
capability, develop a sustainable knowledge base, and ensure the training programme is disability inclusive in line with
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Guidelines on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.107
Institutional and operational level capacities will be built by scaling up investments in preparedness, cash systems, supply
chains and logistics, as well as enhancing accountability of local responders.
151 Communities will be engaged in developing holistic early warning and anticipatory action in local disasters management,
DRR and climate change adaptation plans based on feasibility studies, climate information and local knowledge. These
will include evacuation routes and plans for future construction and retrofitting of small infrastructure for emergencies.
Specific attention will be given to the needs of women, persons with disabilities and vulnerable groups, specifically
building awareness of the increased risk of gender-based violence during emergencies and need for accessibility of
facilities to persons with disabilities, including physical, visual and hearing impairments. As part of CIEWS, communities
will be trained on O&M of early warning devices such as water level recorders, rain-gauges and anemometers. Support
and oversight may also be provided for small scale infrastructure for emergencies such as installing water storage tanks,
minor improvements to existing access paths, and small repairs or improvements to buildings (such as waterproofing,
installing toilets). Existing preparedness systems and operational protocols should reflect the roles, needs and rights of
106 Center for Independent Evaluations (CIE), “Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture (PICSA) Under Saving Lives and Protecting
Agriculture-Based Livelihoods in Malawi: Scaling up the Use of Modernized Climate Information and EWSs (M-CLIMES) Project,” Final Evaluation Report,
March 2021.
107 Inter-Agency Standing Committee (2019), Guidelines on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action.

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40
B
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups, including women, children, elderly, persons with disabilities, people on the
move, minorities, etc. Inclusivity will be central to the approaches adopted in the project across all activities.
Country based project description and strategy summary
152 A summary of climate hazards across critical sectors and proposed interventions for the participating seven countries is
provided in Error! Reference source not found.in Appendix 2, Pg. 106 in this document. A description of these
interventions is provided below.
Antigua and Barbuda
153 The project approach for Antigua and Barbuda (A&B) was developed through an extensive multi-stakeholder engagement
process, which culminated in an implementation roadmap for reinforcing a people-centric MHEWS in the country. The
roadmap identified several key principles which underpin the approach, focused on: i) strengthening the national
governance framework; ii) data-sharing collaborations and consolidation; iii) bridging the gap between technical
information and community comprehension; and iv) enhancing capacity for emergency management. Moreover, several
key sectors/areas have been prioritized to fill gaps in the existing MHEWS, particularly focused on the marine
environment – including ocean conditions and environmental impacts – and the introduction of an EWS for Barbuda that
is not wholly reliant on already stretched services in Antigua.
154 From a governance perspective, interventions in A&B will focus on modernizing the disaster management policy and
legislative framework, including through integration of disability issues, and integrating DRR considerations into sectoral
policies – including for the built environment, land-use planning and urban development. These policy actions will be
aligned with existing plans on a national and regional level and reinforced by a national strategic plan for national
emergency management agencies, together providing a solid foundation for the effective functioning and sustainability
of MHEWS and ensuring clarity and alignment among all involved parties. A key component of the governance support is
the establishment of a Disaster Preparedness and Response Fund. This fund will provide a sustainable mechanism to
channel resources toward critical disaster preparedness and response activities. The cross-cutting governance
interventions will be underpinned by improved disaster risk knowledge in the country (Pillar 1), focused on creating a
seamless information flow between relevant government agencies, supporting organizations and the public to improve
coordination and enable more holistic developmental planning, with risk data and information readily available to all
stakeholders. This will include increasing the availability of sector-specific risk data, disability inclusive risk data,
knowledge and best practices for critical sectors such as tourism, energy, agriculture, education, telecommunications and
health, as well as added focus the marine environment and social risks. At the heart of this effort is the development of
an online risk data platform, designed to centralise and manage critical risk information across all relevant sectors, as well
as undertaking comprehensive and disability inclusive hazard and risk assessments, addressing significant knowledge
gaps, particularly in Barbuda.
155 Under Pillar 2, a core focus of interventions will be on increasing the operational capacity of the Antigua and Barbuda
Meteorological Service (ABMS) – including supporting actions to direct additional budget to the services, hiring and
training of technical staff, and improving the hurricane resilience of the ABMS offices through structural enhancements
and the installation of backup power and communication systems. In addition, the project will improve existing
hydrological observation infrastructure and monitoring systems to enhance flash flood forecast system for urban and
rural areas, as well as introducing additional marine monitoring infrastructure for swells and potential environmental
changes. The enhancements to these networks will include provisions for real time monitoring and analysis of
hydrometeorological data, ensuring interoperability with risk data in place at ABMS through the introduction of a
platform to consolidate geospatial hydrometeorological and disaster risk information.
156 Pillar 3 will focus on simpler warning messages that are easily understandable by the public, including persons with
disabilities, ensuring that warning messages are clear, concise, and actionable in accessible formats during emergencies.
This will be supported by awareness actions to build trust among communities in the warnings being presented and their
associated anticipatory actions. A national emergency telecommunication plan will be developed alongside a common
alert protocol that integrates multiple dissemination platforms, including cell broadcasts, radio and television
broadcasting, sirens, among other traditional forms of mass warning, as well as accessible formats to reach persons with
a variety of disabilities.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41
B
157 Finally, interventions under Pillar 4 the project will support the scaling of community-based EWS (CEWS) to empower
local communities, including persons with disabilities, to take an active role in monitoring, disseminating, and responding
to potential threats — developing specialized risk-informed response/contingency plans for extreme events based on the
needs of vulnerable communities, including persons with disabilities. The plan also emphasizes enhancing community
disaster response teams, providing training and equipment for first responders, as well as providing resources for rapid
evacuation and shelter services, and strengthening scenario-based planning with IbF to improve response capabilities.
and establishing dedicated financing mechanisms and structured early action measures for pre-impact actions based on
the needs of vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities. The anticipatory action will be closely linked with the
governance support interventions – ensuring that relevant legislation is updated to accommodate the emerging functions
of key response institutions.
Chad
158 The intervention in Chad will ensure that EW/EA are impact based by building capability to carry out disability-inclusive
post-disaster needs assessments and loss and damages reporting, promoting longer-term adaptation planning and
knowledge management. It will ensure EWS are functional, by developing a sustainable finance plan with expertise in
public financial management in the context of Fragile and Conflict Affected States (FCAS). The project will promote the
development of a pipeline of supporting projects, ensuring data collected is transmitted in a timely way, ensuring data
governance, disability disaggregation, and mapping of location and collection of information on the support needs of
persons with disabilities through consultation, and developing rights and protocols for issuing and disseminating
warnings including in accessible formats for persons with disabilities. It will move from a siloed approach centred on food
security, towards a multi-hazard system, considering wider adaptation challenges. It will be people centred, based on the
right to information on risks, advice on preparedness measures, and warnings/advisories that are locally relevant and
respond to the needs and expectations of people including women, the elderly, people with disabilities, refugees and
minorities.
159 The project will develop an offer of audio recordings developed through mobile phones, conduct regular surveys and
qualitative community research, and develop national capability for cell broadcasts. It will consider preferences for
communication, including accessible formats for persons with disabilities, and monitor trust in existing and new
communication channels being developed. It will provide end-to-end integration of early warning and early action,
ensuring anticipatory action protocols are tested and adapted, providing capability to carry out simulations, lessons
learned and post disaster needs assessments, supporting crisis response capacity at devolved levels, while bringing
together contingency planning information with a register of responsibilities for disaster management, and defined
alerting rights. The project will respond appropriately to the needs of people concerning transparency, accountability and
the management of grievances, and be sensitive to conflict dynamics. Significant stakeholder engagement, and
preparatory work on institutional and regulatory frameworks, will ensure that coordination and governance approaches
are set in motion to support these activities and outcomes, and address critical institutional, financial and regulatory
barriers.
Fiji
160 The proposed interventions in Fiji primarily focus on strengthening and enhancing the existing functions of partner
organizations to address well-known priorities for improving understanding and communication and governance and
coordination mechanism amongst the national stakeholders relevant to EWS in Fiji. The project aims to unify risk
assessment methods in Fiji, focusing on historical data, climate models and local knowledge.
161 The project will expand or upgrade weather/climate/hydrometric observation network for EWS: Investments will be
made to improve monitoring and warning for severe weather, and localized and flash flooding, and droughts. Data
collected will be used to create models and forecasts of, enabling timely warnings and the development of disability
inclusive evacuation plans. The project will additionally Strengthen MHEWS forecasting capacity by enhance predication
accuracy through integration of AI and machine learning techniques, developing a centralized database/repository and
incorporating use of data science, e.g. AI to assist in forecasting and early warning. A slow drought monitoring IbF system
for food security will be established along with Drought EWS.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42
B
162 For warnings dissemination and preparedness, the project will support the implementation of the National Emergency
Telecom Plan which includes automation of a geo-targeted, location-based messaging through the CAP and cell
broadcasting. This will require a review and revision of the current licensing of the national mobile providers to ensure
they upgrade their infrastructure to enable cell broadcasting. The project will also support expansion of Starlink network
and maritime radio to achieve 100 % EWS coverage in Fiji. This plan will ensure inclusion of formats accessible for persons
with disabilities.
163 The project will develop and implement community-focused communication strategies based on findings from risk
perception studies, and incorporating accessible communication formats for persons with disabilities. It will improve
translation and interpretation of early warning messages by incorporating message translation, caption generation, and
text-to-speech capabilities in EWS messaging to enhance inclusivity for persons with disabilities and the elderly. Train-
the-Trainer workshops will be run for key stakeholders, such as ground actors, government officers, Red Cross officers,
and sugarcane extension officers and Technology Transfer Officer and community-level awareness campaigns will be run
on how to respond to early warning information, including for persons with disabilities and OPDs. The project will
evaluate the reach and effectiveness of disaster preparedness campaigns, and integrate the lessons learned into revised
communications and training. Local contingency plans will be developed which are behaviourally informed, inclusive and
community driven and a community-based DRM (CBDRM) Training Toolkit will be developed used to and run Train of
Trainer workshops on CBDRM and early warning messages with inclusion of early actions.
Cambodia
164 The EW4AII intervention for Cambodia provides a comprehensive plan for governance and coordination, disaster risk
knowledge and coordination, and warning dissemination and preparedness in Cambodia. The plan includes developing a
disability inclusive data-sharing protocol, upgrading the Cambodia Disaster Damage & Loss Information System (CamDi),
and implementing disability inclusive EWS at the national and sub-national levels. It also emphasizes the need for gender,
disability and inclusion considerations, as well as the establishment of river gauges and drought gauges in target
provinces to address weather information needs. Furthermore, the plan focuses on raising awareness of emergency alert
systems and enhancing warning dissemination through various channels, including mobile networks, online platforms,
and accessible formats for persons with disabilities.
165 The governance and coordination aspect of the plan involves establishing a collaborative early warnings secretariat,
addressing gaps in the legal and financial context, and implementing a cross-pillar approach to gender, disability and
inclusion. The disaster risk knowledge and coordination section emphasize upgrading the CamDi, preparing preparedness
and contingency plans in target provinces (incorporating specific needs of persons with disabilities and preparing persons
with disabilities to respond effectively to warnings), and installing river gauges and drought gauges. Additionally, it
highlights the development of a comprehensive human resource plan to meet early warning requirements.
166 The warning dissemination and preparedness component focuses on raising awareness of emergency alert systems,
coordinating mobile network providers, and upgrading online presence and dissemination channels. It also entails
equipping local authorities with early action capacity, implementing community-based disability inclusive EWS, and
providing shock-responsive social protection for preparedness and anticipatory action in target provinces. The plan places
particular emphasis on the needs of vulnerable communities, including women, persons with disabilities, children, and
youth.
Ecuador
167 The MHEWS project proposed in Ecuador is designed to significantly enhance the country's ability to anticipate, prepare
for, and respond to various climate-related hazards, such as floods, landslides, droughts and extreme temperatures. The
impact of these hazards is increasing in Ecuador in the last years due to climate change. The project aims to establish a
robust and integrated multi-hazard EWS that leverages advanced forecasting techniques, standardised climate data
management, inclusive communication strategies, community emergency plans and anticipatory actions. The primary
activities include the development of a functional legislative framework, the development of a National Framework for
Climate Services (NFCS), the establishment of a comprehensive climate data centre, the implementation of national risk
assessments for the relevant hazards, the improvement of the hazard forecasting, the integration of Indigenous
Knowledge Systems (IKS) into early warning practices, the integration of rights of persons with disabilities into early

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43
B
warning laws, policies, systems, data collection, communication strategies, risk management strategies, and protocols,
the improvement of the communication strategies and the creation of gender-sensitive disaster preparedness protocols.
168 These activities are strategically aimed at addressing the pressing climate challenges in Ecuador. The country is highly
vulnerable to natural hazards due to its geographical location in the Andean region, which is prone to extreme
meteorological events, droughts, floods, and landslides. The project’s focus on strengthening governance structures and
enhancing institutional capacities ensures that EWS are effective and sustainable. By improving disaster risk knowledge,
enhancing monitoring and forecasting capabilities, and ensuring timely and inclusive communication of warnings, the
project will mitigate the adverse impacts of climate-related hazards on vulnerable communities.
169 Key activities of the project, such as the establishment of a National Climate Finance Framework and the enhancement of
data management systems, address specific gaps identified in Ecuador’s national climate strategy. These include the need
for more robust and sustainable financing mechanisms for climate adaptation, as well as improved coordination among
different governmental and non-governmental stakeholders involved in DRM. Furthermore, the project’s emphasis on
gender-sensitive and disability inclusive approaches and the inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) aligns with
Ecuador’s commitment to social inclusion and equitable climate adaptation. By ensuring that EWSs are accessible and
responsive to the needs of women, persons with disabilities, Indigenous peoples, and other vulnerable groups, the
project contributes to a more resilient and inclusive society.
170 In summary, the MHEWS project addresses the key challenges identified in Ecuador’s national climate strategy, including
gaps in institutional capacity, financing, and community preparedness. Its activities are specifically designed to
strengthen the country’s preparedness and resilience in the face of increasing climate variability and extreme weather
events, ensuring that Ecuador is better equipped to protect its people and assets from future climate-related risks.
Ethiopia
171 The project interventions address critical barriers that prevent the effective generation, dissemination and use of early
warnings for climate change adaptation, preparedness and response to warnings, through three broad outputs tailored
to specific country needs, which are aligned with the tree activities under Output 2 of the Global FP. The project will
support the collection and dissemination of multi-hazard, multi-sector, disability inclusive risk data through the
development of a central National Risk Data Hub managed by EDRMC and accessible to all. This will enable the
development and sharing of impact-based disaster risk profiles focusing on highly vulnerable areas especially looking at
floods risk and drought. It will support the upgrade of hydro-meteorological observing stations and improve coverage in
under-covered areas. An analysis on most relevant communications channels to address early warning to vulnerable
populations, including accessible formats for persons with disabilities, will be undertaken and used to develop a disaster
risk, early warning linked to mitigation and Anticipatory Action messaging. Early warnings systems will be operationalized
at community level in priority high risk locations, linking with Anticipatory Action. An emergency call number and service
will be developed.
172 Multi-sector line ministries will be engaged to agree on sector-specific early warning and Emergency Thresholds, and
multi-hazard Anticipatory Action plans will be integrated into Preparedness Planning in highly vulnerable areas, linking
with a financial support mechanism and a disability inclusive social protection scheme.
173 A National Risk Data Hub coordinated by EDRMC with contributions from all sector Agencies/Ministries will be formed to
collect and develop multi-hazard disability inclusive data and risk analyses and undertake capacity development for
expert human resources including IT and connectivity capacities to enable data sharing amongst all actors. Woreda level
risk profiles in priority areas will be developed with compilation and analysis of hazard, exposure and vulnerability data.
The project will improve data sharing by establishing requisite protocols and procedures and will support the integration
of geo-hazards in EWS. A gender based, disability inclusive EWS focusing on elderly and children will be developed as part
of this exercise which will also lead to the establishment of community-based, disability inclusive EWS in priority areas.
174 A survey will be undertaken to identify most relevant media communications channels according to types of audience,
including vulnerability, disability inclusive and gender-based issues. This will be used to build capacities of
communications specialists to address media, and to journalists to communicate about disaster risk.
Somalia

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44
B
175 The interventions proposed for Somalia under the EW4All project fall predominately within the Country’s EW4All
Roadmap identified activities and the resourcing requirements for these. In collaboration with the UNDP Somalia country
office, the Early Warning for All (EW4All) 2024-2027 Roadmap will be operationalised under the leadership of the Somali
Disaster Management Agency (SODMA) and the National Multi-Hazard Early Warning Center (NMHEWC). Three outputs
under the four pillars, corresponding to the three activities under Output 2 of the Global FP, form the interventions
proposed for Somalia, and contribute directly to the realisation of Somalia’s Early Warning for All (EW4All) 2024-2027
Roadmap through the identified activities and the resourcing requirements for these. The activities under the three
outputs include the following:
176 To improve disaster risk knowledge and capacities the project will undertake the development of a comprehensive risk
assessment framework and database. Disaster risk knowledge materials and communications will be developed for
national and local levels, and capacity building and coordination provided for the application of improved disaster risk
knowledge at national and local levels. The project will also support integrated actions for detection, monitoring, analysis
and forecasts of weather and climate; harmonising the collection of early warning data, its analysis and exchange
modalities among federal line ministries, sectorial offices, and regional bodies. The proposed project will support
improved data automation, modelling and forecasting of early warning coherency among sectorial offices and the
improved interoperability and early warning information exchange between sectors. Disaster risk knowledge activities
will ensure mapping the location of persons with disabilities and gathering information on their support needs, consulting
with persons with disabilities and their representative organisations.
177 The project will support nationwide warning dissemination and communication access by supporting the development
and implementation of early warning communication strategies and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for
governance, functions, roles and responsibilities for early warning information, communication and dissemination. These
will include early warning communication strategies and SOPs being established for early warning information,
communication and dissemination governance, functions, roles and responsibilities, impact-based forecast and warning
services (IBFWS), and CAP. It will establish comprehensive infrastructure networks and early warning dissemination
services and equipment which cover simulation exercises, CAP adoption, telecommunication service provider
agreements, automated system setups and protocols for AA and communication strategies and feedback mechanisms,
amongst others. The project will invest in accessible nationwide warning dissemination and communication.
Communication strategies and SOPs will also incorporate risk and warning information in accessible formats for persons
with disabilities.
178 The proposed project will establish comprehensive functional infrastructure networks and early warning dissemination
services and equipment and ensure inclusive, people-centred EW4ALL at the local level. Finally, the project will enhance
preparedness for timely responses and early actions by supporting improved response and recovery disaster
preparedness measures established for early actions and the development of supporting risk management policy,
legislation and strategies. This will include ensuring preparedness and response plans (i) address the needs of persons
with disabilities, including through their consultation and meaningful participation, (ii) are tested, and (iii) prepared
persons with disabilities to respond effectively to warnings.
179 The Responsible Parties for the different activities in each of the participating countries are provided in the table 3 below.
These will be finalized and formalized through signed Responsible Party Agreements during the inception phase of the
country projects.
Table 3: List of responsible parties for the seven participating countries disaggregated by activity:
Ecuador Cambodia Antigua & Fiji Ethiopia Chad Somalia
Barbuda
Activity 1.1, Activity 1.1 – Activity 1: Activity 1.1: Activity 1.1: Activity 1.1: Activity 1.1:
UNDP, UNDP, WFP, Ministry of National Ethiopian UNDP, UNDP, ITU,
National Ministry of Finance, Disaster Risk Disaster Risk UNDRR ; Somali
Secretariat for Environment National Office Management Management Disaster
Risk (MoE) of Disaster Office Commission Management
Management Services (NDRMO), (EDRMC) Agency
(SNGR), (NODS), UNDP (SoDMA),

--- Table 1 on Page 47 ---
Ecuador | Cambodia | Antigua &
Barbuda | Fiji | Ethiopia | Chad | Somalia
Activity 1.1,
UNDP,
National
Secretariat for
Risk
Management
(SNGR), | Activity 1.1 –
UNDP, WFP,
Ministry of
Environment
(MoE) | Activity 1:
Ministry of
Finance,
National Office
of Disaster
Services
(NODS), | Activity 1.1:
National
Disaster Risk
Management
Office
(NDRMO),
UNDP | Activity 1.1:
Ethiopian
Disaster Risk
Management
Commission
(EDRMC) | Activity 1.1:
UNDP,
UNDRR ; | Activity 1.1:
UNDP, ITU,
Somali
Disaster
Management
Agency
(SoDMA),

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45
B
Meteorological UNDP, National
and UNDRR, Communicatio
Hydrological WMO ns Authority
Institute (NCA)
(INAMHI)/
Water and
Ecological
Transition of
Ecuador
(MAATE) page
20
Activity 1.2, Activity 1.2 – Activity 1.2: Activity 1.2. Activity 1.2: Activity 1.2: Activity 1.2
UNDP, SNGR UNDP, IFRC NODS, UNDP NDRMO, EDRMC UNDP, WMO UNDP, WMO,
page 20 UNDP MoEWR
Activity 1.3, Activity 1.3 - Activity 1.3: Activity 1.3: Activity 2.1 Activity 1.3: Activity 1.3
UNDP, SNGR UNDP NODS, UNDP NDRMO, EDRMC UNDP, World UNDP,
page 20 IFRC, UNDP Food UNDRR,
Programme (SoDMA)
(WFP);
Activity 2.1, Activity 2.1 Activity 2.1: Activity 2.1: Activity 2.2 Activity 2.1: Activity 2.1
UNDP, UNDP, Ministry of NDRMO, EDRMC UNDP, WFP, UNDP,
UNDRR, UNDRR, Legal Affairs, UNDRR, UNDRR, IFRC UNDRR,
SNGR, IFRC, National NODS, UNDP SoDMA
INAMHI/MAAT Committee for UNDRR
E page 20 Disaster
Management
(NCDM)
Activity 2.2, Activity 2.2 – Activity 2.2. : Activity 2.2: Activity 2.3 Activity 2.1: Activity 2.2
UNDP, WMO, UNDP, People WMO Fiji Ethiopian UNDP, WMO UNDP, WMO,
INAMHI/MAAT in Need (PIN), Meteorological Meteorological Ministry of
E page 20 Action Aid Service Institute (EMI) Energy and
Cambodia (FMS), UNDP Water
(AAC) Resources
(MoEWR)
Activity 2.3, Activity 2.3 – Activity 2.3: Activity 2.3: Activity 2.4 Activity 2.2: Activity 2.3
UNDP, WMO, UNDP, Antigua and FMS, WMO, EMI UNDP, WMO UNDP, WMO,
INAMHI/MAAT Ministry of Barbuda UNDP MoEWR
E page 20 Water Meteorological
Resources Services
and (ABMS),
Meteorology UNDP, WMO
(MOWRAM),
Regional
Integrated
Multi-Hazard
EWS for Africa
and Asia
(RIMES)
Activity 3.1, Activity 3.1 – Activity 3.1: Activity 3.1: Activity 2.5: Activity 2.3: Activity 3.1
UNDP, ITU, UNDP, IFRC, ITU, NODS, NDRMO, EMI UNDP, WMO, UNDP, ITU,
page 20 ITU, PIN Telecoms UNDP WFP SoDMA, NCA
Division,
UNDP
Activity 3.2, Activity 3.2 – Activity 3.2: Activity 3.2: Activity 3.1: Activity 3.1: Activity 3.2
UNDP, IFRC, IFRC, NCDM IFRC, ITU, NDRMO, Ethiopian UNDP, WMO, UNDP, ITU,
SNGR page NODS IFRC, UNDP News Agency ITU, IFRC, SoDMA, NCA
20 (ENA) WFP

--- Table 1 on Page 48 ---
Meteorological
and
Hydrological
Institute
(INAMHI)/
Water and
Ecological
Transition of
Ecuador
(MAATE) page
20 |  | UNDP,
UNDRR,
WMO |  |  |  | National
Communicatio
ns Authority
(NCA)
Activity 1.2,
UNDP, SNGR
page 20 | Activity 1.2 –
UNDP, IFRC | Activity 1.2:
NODS, UNDP | Activity 1.2.
NDRMO,
UNDP | Activity 1.2:
EDRMC | Activity 1.2:
UNDP, WMO | Activity 1.2
UNDP, WMO,
MoEWR
Activity 1.3,
UNDP, SNGR
page 20 | Activity 1.3 -
UNDP | Activity 1.3:
NODS, UNDP | Activity 1.3:
NDRMO,
IFRC, UNDP | Activity 2.1
EDRMC | Activity 1.3:
UNDP, World
Food
Programme
(WFP); | Activity 1.3
UNDP,
UNDRR,
(SoDMA)
Activity 2.1,
UNDP,
UNDRR,
SNGR,
INAMHI/MAAT
E page 20 | Activity 2.1
UNDP,
UNDRR,
IFRC, National
Committee for
Disaster
Management
(NCDM) | Activity 2.1:
Ministry of
Legal Affairs,
NODS,
UNDRR | Activity 2.1:
NDRMO,
UNDRR,
UNDP | Activity 2.2
EDRMC | Activity 2.1:
UNDP, WFP,
UNDRR, IFRC | Activity 2.1
UNDP,
UNDRR,
SoDMA
Activity 2.2,
UNDP, WMO,
INAMHI/MAAT
E page 20 | Activity 2.2 –
UNDP, People
in Need (PIN),
Action Aid
Cambodia
(AAC) | Activity 2.2. :
WMO | Activity 2.2:
Fiji
Meteorological
Service
(FMS), UNDP | Activity 2.3
Ethiopian
Meteorological
Institute (EMI) | Activity 2.1:
UNDP, WMO | Activity 2.2
UNDP, WMO,
Ministry of
Energy and
Water
Resources
(MoEWR)
Activity 2.3,
UNDP, WMO,
INAMHI/MAAT
E page 20 | Activity 2.3 –
UNDP,
Ministry of
Water
Resources
and
Meteorology
(MOWRAM),
Regional
Integrated
Multi-Hazard
EWS for Africa
and Asia
(RIMES) | Activity 2.3:
Antigua and
Barbuda
Meteorological
Services
(ABMS),
UNDP, WMO | Activity 2.3:
FMS, WMO,
UNDP | Activity 2.4
EMI | Activity 2.2:
UNDP, WMO | Activity 2.3
UNDP, WMO,
MoEWR
Activity 3.1,
UNDP, ITU,
page 20 | Activity 3.1 –
UNDP, IFRC,
ITU, PIN | Activity 3.1:
ITU, NODS,
Telecoms
Division,
UNDP | Activity 3.1:
NDRMO,
UNDP | Activity 2.5:
EMI | Activity 2.3:
UNDP, WMO,
WFP | Activity 3.1
UNDP, ITU,
SoDMA, NCA
Activity 3.2,
UNDP, IFRC,
SNGR page
20 | Activity 3.2 –
IFRC, NCDM | Activity 3.2:
IFRC, ITU,
NODS | Activity 3.2:
NDRMO,
IFRC, UNDP | Activity 3.1:
Ethiopian
News Agency
(ENA) | Activity 3.1:
UNDP, WMO,
ITU, IFRC,
WFP | Activity 3.2
UNDP, ITU,
SoDMA, NCA

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46
B
Activity 3.3, Activity 3.3 Activity 3.3: Activity 3.3: Activity 3.2: Activity 3.2: Activity 3.3
UNDP, IFRC, UNDP, WFP, IFRC, UNDP NDRMO, ENA UNDP, IFRC, UNDP, ITU,
SNGR page IFRC, PIN, IFRC, UNDP WFP SoDMA, NCA
20 AAC
Activity 3.3: - Activity 3.3:
ENA UNDP, WFP,
IFRC
Activity 3.4:
ENA,
Ethiopian
Communicatio
ns Authority
(ECA), ITU
Activity 3.5:
Ethiopian Red
Cross Society
(ERCS), IFRC
Activity 3.6:
ERCS, IFRC
Activity 3.7:
ERCS, IFRC
Activity 3.8:
ERCS, IFRC
Activity 3.9:
ERCS, IFRC
180
B.4. Implementation arrangements
181 UNDP will be the Executing Entity of the EW4All-MCP and will be responsible for the overall project execution. It will
collaborate with the EW4All pillar leads in the provision of technical assistance and support.
182 The UNDP will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with the GCF, on approval of the project. This will be in
accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). UNDP’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide
oversight and quality assurance through its Headquarter and Country Office units. This role includes: i) project
preparation oversight; ii) project implementation oversight and supervision, including financial management; and iii)
project completion and evaluation oversight. It also includes oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge-
management. The ‘project assurance’ function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and
independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones
are managed and completed. Project assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project
Board cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, or M&E
Officer, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent
the interests of the parties which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing,
facilitating, procuring, implementing). The senior supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance
regarding the technical feasibility of the project. The senior supplier role must have the authority to commit or acquire
supplier resources required. If necessary, more than one person may be required for this role. Typically, the
implementing partner, UNDP and/or donor(s) would be represented under this role.
Global implementation arrangements
183 This multi-country project will be implemented by UNDP acting as an Accredited Entity and Executing Entity in terms of
GCF standards. In line with UNDP policies and procedures for direct implementation, the Accredited Entity shall authorize
seven participating UNDP Country Offices to implement the project in each of the seven countries in accordance with the
AMA (the “Project Document”). For the avoidance of doubt, as the Accredited Entity will act as the Executing Entity for
the implementation of the Funded Activity, the Project Document shall not be considered a Subsidiary Agreement. This
EW4All global project will be implemented in multiple countries and therefore will use the multi-country project type

--- Table 1 on Page 49 ---
Activity 3.3,
UNDP, IFRC,
SNGR page
20 | Activity 3.3
UNDP, WFP,
IFRC, PIN,
AAC | Activity 3.3:
IFRC, UNDP | Activity 3.3:
NDRMO,
IFRC, UNDP | Activity 3.2:
ENA | Activity 3.2:
UNDP, IFRC,
WFP | Activity 3.3
UNDP, ITU,
SoDMA, NCA
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.3:
ENA | - Activity 3.3:
UNDP, WFP,
IFRC | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.4:
ENA,
Ethiopian
Communicatio
ns Authority
(ECA), ITU |  | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.5:
Ethiopian Red
Cross Society
(ERCS), IFRC |  | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.6:
ERCS, IFRC |  | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.7:
ERCS, IFRC |  | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.8:
ERCS, IFRC |  | 
 |  |  |  | Activity 3.9:
ERCS, IFRC |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 49 ---
 | n line with UNDP policies and procedures for direct implementation, the Accredited Entity shall authorize
seven participating UNDP Country Offices to implement the project in each of the seven countries in accordance with the | 
AMA (the “Project Document”). For the avoidance of doubt, as the Accredited Entity will act as the Executing Entity for | 
the implementation of the Funded Activity, the Project Document shall not be considered a Subsidiary Agreement. | 

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47
B
modality as per UNDP Policies and Procedures. It is appropriate when multiple countries are required to efficiently,
effectively and accountable to joint results on equal terms, enhancing opportunities for achieving substantive and
operational results. This multi-country project is considered a single project for the purposes of project management and
has a unified project document that includes a joint results and resources framework describing interventions in each
participating country. The funds will be transferred to countries following the Internal Control Framework/ICF and signed
Financial Authorization for each country office. The global implementation arrangement will establish a Project Board as
described below. The Executive will be a senior official from the UNDP. UNDP will also play the role of Senior Supplier.
184 Pillar Focal Points (WMO, UNDRR, ITU and IFRC) will support the Project Board through a Coordination Group and will
attend the Board meetings. A formal Responsible Party agreement will be signed with each of the Pillar leads as per
UNDP policy. Fund flow will be from GCF to the UNDP and from the UNDP to the respective Pillar Leads as per the activity
budgets. Implementation of the global proposal will be undertaken by UNDP at global and country levels in partnership
with the four Pillar Leads (WMO, UNDRR, ITU and IFRC). Activities at the global level will be undertaken by pillar leads
(WMO, UNDRR, IFRC and ITU) and UNDP who are responsible parties for the global-level proposal. Relevant UNDP
Programme and Operational Policies and Procedures/POPP: Financial Management and Implementation Modalities will
be followed, whereas WMO, UNDRR and ITU would follow UN agency procedures. (i) At the Global and country levels,
UNDP will partner with WMO, ITU, UNDRR and IFRC. UN Agency to Agency Transfer Agreement will be signed with
UNDRR, WMO, and ITU (PPM_UN Agency to UN Agency Contributions Template Agreement.docx). Between IFRC and
UNDP – an MOU will be signed for the project duration, following UNDP Programme and Operations Policy and
Procedures: Select Responsible Parties and Grantees | United Nations Development Programme. (ii) At the country
levels, UNDP will engage with Government through Standard LOA between UNDP and a Government
Ministry/Institution/IGO on the implementation of a project when UNDP serves as an implementing partner | United
Nations Development Programme; (iii) Partnerships with Responsible Parties and Grantees such as national NGOs will be
formalized through Responsible Party Agreements. (iv) Beneficiaries will be selected through established criteria as per
country-specific contexts and established criteria. All four pillar leads (UNDRR, WMO, ITU, IFRC) are headquartered in
Geneva, with respective regional offices covering each of the 7 countries to deliver technical assistance, training, and
capacity building based on country priorities.
185 As per the UNDP Programme Operation and Policy Procedure (POPP) guidelines, UNDP will be implementing the planned
activities of the programme document, by following a Direct Implementation (DIM) modality. In line with the programme
document and availability of funds, UNDP (HQ and the participating Country Offices) will develop and approve a Multi-
Year Work Plan by following a UNDP standard work plan format - highlighting the description of activities, linking with the
relevant outputs (with their respective baselines, targets and indicators), Responsible Party/UNDP, period/quarter/year
of implementation, and the allocated/sources of funds, against the approved activities. Once the Multi-Year Work Plan is
approved by the Project Board and the funds are available, UNDP HQ and its participating COs will follow a common
transparent digital competitive procurement process at their respective levels, for the selection/hiring of the national
and/or international contractors (public/private/NGOs/academia) against the planned activities and as part of the
inception phase of the project.
186 The procurement process for the selection of contractors starts with the development of a standard Terms of Reference
(TOR) for each activity (in which relevant eligibility criteria or for selection of beneficiaries and/or interventions, amongst
others, would be highlighted), advertising them in the UNDP global procurement website, invitation of/receiving
applications for the implementation of activities from the interested parties, reviewing and approving the recommended
applications of the contractors by the UNDP procurement committees (to be formed), awarding the activities by signing
of the legal contracts/agreements between UNDP and selected contractors for the implementation of activities, paying
the available funds of the activity to the contractor in installment basis (per the agreement), based on the satisfactory
implementation of the assigned tasks. In case where other UN agency implements activities (ITU, WMO, UNDRR), UNDP
will sign a standard agreement with the UN agency, without any competitive procurement process, and the UN agencies
will follow UN/UNDP procurement processes. The list of responsible parties for implementing the project activities for
the global proposal are provided below, which is reflected in figure 2.
• Output 1

--- Table 1 on Page 50 ---
The procurement process for the selection of contractors starts with the development of a standard Terms of Reference
(TOR) for each activity (in which relevant eligibility criteria or for selection of beneficiaries and/or interventions, amongs
others, would be highlighted), advertising them in the UNDP global procurement website, invitation of/receiving
applications for the implementation of activities from the interested parties, reviewing and approving the recommended
applications of the contractors by the UNDP procurement committees (to be formed), awarding the activities by signing

--- Table 2 on Page 50 ---
the available funds of the activity to the contractor in installment basis (per the agreement), based on the satisfactory
implementation of the assigned tasks. In case where other UN agency implements activities (ITU, WMO, UNDRR), UNDP
will sign a standard agreement with the UN agency, without any competitive procurement process, and the UN agencies
will follow UN/UNDP procurement processes.

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48
B
o Activity 1.1:
▪ Sub-Activity 1.1.1: UNDRR, WMO and ITU
▪ Sub-Activity 1.1.2: UNDRR, WMO, ITU and IFRC
o Activity 1.2:
▪ Sub-Activity 1.2.1: WMO
▪ Sub-Activity 1.2.2: UNDRR, WMO, ITU and IFRC
▪ Sub-Activity 1.2.3: UNDRR
o Activity 1.3:.
▪ Sub-Activity 1.3.1: UNDRR
▪ Sub-Activity 1.3.2: WMO, IFRC
▪ Sub-Activity 1.3.3: ITU
• Output 2, all activities and sub-activities: UNDP Country Offices for Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji and Somalia.
187 The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by the
Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for
development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case
a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP Executive Coordinator. As the
main governing and decision-making body of the project, the Project Board will be governed by comprehensive
guidelines and the latest policies regarding the establishment and operation of Project Board following UNDP's
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). This will be approved by all members during the first project
board meeting. The terms of reference on the composition of the project board, roles and responsibilities in detail,
including on quorum requirements will be outlined in the terms of references developed and shared will all members
prior the first board meeting.
188 The Project Board will be comprised as following:
a. UNDP who will hold the role of Executive and will be represented by the UNDP’s Director for the Bureau of
Policy Programming Support (BPPS) or his/her direct designated representative.
b. A pillar lead representative that will hold the role of Senior Supplier on a rotation basis. Pillar lead rotation
should ensure that each pillar lead holds this position at least once during the project’s lifetime.
189 Project Board meetings will be held virtually, twice times a year. In addition, the members of the committee will look to
meet physically every other year (three times in the five years) for a knowledge sharing meeting. Three such meetings
will be held during the implementation of the seven country projects. These meetings will be attended by the EW4All
Pillar Leads, GCF, UNDP and two representatives from each of the country projects, including at least one from the
relevant national governments.
190 A global PMU will be constituted within UNDP for the overall project coordination, oversight and monitoring. The PMU
will also provide technical support to help the country PMUs in accessing regional and international resources through
networking. Perhaps most importantly, the PMU will ensure the EW4All pillar leads are kept abreast of the project
progress for their inputs and support. The tentative structure of the global PMU is provided in Figure 2. It comprises of
four full time staff – a Project Manager, a Finance Analyst, a Programme and Operations Associate and a Procurement
Analyst. The administrative team will support the acquisition and procurement of specialised equipment during the
project for specific country’s needs, in an effective manner that also responds to national capacities. It will also look into
developing Long-Term Purchasing Agreements that would ensure the efficient use of project resources. The PMU will be
provided part-time technical support through a team of advisors who specialize in climate change adaptation, climate
information and EWSs, a Gender, Disability, Social and Environmental Safeguards expert, a Communications Expert and
other subject experts brought in on an as needed basis.

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49
B
The Project Manager will run the project on a day-to-day basis on behalf of the Project Board within the constraints laid
down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal evaluation report and
other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP have been completed and submitted to UNDP. The Project Manager
is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for the project. The Project Manager’s prime
responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required
standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The project Logic Framework (indicators, means
of verification, assumptions) will be reviewed and the quarterly and annual plans will be refined based on the progress
made in each country as well as at the regional and global level.
`
Figure 2: Global implementation arrangements
Country level implementation arrangements
191 The 7 country projects will be implemented as part of the global multi-country project following the established Direct
Implementation Modality (DIM) where UNDP relevant country office acts as Executing Entity. Implementation
arrangements will be vetted and agreed by the government via the relevant Nationally Designated Authority to the GCF
(NDA) and other Government agencies and relevant ministries. UNDP has a country presence through established fully
operational offices in each of the 7 project countries. At the country level, UNDP will sign Standard LOA between UNDP
and a Government Ministry/Institution/IGO implementation of specified project activities defined by the proejct. UNDP
will follow standards and procedures for project implementation as reflected within the SBAA signed between UNDP and
each national government. as described within each existing signed country SBAA.108 In the case where specific
government agencies will implement certain project activities, these Agencies will act as Responsible Parties for these
specific activities for the duration of the project. In this case the Responsible Party Agreement will be signed between
UNDP and the Responsible Party. Following UNDP POPP guidelines: https://popp.undp.org/procedure/responsible-
parties.
108 https://www.uncdf.org/sbaa

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50
B
192 The Project Board at the national level will be comprised of UNDP as Executive, The Senior Beneficiaries are the most
vulnerable communities and will be represented by the NDMA or Disaster Risk Agency as appropriate, designated by the
NDA. . The Project Board will be responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required
by the National Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international
competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP’s Resident
Representative. The Project Board will meet at least once a year.
193 The project will be developed by UNDP under DIM modality with the support of a National Project Management Unit
(PMU) that will be established in each of the countries. The PMU may rely on the support of Responsible Parties (RPs) in
the implementation of specific actions and/or activities for the delivery of project objectives. RPs will be accountable to
the respective UNDP country office for the implementation of specified activities and outputs of the project to achieve
intended results, i outcomes, and the effective use of UNDP resources. Responsible Parties (RPs) will be identified by the
NDA and UNDP based on their comparative advantages and core competence and will support the respective UNDP
country office in successfully implementing the project activities.. The RPs will report to the UNDP-country office as per
the terms of RP agreement that they will enter into with the UNDP country office.
194 The structure and staff of the National PMU will be decided by each country. The National Project Manager or National
Project Coordinator will run the project on a day-to-day basis within the constraints laid down by the National Project
Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal evaluation report and other documentation
required by the GCF and UNDP has been completed and submitted to UNDP. The Project Manager is responsible for day-
to-day management and decision-making for the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the
project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and within the
specified constraints of time and cost.
195 Project Support comprises stakeholders including relevant government ministries and departments at national level and
local government with local offices in the districts (NMHS and NDMA and ICT ministries/regulators), the community
members from targeted districts, the civil society and other local and international NGOs. Pillar Focal Points will provide
technical advice to the Board through relevant subject experts, reflecting their role in each country.
196 Sub-national coordination of project activities will be done through relevant district agencies, and where needed, through
local units of international agencies such as IFRC societies. Sub-national planning, particularly at the village level will be
informed by village level institutions for social and civil protection. Community members will play a critical role in the
implementation and monitoring of project activities. Extensive stakeholder engagements have been undertaken at the
community level in all countries in the formulation of their respective Stakeholder Engagement Plans. These plans inform
the roles, functions and responsibilities by which communities can be fully engaged in the project.
197 The project Logic Framework (indicators, means of verification, assumptions) will be reviewed and the quarterly and
annual plans will be updated annually, based on stakeholder engagements. The stakeholders will also be engaged during
the mid-term and final evaluations to assess the progress of the project and enable adaptive project management in
response to the needs and priorities of the communities targeted. Community participation will be tracked through tools
developed by the project management, leveraging, where possible the existing decentralised government structures to
implement the project and the role and views of the community members. Community representation in the Board will
be through the decentralised structure of the Implementation Partner in each country.
Responsible Parties will be selected by UNDP based on their technical and institutional capacities, comparative advantage,
cost effective and financial management to implement specific project activities and achieve intended results, compared
to other potential organizations. UNDP standard rules and regulations will be followed at all times, as per POPP
(https://popp.undp.org/procedure/responsible-parties), including the undertaking of the Harmonised Approach to Cash
Transfers (HACT) assessments. Exhaustive stakeholder engagements and feasibility studies which included analysis of
vulnerabilities and key priorities of stakeholders have guided the selection of sites and beneficiaries for the different
project activities. The role of the Responsible Parties in each participating country will be to implement the specified
project activities, manage resources, monitor and report on the results as outlined in the Responsible Party Agreement.

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51
B
Figure 3. National project implementation arrangements
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request
198 Investments in and around MHEWS are largely public goods including the networks, capacity building at the institutional
level as well as community level. While there are a few elements that are conducive for private sector engagement, in
developing countries, particularly in the aviation and telecommunications sectors, such opportunities are largely
untapped due to under-developed markets. Markets can also be constrained due to challenges in insecurity, access and
limitations of government support and available financial services. Public investments in MHEWS have been limited and
sporadic partially because the value that MHEWS can bring is not recognised. The absence of technical capacities to make

--- Table 1 on Page 54 ---
 | B.5. Justification for GCF funding request | 

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52
B
use of existing CIEWS undermines the trust in maintaining such systems. As a result, countries’ needs for MHEWS have
been addressed largely through external financing, on a project-by-project basis. This approach addresses the short-term
equipment needs but has many shortcomings considering that the “ecosystems” that make use of MHEWS require long-
term support and financing.
199 This GCF program focuses on establishing a global support architecture that intends to be long-lasting, is built on the
principle of multi-partners to address a wide range of needs which to date have been addressed, if at all, in a fragmented
manner, and offers a platform for regional and global south-south, north-south, and public-private information exchange.
The quantum of GCF financing allows a program of global/multi-country coverage to establish a pathway towards EW4All
not just for the initial 7 countries but more; and their mandate allows multiple partners not only the pillar leads but also
CREWS, SOFF and other initiatives, to come together to overcome the fragmentation. The multi-partners approach,
particularly the involvement of the likes of ITU, allows exploring the possibility of meaningful public-private sector
collaboration around the dissemination and use of CIEWS.
Key characteristics and dynamics of the private sector
200 Considering that EWS also affect various economic sectors, project interactions with the private sector are expected to be
diverse, and the nature and the extent of private sector engagement in this project will show significant variations
depending on country contexts. However, the following commonalities can be drawn to guide private sector engagement
within the proposed project.
201 The private sector, especially in the telecommunication industry, plays a critical role in both the collection/transmission
of basic observational data and dissemination of early warnings. This project will, with the help of ITU and GSMA seek
collaboration and partnerships with the telecommunications sector in each of the countries. This is critical as universal
coverage of early warnings will not be met unless the existing mobile cellular networks, managed by private operators,
are utilized to assist in automatic collection of observations and to complement radio, TV and other networks in
disseminating alerts. However, in many developing countries, regulatory barriers exist in effectively engaging these
private operators in the dissemination of early warning information.
202 Telecommunication infrastructure is vulnerable to extreme weather events and therefore, companies owning such
infrastructure are also prospective clients for climate services. The same infrastructure can also be leveraged to host
observation systems such as lightening sensors and generic weather observations, particularly in remote areas with
limited power infrastructure and security challenges.
203 Limited public-private partnerships with providers of digital networks and services limit the reach of early warnings and
weather information through multiple communication channels including radio, TV, internet, mobile phones, satellites
and social media. In remote locations (particularly mountainous environments) satellite-based transmission and
dissemination mechanisms may offer the only effective means of communication and therefore also need to be
considered.
204 Private sector engagement in the project will also take place at a different scale involving multi-national corporations
who are expected to supply hydrometeorological equipment to target countries. National governments will be supported
to adopt requisite policy frameworks and principles for successful public-private partnerships between government
entities and private businesses. This will facilitate alignment with corporate social responsibility and help leverage
mechanisms such as the UN Global Compact which offer businesses the opportunity to adopt sustainability principles and
support UN goals. The project will leverage the global commitments and engagement of the private sector as part of the
EW4All Advisory Panel e.g. GMSA, for the telecom industry, IDF for insurance and Microsoft and Planet Labs for
digital/frontier technologies.
205 This will also facilitate the adoption of emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence and provide access to new and
innovative digital platforms, social media and technological platforms such as remote sensing systems for high resolution
hydrometeorological data acquisition, big-data and cloud computing. This can facilitate data analysis and delivery to the
most vulnerable, enhance warning, improve dissemination and increase awareness about disasters and early warnings.

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53
B
At the other end of the spectrum, private companies and innovators can help design low cost, autonomous EWSs and
alarms that are managed by communities, for example for floods109 and landslides.110
206 The insurance sector plays an important role in using improved weather and climate data. This project will explore how
CIEWS can be used for development of weather indexed insurance products that the population can benefit from. In
many developing countries, risk transfer mechanisms using insurance are significantly underdeveloped due to the
absence of weather/climate and other socioeconomic data needed for product development, lack of awareness about
insurance products, underdeveloped regulations, all of which increase risks for insurance providers to enter into the
market. Globally, economic losses from natural hazard-related disasters in 2022 amounted to USD 270 billion and 55% of
the losses were uninsured. In emerging and developing countries, less than 10% of their losses were insured.111 The
absence of insurance as a mechanism to mitigate the impact when climate-induced extreme events strike continues to be
a major impediment for resilient development in many developing countries.
B.6. Exit strategy
The global support structure
207 The speed and scale of interventions required to deliver on the EW4All objectives can only be achieved through
coordinated global support involving all key actors across the EW4All value chain. The needs of LDCs and SIDS to
establish, operate and maintain their national end-to-end EWSs, effective communication systems and disaster
preparedness at the level of vulnerable communities requires multiple funding instruments. These instruments need to
bring together complementary mechanisms that maximize country ownership and impact.
208 There is a need to facilitate national investment planning to achieve EW4All goals around which finance can coalesce to
achieve shared value and results. This includes the development of national roadmaps and investment pipelines and the
communication of a common vision of needs, priorities, and opportunities across all four pillars of EWS. It is necessary to
recognize the respective business practices, funding cycles, and operational practices of various financial instruments to
accelerate GCF co-finance. This will help address gaps across the continuum of country-specific technical and financial
support needs for end-to-end EWSs, translating country vision into concrete investment.
209 The absence of a consistent, reliable and robust source of holistic technical and financial support to countries is the
essential challenge to the effective generation and use of MHEWS. Support available to countries is fragmented and
tends to be driven through project financing. Global initiatives such as EW4All and mechanisms like CREWS are therefore
necessary for countries to receive consistent, continuous support that meets the global standards, allows them to
exchange knowledge and sustainably develop and expand MHEWS to cover all sections of their vulnerable communities.
210 Recognizing that responding adequately to the SG’s call for EW4All will require concerted efforts at the global level for a
sustained period of time, developing a strong exit strategy for this project will become one of the critical deliverables of
this GCF project. In particular, the global support architecture supported by the project will continue to finance itself
through various channels including bilateral or multilateral public financing, philanthropists, private sector financing, or
other innovative financial instrument. Sustainability and replicability of the project will be facilitated and supported
through key partnerships and its alignment with key frameworks and strategies at the global and regional level. The
project is aligned with the WMO Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS), designed to facilitate delivery of best
practice climate services.
211 This project is designed to address existing root causes and barriers to sustainable climate information services, MHEWS
and Anticipatory Action in the most vulnerable countries among the LDCs and SIDS. The following strategy is proposed to
ensure sustainability beyond the project’s lifespan.
109 “Community-Based Flood Early-Warning System | India | UNFCCC” (https://unfccc.int/climate-action/un-global-climate-action-awards/winning-
projects/activity-database/community-based-flood-early-warning-system-india, n.d.), accessed April 14, 2023.
110 N. Dixon et al., “An Acoustic Emission Landslide EWS for Communities in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries,” Landslides 15, no. 8 (August
2018): 1631–44, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-018-0977-1.
111 Munich Re, “Natural Disaster Risks - Rising Trend in Losses” (https://www.munichre.com/en/risks/natural-disasters.html, n.d.), accessed April 6,
2024.

--- Table 1 on Page 56 ---
 | B.6. Exit strategy | 

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54
B
Institutional strengthening
212 The project will strengthen the existing institutions and governance at the global, regional and national levels, rather than
creating new parallel structures. Sustainability will be supported by the establishment of holistic national and regional
frameworks, with associated institutional coordination mechanisms such as road-maps, to ensure effective governance,
coordination and management of national climate services. The project will support integration of climate services in key
policies, strategies, plans and budgets which will provide a foundation for uptake of climate information in decision-
making and facilitate sustainable service provision in the long term. The identification of funding modalities for climate
information products and anticipatory action including by integration in the national/regional budget/pools will also
contribute to sustainability.
213 State of the art hydrometeorological monitoring equipment and tools for observations, monitoring, modelling and
prediction will be integrated in the existing hydrological and meteorological institutions, based on available data
management infrastructure. Institutional capacity will be further strengthened through upgrading relevant IT and
communications equipment. Special attention will be given to building capacities for O&M of both equipment and data
infrastructure. The project will also help NHMS and NDMAs in developing and implementing long-term sustainable
strategies for O&M through financial arrangements such as SOFF, for which it will provide support. NHMS will be
supported in designing and disseminating a suite of tailored climate information products for national ministries,
departments and agencies and the private sector to ensure some cost recovery. Transfer of Equipment: Equipment
purchased through GCF Proceeds will be transferred to the governments per standard processes as detailed in Article III
of each SBAA entered between UNDP and each respective government in a mutually agreed upon manner that places a
priority of the sustainability of project results and objectives.
214 In order to ensure long term technical and capacity support, the project will support NMHS and NDMA to participate in
networks based on regional and national centres of expertise. This will ensure long-term and sustainable engagement
with governments and policy makers. It will allow network actors to apply to a wide variety of other funding sources,
including utilising academic grants to support research as part of MEAL. This national and regional technical capacity will
furthermore benefit DAEs, regional institutions and national government by increasing access to technically rigorous
support and their capacity to submit transformative proposals in the future. By including DAEs and NDAs in the
development of proposals, this programme will also expose them to new ideas and enhance their proposal development
capacity.
Community level capacity strengthening
215 The project will adopt a broad multi-stakeholder approach and bring on board government agencies, multilateral and
international agencies and NGOs, Organisations of Persons with Disabilities (OPDs), Red Cross and Red Crescent network,
private sector actors and communities as users of climate information, early warnings and anticipatory actions as well as
front-line agencies in climate adaptation and disaster response. When possible, this will be done through existing
government-led coordination mechanisms. Institutional linkages will be strengthened by enacting enabling policies and
procedures that improve effectiveness of delivery and use of CIEWS. Local, community-based institutions, in particular,
will be strengthened to effectively access CIEWS, interpret and co-develop anticipatory action, adaptation and response
strategies and plans. These activities will be implemented through government agencies and institutions with a mandate
for decentralized disaster preparedness and response. Lessons learned will be used to fine tune and improve the
strategies and plans and successes will be scaled up through the relevant agencies to other vulnerable regions in the
country.
Programmatic alignment
216 This multi-country project will unlock opportunities for coordinated action and serve as an accelerator and amplifier for
EWS support co-financed through complementary instruments. It will work closely with other important programmes
such as CREWS and SOFF, and other mechanisms for funding such as from GEF and multilateral donors. This will be
achieved by building on multilateral mechanisms such as CREWS and the GCF, which mobilizes a significant number of
diverse national entities ranging from Ministries to national NGOs operating through a collaborative and partnership-
based business models. This will ensure scaling up of projects supported by these agencies, particularly under SOFF and
CREWS.

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55
B
Financing
217 Establishing a financing strategy in each participating country is one of the deliverables of the project to address the
critical challenge of financial sustainability. The strategy will assess the feasibility of various possible sources of finance,
including both public and private sources, to expand and maintain end-end-to end MHEWS in the selected countries,
based on their specific needs. This includes the national hydrometeorological monitoring network including public and
private financing sources. The financing strategy will include financial mechanisms that ensure the sustenance of: i) the
national hydrometeorological monitoring network; ii) development of climate products including IbFs, models for
scenario and trigger development; iii) support to anticipatory actions including ex-ante forecast-based financing and
resilience bond or ex-post climate risk transfer mechanisms; and iv) support disaster preparedness and response
capabilities down to the level of communities. These mechanisms will be operated at multiple levels and tailored to each
countries fiscal policies and capacities for effective and efficient fund transfer for DRR. Contingency funds will thereby be
released to targeted agencies and communities to take early action and avoid and/or mitigate the impact of disasters
through effective action built on CIEWS. This arrangement applies to countries where contingency funds are already
available for early and anticipatory action. Deployment of these funds is based on agreed approaches built by consensus
between governments and donors. Where this coordination is lacking the project will help coordination mechanisms
between relevant agencies and the government.
218 .
219 The financing plan will explore public-private partnership on data usage, analysis and dissemination. It will develop and
implement campaigns and consultations with various development partners, seek synergy among donors and coordinate
funding requests, including GCF submissions, across pillars to unlock financing at the global level. The project will support
Direct Access Entities to fast-track access to GCF financing on early warnings. Countries will be supported in sourcing
financing from international financial institutions, international organisations, vertical funds and corporate donors
seeking to support climate adaptation.
Policy strengthening
Project activities will fill gaps in policies and governance arrangements to strengthen national level EWS coordination
among government actors at the national and local level across sectors. Relevant national strategies and plans will be
updated or developed for NMHS and NDMA agencies in each country contributing to Sendai Target G Indicator 4: All
countries' local governments have a plan to act on early warnings. The project will strengthen legislation and policies
governing coordination, exchanging of information, coordinated dissemination of warnings and establishing DRR
structures for preparedness and response. This will mainstream early warning and anticipatory action and will leverage
supportive framework and legislation within the respective countries. The strategy will be linked to social protection and
DRM based on local priorities and will address assignment of roles and responsibilities at the national and subnational
level for government agencies, communities and local institutions as well as other actors such as NGOs. Coordination
platform will be established and inter-institutional arrangements will be specified for data sharing, inter-operability of
systems, co-design of services.

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56
C
FINANCING INFORMATION
C.1. Total financing
(a) Total amount Currency
Requeste
d GCF
funding
(i + ii + 103.25 million USD ($)
iii + iv +
v + vi +
vii)
GCF
financia
l Amount Tenor Grace period Pricing
instrum
ent
(i) Senior
Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
loans
(ii)
Subordin
Enter amount Enter years Enter years Enter %
ated
loans
(iii)
Enter amount Enter % equity return
Equity
(iv)
Guarante Enter amount Enter years
es
(v)
Reimburs
Enter amount
able
grants
(vi)
103.25
Grants
(vii)
Results-
based Enter amount
payment
s
(b) Co- Total amount Currency
financin
g
11.34 million USD ($)
informa
tion
Name of Financial
institutio instrume Amount Currency Tenor & grace Pricing Seniority
n nt

--- Table 1 on Page 59 ---
 | FINANCING INFORMATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.1. Total financing |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a) |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  | 
 | Requeste |  | 103.25 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  | 
 | d GCF |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | funding |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i + ii + |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | iii + iv + |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | v + vi + |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | vii) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GCF |  | Amount |  |  |  | Tenor |  |  | Grace period |  |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | 
 | financia |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | l |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | instrum |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ent |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (i) Senior |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (ii) |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % |  | 
 | Subordin |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | loans |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (iii) |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Enter % equity return |  | 
 | Equity |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (iv) |  | Enter amount |  |  |  | Enter years |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Guarante |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | es |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (v) |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Reimburs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | able |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vi) |  | 103.25 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Grants |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (vii) |  | Enter amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Results- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | based |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | payment |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | s |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (b) Co- |  |  | Total amount |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financin |  | 11.34 |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | g |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | informa |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tion |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Name of |  |  | Financial |  | Amount |  | Currency |  | Tenor & grace |  |  |  |  | Pricing |  | Seniority | 
 | institutio |  |  | instrume |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | n |  |  | nt |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57
C
Governm Enter% Options
ents million Enter years
In kind 10.39
Pillar USD ($)
Leads
million Enter years Enter% Options
UNDP-CO Grant 0.90
USD ($)
million Enter years Enter% Options
UNDP-CO In-kind 0.05
USD ($)
Tota Amount Currency
l
fina
ncin
g 114.59 million USD ($)
(c) =
(a)+(
b)
(d)
Other
financin
g
arrange
1) Parallel financing in the amount of 40.1 mln. from System Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) will
ments
go towards supporting the countries at the early stages of the EWS value chain by investing in
and
contrib meteorological equipment like automated weather stations and radio sounds.
utions 2) Parallel co-financing US$ 563,985 in the form of a loan has been provided by the National
(max.
Secretariat of Risk Management of the Republic of Ecuador to streamline ongoing initiative
250
“Strengthening the National Early Warning System for Multiple Threats”.
words,
approxi
mately
0.5
page)
C.2. Financing by component
Component Output Indicative GCF financing Co-financing
cost
Amount Financial Amount Financial Name of
million
Options Instrument Options Instrument Institutions
USD ($)
IFRC, ITU,
1 1 13.50 6.68 Grants 6.82 In-kind
WMO
National
Government
Grants, In s, institutions
2 2 92.50 88.93 Grants 3.57
kind of Ecuador,
Ethiopia,
Cambodia)
M&E Participating
Grants, In-
M&E 3.04 2.79 Grants 0.25 country
kind
offices
PMC Participating
Grants, In-
PMC 5.54 4.84 Grants 0.70 country
kind
offices
Total cost (USD) 114.59 103.25 11.34

--- Table 1 on Page 60 ---
 | Governm |  | In kind |  |  | 10.39 |  |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter% |  |  | Options | 
 | ents |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Pillar |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Leads |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
UNDP-CO |  |  | Grant |  |  | 0.90 |  |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter% |  |  | Options | 
UNDP-CO |  |  | In-kind |  |  | 0.05 |  |  |  |  | million
USD ($) |  | Enter years |  |  |  | Enter% |  |  | Options | 
 | Tota |  |  | Amount |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Currency |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | l |  | 114.59 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | fina |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ncin |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | g |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (c) = |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (a)+( |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (d) |  | 1) Parallel financing in the amount of 40.1 mln. from System Observations Financing Facility (SOFF) will
go towards supporting the countries at the early stages of the EWS value chain by investing in
meteorological equipment like automated weather stations and radio sounds.
2) Parallel co-financing US$ 563,985 in the form of a loan has been provided by the National
Secretariat of Risk Management of the Republic of Ecuador to streamline ongoing initiative
“Strengthening the National Early Warning System for Multiple Threats”. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Other |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | financin |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | g |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | arrange |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | ments |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | contrib |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | utions |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | (max. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 250 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | words, |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | approxi |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | mately |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 0.5 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | page) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | C.2. Financing by component |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Component |  |  |  | Output |  |  | Indicative |  | GCF financing |  |  |  |  |  | Co-financing |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | cost |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Amount
Options |  |  |  |  | Financial
Instrument | Amount
Options |  | Financial
Instrument | Name of
Institutions |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | million |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | USD ($) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | 1 |  |  |  | 1 |  | 13.50 |  |  | 6.68 |  |  |  |  | Grants | 6.82 |  | In-kind | IFRC, ITU,
WMO |  | 
 | 2 |  |  |  | 2 |  | 92.50 |  |  | 88.93 |  |  |  |  | Grants | 3.57 |  | Grants, In
kind | National
Government
s, institutions
of Ecuador,
Ethiopia,
Cambodia) |  | 
 | M&E |  |  |  | M&E |  | 3.04 |  |  | 2.79 |  |  |  |  | Grants | 0.25 |  | Grants, In-
kind | Participating
country
offices |  | 
 | PMC |  |  |  | PMC |  | 5.54 |  |  | 4.84 |  |  |  |  | Grants | 0.70 |  | Grants, In-
kind | Participating
country
offices |  | 
 | Total cost (USD) |  |  |  |  |  | 114.59 |  |  | 103.25 |  |  |  |  |  | 11.34 |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 60 ---
Amount
Options

--- Table 3 on Page 60 ---
Financial
Instrument

--- Table 4 on Page 60 ---
Amount
Options

--- Table 5 on Page 60 ---
Financial
Instrument

--- Table 6 on Page 60 ---
Name of
Institutions

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58
C
Financing per country:
Antigua & Barbuda US$ 12,373,360
Cambodia US$ 13,218,000
Chad US$ 12,262,938
Ecuador US$ 12,369,770
Ethiopia US$ 12,975,801
Fiji US$ 12,938,526
Somalia US$ 12,792,367
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? Yes ☒ No ☐
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? Yes ☒ No ☐
220 The project is expected to support capacity building, technology development and technology transfer through multiple
mechanisms. Under Activity 1.3 knowledge exchange between countries and across initiatives with a focus on countries
seeking to improve their MHEWS and Anticipatory Action approaches and systems and through development of analytic
frameworks and models for IbFs and scenarios to inform early and anticipatory actions.
221 Under Activity 2.1 the project will support capacity development towards meeting the needs of Sendai Framework Target
G. This includes collection of risk data, information and its analysis leading to improved production and use of risk
information to support IbFs, better integration of relevant agencies with the work on NDMAs and NMHYS for more
efficient use of this information and improved monitoring, evaluation and learning systems.
222 Under Activity 2.2, the observation and forecasting capacities of NMHS will be enhanced by addressing technical gaps
leading to better accuracy and timeliness of these forecasts leading to GABON compliance. This will also lead to
installation of EWS and forecasting services for all priority services leading to meeting Sendai Target G Indicator 4.
223 Activity 2.3 will lead to improved use of technological solutions for data integration and sharing for development and
broadcasting alerts, communications and dissemination of early warnings across multiple channels, but specifically
focusing on mobile cellular networks and communications. This will lead to the strengthening or establishment of the
Common Alerting Platform in all countries backed with multiple channels of dissemination by working with network
operators. The activity will also build capacities of extension services in co-development of early warnings which
integrate weather forecasts and information with indigenous knowledge and practices. Innovative technologies for
autonomous community based EWSs will be transferred for relevant hazards to adapt to local EWS needs, particularly in
remote, “off-grid” locations and areas with poor reach of the NMHS and most dissemination channels.

--- Table 1 on Page 61 ---
 | C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) |  | 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? |  | Yes ☒ No ☐ | 

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59
D
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial
Investment Framework.
224 Globally, 3.3 to 3.6 billion people are highly vulnerable to climate change112. Between 2015 and 2021, 1.05 billion people
were affected by disasters and $330 billion USD in economic losses of 145 countries reporting to the Sendai Framework.
Yet, only 4.1% of disaster-related development assistance was allocated to ex-ante prevention and preparedness, of
which the majority was for emergency response113. As of 2022 half the countries in the world, less than half of LDCs and
less than a third of SIDS had a MHEWS.
225 Numerous studies have assessed the costs and benefits of EWSs. EWSs save lives and assets worth at least ten times their
cost. Just 24 hours warning of a coming storm or heat wave can cut the ensuing damage by 30 percent, and spending
$800 million on such systems in developing countries would avoid losses of $3–16 billion per year. Such investments
benefit from high benefit-cost ratios. For each of the 7 countries included in this project, an economic analysis will be
conducted following the GCF Guidelines. The outcome of these 7 analyses will be aggregated into a single economic
analysis for the entire proposed project.
226 The project contributes to the achievement of GCF strategic-level impacts through increased resilience and enhanced
livelihoods of the most vulnerable people and communities globally through a programmatic approach which accelerates
access to EWSs for the most critical climate hazards. It does so by investing in technologies and finance for generation,
dissemination of climate information and in its effective use through preparedness and anticipatory action. It will
enhance and increase the impact and long-term sustainability of these investments both at the national and regional
levels. It responds to the update of the GCF strategic plan 2024-20271 which contributes to the EW4All call of the
Secretary Generation with a dedicated target result on EWS.
227 Seven countries will receive holistic investment and technical assistance to establish an effective end-to-end EWS in
accordance with the actions proposed in the EW4All Executive Action Plan. A particular focus will be placed on improving
last-mile communication of and community-level capacities to receive, understand and act on climate information and
early warnings by ensuring each country prepares and updates disaster response plans and ensures communities have
access to communications, the capacities and knowledge and the preparation to react to warnings. These activities will
directly contribute to improving the resilience of people potentially at risk from climate-related extreme events and
hazards in LDCs and SIDS where communities are highly vulnerable to climate induced disasters on account of socio-
economic vulnerabilities and physical exposure.
228 Actionable climate information products for agriculture, energy and water management will increase resilience across
sectors, particularly agriculture, reducing the risks from climate-related hazards and thus reduce losses and damage to
crops, infrastructure and other assets. By the end of the project, it is expected that these target countries are well on
track to achieve the target of universal early warning coverage and hence the total population of the countries will be
receiving adaptation benefits from the project. Section B (pg. 43 to 48) summarizes the proposed interventions at the
country level which address barriers and gaps in governance, coordination, policies, implementation of EWS and in
delivering EWS services and response. The section also describes the expected adaptation benefits of these interventions
for vulnerabilities across relevant sectors and geographic areas.
229 The project will support existing WMO frameworks such as WIGOS, WIS, WIPPS and is aligned with existing initiatives
around early warning and early action such as CREWS and the Risk-informed Early Action Partnership (REAP) which aims
to make one billion people safer from disasters by 2025. The project will facilitate knowledge exchange, coordination and
112 The UN Global Early Warning Initiative for the Implementation of Climate Adaptation. ‘Early Warnings for All - Executive Action Plan 2023-2027’.
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 2023.
113 UNDRR and WMO. ‘Global Status of Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems: Target G’. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2022.

--- Table 1 on Page 62 ---
 | EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA | 
 | This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s Initial | 
 | Investment Framework. | 

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60
D
collaboration with key initiatives such as the Alliance for Hydrometeorological Development, Anticipatory Hub, CREWs,
SOFF, and with UN agencies and IFIs to ensure that they collectively strive towards meeting the EW4All target.
230 The project will contribute to the achievement of the GCF indicator of reduction in the number of people affected by
climate-related disasters and will deliver climate change adaptation benefits by:
1. Improving the resilience of people potentially at risk from climate-related extreme events and hazards in LDCs
and SIDS where communities are highly vulnerable to climate induced disasters on account of socio-economic
vulnerabilities and physical exposure. It will provide early warnings to communities who are susceptible to
cyclones, coastal flooding and sea-level rise, floods, landslides and droughts.
2. Strengthening NMHSs and NDMAs in participating countries through regional and global collaborations which
enhance their access to sustainable finance and technical knowledge. This will result in up gradation and
improved O&M of hydrometeorological infrastructure, access to innovative and state of the art tools and
techniques and streamlined protocols which increase institutional effectiveness leading to more reliable impact-
based forecasts and targeted, actionable climate information products for early and effective on-ground action.
3. Enhancing regional and national MHEWS with targeted and timely IbFs which help communities take effective
measures to secure their lives, assets, and livelihoods during climate-related hazards and triggers to inform early
and anticipatory actions, including forecast based financing so that resources are made available to at-risk
communities ahead of disasters.
4. Increasing the safeguarding of assets and infrastructure from climate-related hazards through accurate, timely
and actionable early warning services. Actionable climate information products for agriculture, energy and water
management will increase resilience across sectors, particularly agriculture, reducing the risks from climate-
related hazards and thus reduce losses and damage to crops, infrastructure and other assets.
5. Strengthening national DRM legal frameworks and financing mechanisms as well as coordination, collaboration,
and knowledge sharing from the local to the international level leading to an effective DRM cycle and increased
opportunities for regional cooperation and up-scaling of climate resilient sustainable development.
D.1. Impact potential
Country No. Direct Beneficiaries % of Direct Beneficiaries No. Indirect % of Indirect Beneficiaries of
(m/f) of Total Population Beneficiaries (m/f) Total Population
Antigua and Barbuda 91,500 (43,712/ 47,788) 100% 114,000 (54,461/59,539) N/A114
Cambodia 514,098 (254,324/ 2.91% 2,153,028 (1,065,103/ 12.21%
259,774) 1,087,925)
Chad 1,200,000 (593,939 / 6% 5,500,000 (2,722,222/ 28%
606,061) 2,777,778)
Ecuador 513,900 (250,367/ 2.6% 14,000,000 (6,820,675/ 72%
263,533) 7,179,325)
Ethiopia 16,000,000 (8,035,200/ 12.12% 21,600,000 (10,847,520/ 13.64%
7,964,800) 10,752,480)
Fiji 416,282 (211,217/ 46% 488,308 (247,762/ 54%
205,065) 240,546)
Somalia 7,800,000 40.25 19,247,455 100%
(3,910,920/3,889,080) (9,650,674/9,596,781)
231 The approach used to estimate direct and indirect beneficiaries is as follows. Direct beneficiaries are vulnerable
populations (as per official census or assessments) directly involved in project activities falling largely under Pillar 3 and 4,
such as recipients of EWS through enhanced dissemination systems, capacity building in the use of MHEWS, disaster
114 Indirect beneficiaries for Antigua and Barbuda are considered the significant number of tourists that visit the country during the hurricane season.

--- Table 1 on Page 63 ---
Country | No. Direct Beneficiaries
(m/f) | % of Direct Beneficiaries
of Total Population | No. Indirect
Beneficiaries (m/f) | % of Indirect Beneficiaries of
Total Population
Antigua and Barbuda | 91,500 (43,712/ 47,788) | 100% | 114,000 (54,461/59,539) | N/A114
Cambodia | 514,098 (254,324/
259,774) | 2.91% | 2,153,028 (1,065,103/
1,087,925) | 12.21%
Chad | 1,200,000 (593,939 /
606,061) | 6% | 5,500,000 (2,722,222/
2,777,778) | 28%
Ecuador | 513,900 (250,367/
263,533) | 2.6% | 14,000,000 (6,820,675/
7,179,325) | 72%
Ethiopia | 16,000,000 (8,035,200/
7,964,800) | 12.12% | 21,600,000 (10,847,520/
10,752,480) | 13.64%
Fiji | 416,282 (211,217/
205,065) | 46% | 488,308 (247,762/
240,546) | 54%
Somalia | 7,800,000
(3,910,920/3,889,080) | 40.25 | 19,247,455
(9,650,674/9,596,781) | 100%

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61
D
preparedness and response, and those residing within the service area of sub-national emergency coordination and
response facilities that the project would enhance and support. Indirect beneficiaries are populations (as per latest
official census or assessments) in areas targeted by the project under Pillars 1, 2 and 3, who would receive enhanced
MHEWS through improved risk information, forecasting and dissemination.
D.2. Paradigm shift potential
232 This project will help shift the emphasis of DRM in countries from response to preparation and anticipatory action by
strengthening MHEWS, IbF. It will facilitate the generation and dissemination of critical climate risk information and the
design and implementation of evidence-informed transformative policies and plans which reduce the exposure and
strengthen the capacities of communities to prepare for and take pre-emptive action against disasters. It will thereby
reduce the vulnerability of communities and critical infrastructure and strengthen the resilience of vulnerable sectors to
climate-related hazards and their impacts of climate change. It will ensure the needs of most vulnerable population
groups during extreme events such as women, children, elderly and persons with disabilities will are reflected in relevant
policies, procedures and processes.
233 The global support architecture that the project establishes a sustainable mechanism to support countries both
technically and financially in rolling out a comprehensive MHEWS value chain. It will catalyse learning and impact beyond
one-off, project-based investments, which characterises investments in CIEWS in many developing countries. Elements
that contribute to the paradigm shift potential of this project include the emphasis on utilizing global standards for
assessing the gaps and needs and fostering synergies with other initiatives with complementary objectives. These include
the Alliance for Hydrometeorological Development, CREWS and SOFF, which will lead to support towards knowledge
generation; knowledge synthesis and sharing among countries; and long-term financing strategy for both countries and
for the global support architecture.
234 Finally, these investments and coordination between initiatives will be based in EW4All Roadmaps and standardized
assessments (CHD) leading to an unprecedented level of cooperation and collaboration among key actors across the
MHEWS value chain, from global to regional, national and even sub-national levels. This will leverage multi-institutional
partnerships at the regional and global level coupled with national frameworks and road-maps which ensure multi-
sectoral collaborations within government ministries and multi-level implementation mechanisms for disaster
preparedness and response. The mechanism will enhance partnerships between government and non-government
agencies, including societies and circles of Pillar Leads, iNGOs and national entities and mechanisms such as CREWS and
SOFF.
Potential for scaling-up and replication:
235 Scale-up and replication to other countries is feasible given the global support structure, should further funding be made
available. Substantively, the establishment of selected IbF schemes and Anticipatory Action initiatives have a high
potential for replication within and across the target countries. The use of appropriate technologies and innovations will
also contribute to scaling up and replications. For example: i) The implementation of the CAP and use of multiple
channels for dissemination, but those specifically leveraging on the cellular networks will facilitate uptake by different
telecommunication companies; ii) Successful applications of AI in for development of early warning products and
vulnerability assessments; iii) Co-development of agricultural advisories using PICSA and E-PICSA; and iv) Community
based autonomous early warning and alarm systems.
Potential for knowledge and learning:
236 The enhancement of MHEWS and production of IbF which utilise and combine traditional indigenous knowledge with
modern and scientific techniques will facilitate adoption of adaptation and responses to early warnings, facilitate
anticipatory actions for disaster preparedness and response by DRM institutions and grassroots communities. This will
catalyse wider acceptance and lead to safeguarding of lives, livelihoods and assets. It will support regional and country
level dialogues, knowledge exchange, coordination and collaboration with key initiatives such as on-going projects and
programmes of the UN, the Alliance for Hydrometeorological Development, CREWs and SOFF. Through these initiatives,
the project will also tap into communities of practice in place for knowledge sharing between countries and key actors

--- Table 1 on Page 64 ---
 | D.2. Paradigm shift potential | 

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62
D
involved in effective MHEWS. For example, the community of peer advisors working with countries through SOFF
investments to develop CHD and Gap Analysis used for EW4All baseline.
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment:
237 The project will support enabling conditions at regional and global level, building on the significant investments of SOFF
in human and institutional capacity development and thereby promoting country-level actions towards the EW4All goals.
It will improve the hydrometeorological infrastructure of participating countries and strengthen capacities of NMHS and
NDMAs to improve observations and O&M of infrastructure as well as the generation of risk and vulnerability
information. It will streamline national and local protocols to improve institutional effectiveness of coordinating with
multiple actors in the dissemination of reliable, actionable IbF and climate information to trigger and support decisions
for anticipatory action. It will strengthen national DRM legal frameworks as well as coordination, collaboration, and
knowledge sharing from the local to the international level leading to an effective DRM cycle and increased opportunities
for regional cooperation and up-scaling of climate resilient sustainable development. It will help link sectoral and
technical government entities, science institutions, civil society and other stakeholders to promote anticipatory actions.
All of these will ultimately contribute to an enabling environment where climate risk information is effectively produced
and disseminated, in a sustainable fashion, to the most vulnerable groups to safeguard their lives, livelihoods and assets
in the long-term.
Contribution to the regulatory framework, policies and financial mechanisms:
238 The project will catalyse a systemic change in the operational procedures and processes of participating countries in the
generation and use of early warnings. It will facilitate the integration of climate information services in key decision
making, planning and operational processes by: i) revising institutional frameworks to optimise coordination between
hydrological and meteorological organisations with other governmental institutions by embedding early warnings, IbFs
and anticipatory action into government contingency plans and DRM budgets; ii) advocating for and providing links to
international financing opportunities for long-term funding arrangements for hydrological and meteorological institutes
to provide tailored climate information services on climate change threats; iii) linking with initiatives such as SOFF to
ensure funding for the installation and O&M of hydrometeorological infrastructure as well as human and institutional
capacity of NMHS as per WMO standards; and iv) delivering fine grained and updated vulnerability assessments to assist
in long-term disaster mitigation and adaptation planning.
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways:
239 The development and dissemination of timely, tailored and targeted climate information products will be
transformational in building the long-term resilience of key economic sectors such as agriculture, tourism and health, to
climate risks. Delivered through a suite of outreach, learning and knowledge management activities, information
products will increase efficiency and provide more detailed and better-informed approaches and response actions to
climate risks.
240 A summary of the paradigm shift potential for each participating country is presented below.
Antigua and Barbuda
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
241 The proposed approach for Antigua and Barbuda will create a paradigm shift in the end-to-end MHEWS process, enabling
effective anticipatory action and planning across multiple sectors. In particular, the project will be transformative in the
marine environment, significantly improving the monitoring and forecasting capacities for ocean swells, storms, strong
winds and sea temperature and other parameters. This will have a significant impact in terms of building resilience of
fisheries communities, as well as to enabling preparatory action to safeguard coastal infrastructure and related economic
activities – including shipping and tourism – against the impacts of swells, coastal flooding and erosion. The marine
monitoring will also enable tracking and forecasting of environmental impacts in coastal ecosystems – including coral
reefs early warnings and related links to the fisheries and tourism sectors. Additionally, the project’s focus on improved
disaster risk knowledge, monitoring, forecasting and response for Barbuda will enable a paradigm shift in disaster
preparedness and response on the island which is currently almost entirely reliant on information coming from Antigua.

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63
D
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies, and the creation of an enabling environment
242 The approach for Antigua and Barbuda is grounded in a strong cross-cutting governance and coordination component,
mainstreaming disaster preparedness and response into national sectoral policies and strategies, as well as ensuring
effective coordination between stakeholders in the full end-to-end process of MHEWS. The regulatory framework will be
enhanced by the development of a national strategic plan for national emergency management agencies, that together
with the policy updates will provide a solid foundation for the effective functioning and sustainability of MHEWS and
ensuring clarity and alignment among all involved parties.
243 In addition to strengthening the regulatory framework for MHEWS, the project will build capacity among key agencies
and response services, ensuring clear delineation of roles and responsibilities in preparedness and response processes.
Together with the strategic action plan, such capacity development will create an enabling environment for collaborative
actions, ensuring smooth and efficient implementation of preparedness and response strategies.
Potential for scaling up and replication
244 The expansion of Community Based Early Warning Systems (CBEWS) and the incorporation of localised response plans
offer a replicable framework for scaling CBEWS to additional districts or even other countries facing similar risks. These
scalable components, combined with robust training and capacity-building efforts, ensure that the project’s successes
can be replicated and adapted to enhance resilience in diverse contexts.
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
245 By establishing a centralised online risk data platform and integrating it with sector-specific knowledge management
tools, the project facilitates the collection, sharing, and dissemination of risk information across government agencies
and the public. Antigua and Barbuda is also an active player in the Caribbean in terms of climate action and response,
positioning the country well to act as a catalyst for enhancing MHEWS and associated response actions in the region. As a
regional focal point for the CDEMA, Antigua and Barbuda actively participates in regional knowledge, learning and
support systems in the DRM space, creating a platform for sharing lessons and promoting the replication of actions across
the region. The involvement of the University of the West Indies (UWI) in the risk knowledge components further
facilitates knowledge sharing across the Caribbean region.
Ecuador
Potential for Scaling Up and Replication
246 The MHEWS project in Ecuador is designed with a flexible framework that can be adapted to different regions and hazard
types, making it highly scalable. The establishment of a NFCS and a comprehensive climate data management strategy
provides a model that can be replicated across other sectors or regions within Ecuador and even in other countries facing
similar climate risks. The use of innovative technologies for data collection and forecasting, the inclusion of
communication strategies and the implementation of community emergency plans in selected communities provides
support for replication and scaling up in other regions of Ecuador and countries in the region.
Potential for Knowledge Sharing and Learning
247 The project emphasises the development of a harmonized MEAL strategy, which will systematically capture lessons
learned and best practices. This creates a strong foundation for knowledge sharing at both national and international
levels. The integration of diverse stakeholder groups, including gender and development initiatives, ensures that a wide
array of perspectives and knowledge bases are shared, enriching the overall learning process. The focus on capacity
building and the creation of a robust data management framework will enable continuous learning and adaptation.
Contribution to the Creation of an Enabling Environment
248 The project contributes to the creation of an enabling environment by strengthening governance structures and
establishing inter-ministerial and multi-stakeholder coordination platforms. By developing a National Climate Finance
Framework and creating a sustainable funding mechanism, the project ensures long-term viability for climate services.
The development of standardised data frameworks and the establishment of a climate data centre will also foster an
environment where climate data is readily available, enhancing decision-making and planning across sectors.

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64
D
Contribution to the Regulatory Framework and Policies
249 The MHEWS project will directly contribute to the enhancement of Ecuador’s regulatory framework by creating a
functional regulatory framework for MHEWSs. The project’s focus on developing and strengthening governance
capacities, including the establishment of clear warning procedures and communication protocols, will result in more
coherent and effective climate-related policies. Additionally, the creation of binding documents for warning
dissemination and the development of anticipatory action protocols will contribute to more robust and enforceable
policies.
Overall Contribution to Climate-Resilient Development Pathways Consistent with Relevant National Climate Change
Adaptation Strategies and Plans
250 The project aligns with Ecuador’s national climate change adaptation strategies by enhancing the country’s ability to
anticipate, prepare for, and respond to climate-related hazards. By improving disaster risk knowledge, enhancing
forecasting capabilities, and strengthening early warning dissemination, the project supports Ecuador’s climate-resilient
development pathways. The focus on integrating climate services with national development plans ensures that the
project contributes meaningfully to the broader goals of sustainable development and climate adaptation in Ecuador,
consistent with its commitments under international agreements like the Paris Agreement.
Chad
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
251 This initiative will strengthen climate information systems by supporting the development of EWSs, the monitoring of
climate variables and observation facilities, and building the capacity of the stakeholders involved. It will contribute to
strengthening the capacity of relevant ministries and directorates dealing with DRM in Chad, the NDA, Red Cross
volunteers acting as first responders, local authorities, traditional leaders and communities at different levels of
governance (from the national to the local levels).
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies, and the creation of an enabling environment
252 It will address the disconnect between climate information systems and the end-users in Chad, by investing across the
entire early warning value chain, supporting an inclusive multi-channel approach to disseminate early warning alerts to
the people most at risk of climate disasters, and build systems for two-way communication as a way of promoting a
culture of risk and an understanding of local capacities, and local knowledge systems for disaster preparedness and
disaster management. It will work closely with the range of national and international actors engaged in climate finance,
and in EWSs, to ensure a coordinated approach that contributes to a longer-term vision in Chad. This will include
advocacy at all levels for resourcing, regulatory evolution and ensuring that institutional mandates reflect the expected
roles and capacities of each of the national departments and institutions.
Potential for scaling up and replication
253 Qualitative research and dialogue conducted to inform the design and delivery of inclusive and people-centered EWSs
(including, language, gender and conflict sensitivity) will seek to address the global gap in community influence over
climate programming. This will ensure that anticipatory action programmes are aligned with community perceptions,
preferences, and priorities and foster greater community ownership and responsiveness in disaster preparedness.
Learnings from this process and its results will be relevant for comparable contexts, particularly in the Sahel and sub-
Saharan African countries with similar challenges.
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
254 The project will invest substantially in knowledge management, M&E, accountability and learning. Research and dialogue
conducted to inform design and delivery will also shape and influence global and regional policy discussions on early
warning through sharing project findings, the process of developing the tools and learning. Broad dissemination of
findings, process and tools through targeted regional engagement, ensuring community views and voices are included in
targeted discussions with decision-makers, policymakers and donors. Data and learning will be shared at the global level
through the Anticipation Hub and the REAP. Community members and local organizations will be engaged in advocacy
efforts at both regional and global levels.

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65
D
Cambodia
Potential for scaling up and replication
255 Project interventions in the four target provinces will act as a proof of concept for what a comprehensive approach to
EW4AII at a local level can achieve. For this reason, the project will monitor progress carefully and leveraged for good
practices and lessons learned and replication as part of the overall EW4AII country initiative as well as potential for
scaling up in other provinces around the country. Additionally, the project will advocate and build capacity for improved
monitoring and learning across the EW4AII initiative.
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
256 The Cambodia EW4AII project will form a central part of the already ongoing EW4AII initiative started in October 2023.
Many activities in the project arise from the development of the country EW4AII Roadmap, developed in conjunction
with three government ministries and 34 other agencies engaged with the initiative.
257 The EW4AII initiative is planning regular semi-annual meetings where facilitators will ensure a focus on cross-pillar
knowledge sharing and learning.
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
258 A key focus of the project will be on capacity development for the National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM)
as well as for the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM) at both the central as well as the
subnational levels. Training interventions will emphasise making the best use of regional centres of excellence and
investing in skills in newly emerging technologies such as AI and remote sensing capacities. In addition, trained local
youth will play a key role in accessing existing online early warning resources as part of Cambodia’s commitment to
digital transformation. In the target provinces, for the first time, the project will operationalise the newly developed
government Shock Resilient Social Protection mechanism.
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
259 In line with existing laws and decrees on disaster management115, in 2022 UNDP developed and advocated for the
implementation of Standard Operating Procedures for disaster preparation and response, on behalf of the NCDM. This
project will review these SOPs as well as develop protocols for shared data management collaboratively with government
ministries through the EW4AII initiative. In addition, as part of the planned DRR capacity development initiatives at
national and sub-national levels, existing DRR regulations will be publicised and further operationalised.
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
260 Universal access to EWSs for natural hazards in Cambodia could substantially reduce risks to its population's well-being.
Studies suggest that implementing these systems could prevent annual well-being losses of around US$340 million and
asset losses of up to USD 170 million, potentially decreasing losses by up to 21% and 20% respectively.
261 This project seeks to directly address the needs and priorities outlined in the National Action Plan on DRR (NAP-DRR)
2024-2028.
Ethiopia
Potential for scaling up and replication
262 Project interventions in the four target provinces will act as a proof of concept for what a comprehensive approach to
EW4AII at a local level can achieve. For this reason, the project will monitor progress carefully and leveraged for good
practices and lessons learned and replication as part of the overall EW4AII country initiative as well as potential for
scaling up in other provinces around the country. Additionally, the project will advocate and build capacity for improved
monitoring and learning across the EW4AII initiative.
115 See https://opendevelopmentcambodia.net/topics/disaster-preparedness-and-emergency-response-policy-and-administration/ for a comprehensive
source of data on existing national disaster management legislation.

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66
D
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
263 The EW4AII project will form a central part of the already ongoing EW4AII initiative started in October 2023. Many
activities in the project arise from the development of the country EW4AII Roadmap, developed in conjunction with
government ministries and agencies engaged with the initiative.
264 The EW4AII initiative is planning regular semi-annual meetings where facilitators will ensure a focus on cross-pillar
knowledge sharing and learning.
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
265 A key focus of the project will be on capacity development for the NCDM as well as for MoWRAM at both the central as
well as the subnational levels. Training interventions will emphasise making the best use of regional centres of excellence
and investing in skills in newly emerging technologies such as AI and remote sensing capacities. In addition, trained local
youth will play a key role in accessing existing online early warning resources as part of the country’s commitment to
digital transformation. In the target provinces, for the first time, the project will operationalise the newly developed
nationals Shock Resilient Social Protection mechanism.
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
266 In line with existing laws and decrees on disaster management1, in 2022 UNDP developed and advocated for the
implementation of SOPs for disaster preparation and response, on behalf of the NCDM. This project will review these
SOPs as well as develop protocols for shared data management collaboratively with government ministries through the
EW4AII initiative. In addition, as part of the planned DRR capacity development initiatives at national and sub-national
levels, existing DRR regulations will be publicised and further operationalised.
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
267 Universal access to EWSs for natural hazards could substantially reduce risks to its population's well-being. Studies
suggest that implementing these systems could prevent annual well-being losses of around US$340 million and asset
losses of up to US$170 million, potentially decreasing losses by up to 21% and 20% respectively.
This project seeks to directly address the needs and priorities outlined in the NAP-DRR 2024-2028.
Somalia
Potential for scaling up and replication
268 The proposed activities will initiate Somalia's EW4All initiative, fulfilling the immediate programme of activities under the
Roadmap of the EW4All initiative 2024-2027, for building disaster resilient communities in Somalia. The activities under
the three project outputs, which represent the four pillars of the EW4All initiative and early warning more broadly, will
establish key needs and national apparatus for further future early warning activities to be implemented at local scales.
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
269 The database of disaster impact data and loss and damage tracking (aligned with UNFCCC, Sendai and SDG targets and
indicators) will provide potential learning from past events alongside Interpretation and communication materials
developed. These materials are to include hazard maps that identify specific geographic areas, sectors and groups that
may be affected by particular hazards; tailored for EWS and DRR plans/local risk management plans. They will
incorporate climate risk projection summaries, tailored in clear, accessible language (as appropriate) that incorporate
traditional knowledge and understandings, developed and disseminated for the national and local levels and
applied/interpreted and translated for Somalia’s critical sectors (health, agriculture, livestock, forestry, fisheries and
aquaculture etc) and in considerations of key vulnerability factors (e.g. age, gender, disability, access to infrastructure
and services, IDP, conflict affected areas, economic diversity, social inequalities and environmental sensitivities). As
knowledge sharing and learning opportunities, these will complement the Early Warning Coordination and Information
Sharing Platform proposed to be established as a sub-structure of the National Platform for DRR (under the NMHEWC)
committed to coordinating and distributing early warning information across the country.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67
D
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
270 Despite establishing an NMHEWC as a central point for early warning coordination and information sharing, early
warning and information management in Somalia still need to improve in the early warning value chain. As a result,
competition and overlapping roles and responsibilities continue across the various government departments and
agencies. The Early Warning Coordination and Information Sharing Platform is therefore proposed for coordinating and
distributing early warning information across the country, with many of the activities (e.g. Comprehensive Risk
Assessment Framework and development of database, disaster risk knowledge materials and communication developed
for national and local levels) aimed to contribute to these. The activities of the EW4All Initiative, and therefore the
proposed activities under Somalia’s project, implement key areas of Somalia’s National Disaster Risk Management Policy
(NDRMP) and its accompanying national and local DRR plans, contributing to creating a better enabling environment for
enhancing the availability of disaster risk knowledge in the country.
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
271 The project's proposed activities include specific harmonisation of Somalia’s early warning with Somalia’s commitments
to the UNFCCC, Sendai Targets and SDGs. Specifically, seeking to harmonise the development of a comprehensive hazard
risk assessment methodology and assessments for key risks with regional approaches and UNFCCC, and Sendai and SDG
targets and indicators and the harmonisation of early warning data collection, analysis and exchange modalities among
federal line ministries, sectorial offices, and regional bodies and improved data automation, modelling and forecasting of
early warning harmonised among sectorial offices. The project directly contributes to Somalia’s commitment to the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030) Target G (substantially increase the availability of and access
to multi-hazard EWS and disaster risk information and assessments to the people by 2030) and Priority 4 (enhancing
disaster preparedness for effective response and to ‘build back better’ in recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction).
Furthermore, the project interventions align with Somalia’s commitment to the Paris Agreement (Article 7, paragraph 7c)
on adaptation and the Africa Program of Action for implementing the Sendai Framework in Africa. The EW4ALL initiative
is now operationalised at the national level under the NMHEWC leadership. The activities accompany the process of the
Roadmap, which establishes a systematic reform initiative aimed at aligning it to Article 3, para 6 and Article 7, para 2, of
the establishment Law 17/2016 of SoDMA. These Articles state the clear responsibility of SoDMA to gather information
and report on disasters and the risks facing the country and send out early warnings in collaboration with organisations
inside the country and abroad working on those activities. While implementing key aspects of the NDRMP and its
accompanying national and local DRR plans, the proposed project activities also interlace with Somalia’s NAP
Framework116, the 2021 NDC117, Somalia’s Biennale Update Report (BUR) to the UNFCCC118, and the 2021 National
Climate Change Policy119 which provides the framework for addressing climate change impacts focused on both
adaptation and DRR measures.
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
272 As noted, the proposed activities kick off the implementation of Somalia’s Roadmap, thereby contributing to climate-
resilient pathways consistent with national climate change strategies and plans. These contribute to climate-resilient
development pathways through the alignment with Somalia’s commitments on the Sendai Target G (substantially
increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard EWS and disaster risk information and assessments to the people
by 2030) and Priority 4 (enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to ‘build back better’ in recovery,
rehabilitation, and reconstruction) as well as the Africa Program of Action for implementing the Sendai Framework in
116 Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework, 2022, https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-
nap-framework.pdf
117 The Federal Republic of Somalia updated nationally determined contribution (NDC), JULY 2021
118The Federal Republic of Somalia Ministry of Environment and climate change Somalia’s first biennial update report under the United Nations
Framework Convention on climate change (UNFCCC).
119The Federal Republic of Somalia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Somalia National Climate Change Policy, https://moecc.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2023/07/Somalia-National-Climate-Change-Policy.pdf

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68
D
Africa; and Somalia’s commitment to the Paris Agreement (Article 7, paragraph 7c) on adaptation. Somalia’s NAP
Framework establishes local State-level climate change adaptation plans for Jubaland, Hirshabele, Puntland, Somaliland,
and the South West State to which the proposed project activities will bolster a number of the priority actions through
improved education and awareness raising, as well as additional climate and disaster hazard mapping and interpretation
and communication materials tailored for EWS and DRR plans, and local risk management plans. These plans also cross-
cut with DRM, preparedness, and response capacities.
Fiji
Potential for scaling up and replication
273 Integration of AI-powered systems into EWS will provide more accurate forecasts, which will also enhance people’s faith
in early warning messages. By analysing historical weather data, AI can predict future events effectively, especially for
specific regions like agriculture and emergency services. It can optimize resource allocation and assess risks of extreme
weather events, improving preparedness and mitigation strategies.
274 Although Cell Broadcast (CB) is not a new technology for public warning systems, it has yet to be implemented in Fiji due
to the lack of infrastructure requirements for mobile service providers. However, the current infrastructure can be
upgraded to support cell broadcasting technology. Consequently, the project aims to establish cell broadcasting services
in Fiji and will enhance these mechanisms by integrating additional systems to disseminate early warning messages
utilising the Common Alert Protocol system.
275 The initiative to use selected sugarcane farms as reference points to monitor crop status and provide farmers with
guidance on necessary actions is a simple but effective way to implement an impact-based early warning system.
Although the system may not be perfect, it will be relatable to farmers. Furthermore, this system has the potential to be
extended to other crops in Fiji.
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning
276 Most importantly, people often do not take appropriate actions in response to early warnings; therefore, delays can be
critical in fast-moving disasters. This lack of action may be due to a lack of faith in the messages or insufficient knowledge
of the actions they could take to reduce impacts. It can also be attributed to resource or financial constraints, in the cases
of sugarcane farmers. Furthermore, false alarms can lead to people becoming desensitised to warning and are less likely
to take them seriously. Therefore, to have an effective EW4All system in Fiji, there is a need to change people’s mindsets
and attitudes towards early warning messages, so they are willing to take responsive actions, knowing that it may not
eventuate. This effort is required not only at the community level but also at the government level to adopt and
implement an effective Anticipatory Action system in Fiji.
277 It is important to understand how people perceive early warning messages and what influences their decision-making
and actions. This understanding can inform the development and implementation of innovative approaches and
technological advancements that enhance community capacity and inclusivity for people with disabilities and the elderly,
empowering them to respond effectively to early warning messages. It is anticipated that, over time, there will be
changes in people's mindsets regarding how to perceive and respond to early warning messages.
278 The project will facilitate a stocktake and harmonise multi-hazard risk assessment methodologies and tools across
government and non-government institutions in Fiji. It will encompass data on hazards, vulnerabilities, exposure,
capacity, and impacts. This will necessitate the development of a centralised database or repository system for disaster-
related data to be shared among all national and subnational EWS actors. Furthermore, the project will prioritise
enhancing the capacity to assess and gather information about risks at the local level. This will include documenting data
and information on community-specific risks, incorporating traditional, local, and indigenous knowledge. Once in a
mature stage, this centralised database can be used to inform the development monitoring of future EWS or DRR
initiatives in Fiji and other countries in the region.
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies
279 The project will facilitate development of interagency protocols and SOPs for data access and sharing between relevant
MHEWS agencies. It will also strengthen coordination mechanisms for implementing MHEWS plans and protocols.
Furthermore, it will aim to enhance technical support for continuously collecting risk data, analysing it, and applying

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69
D
information for emerging hazards. It will involve evaluating coordination among different actors in communities to
identify overlaps, gaps, and inefficiencies in response efforts, clarifying roles within and between agencies with a focus on
involving communities in early warning systems.
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
280 Furthermore, the project will focus on building communities' ability to understand and adopt new climate-resilient
livelihood practices through the use of an anticipatory action system. Efforts will be made to advocate and gain the
government’s support and willingness to implement AA in Fiji.
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change
adaptation strategies and plans
281 The project activities are well aligned with Fiji's Scaling Up Early Warning Systems – Implementation Roadmap (in draft)
and contribute to fulfilling the country's commitments to the Nationally Determined Contribution and the
implementation of the National Adaptation Plan, which includes specific actions aimed at strengthening early warning
systems in Fiji. Furthermore, it is also well aligned with and contributes to the National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy
2018-2030, which highlights the importance of early warning systems, community preparedness, and building resilience
at all levels; the National Climate Change Policy, which recognises the need for improved early warning systems to
anticipate and respond to climate-related risks; and the National Disaster Management Plan, which outlines strategies for
disaster risk reduction and response. It emphasises the role of early warning systems in providing timely information to
communities and authorities for informed decision-making during emergencies. Additionally, the project supports the Fiji
Meteorological Service Act, which provides the legal framework for the operation of the Fiji Meteorological Service,
responsible for monitoring and issuing weather warnings, as well as local Disaster Risk Management Plans, which
incorporate early warning systems and outline strategies for response and preparedness at the local level. Moreover, Fiji
has signed the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015-2030) and the Sustainable Development Goals. The
country is also actively involved in regional initiatives and policies, such as the Framework for Resilient Development in
the Pacific (2016), which prioritise early warning systems.
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
282 This project will contribute to long-term social, economic and environmental benefits from avoided human and economic
losses and support the objective of climate risk-resilient economies. Poor and vulnerable communities suffer
disproportionally from natural hazards due to increased exposure, fewer assets and economic resources and poor access
to information and financing to promote adaptation. In these countries, resources required to recover from disasters are
often covered through external borrowing, leading to significant debt and increased exposure to economic shocks that
result in large reductions in GDP and exports during global crises. Climate information services and MHEWS can be vital
tools in reducing these impacts and thereby promoting social development. This will enable preparation, planning and
anticipatory action based on early warnings which will result in avoidance, mitigation and adaptation to climate induced
hazards, directly contributing to health and safety for communities most vulnerable to such disasters.
The project is fully aligned with the SDGs, Paris Agreement and Sendai Framework, SDG 13 on urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts and related target 13.1 to “Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related
hazards and natural disasters in all countries”. The project also speaks to the SDGs 1, 2, 9, 11, 12 and 15120.
283 The project is aligned with the following priorities under Article 8 of the Paris Agreement:121 i) EWSs; ii) emergency
preparedness; iii) slow onset events; iv) events that may involve irreversible and permanent loss and damage; v)
comprehensive risk assessment and management; and vi) resilience of communities, livelihoods and ecosystems. It is also
120 Goal 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere; Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
agriculture; Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; Goal 11. Make cities and
human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts; Goal 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss.
121 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Paris Agreement,” 2015.

--- Table 1 on Page 72 ---
 | D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70
D
aligned with the strategies and actions on DRR as per the Sendai Framework122 which lists four priorities for action to
prevent new and reduce existing disaster risks: i) Understanding disaster risk; ii) Strengthening disaster risk governance to
manage disaster risk; iii) Investing in disaster reduction for resilience and; iv) Enhancing disaster preparedness for
effective response, and to "Build Back Better" in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. It is closely aligned with
Sendai Target G Indicator 4: All countries' local governments have a plan to act on early warnings and Sendai Target G
Indicator 5123.
284 The proposed project is closely aligned with and will support and collaborate with a number of WMO programmes,
initiatives and frameworks such as WIGOS,124 WIS and WIPPS.125 This includes support to NMHS in in the area of DRR, i.e.:
i) preparedness through EWS; ii) providing hazard information for risk assessments, prevention, response and recovery,
and risk transfer across sectors; iii) mitigating existing risks and prevent the creation of new risks; iv) responding to user
requirements; and, v) cooperating and engaging in disaster risk governance structures at all levels.
285 Additionally, the project will leverage CREWS and collaborate with the SOFF for the provision of a global public good:
basic weather and climate observations.126 SOFF's primary objectives are to address the gaps in systematic
observations127 as described by GBON.128
Environmental benefits
286 Climate information and MHEWS will inform the management of natural resources and adaptation to climate impacts
such as floods and droughts, particularly in the agricultural sector. The project will scale up the co-development and use
of climate advisories using participatory approaches such as PICSA which is expected to contribute significantly to the
adoption of climate resilient agricultural practices which improve productivity and reduce agricultural losses. The project
will also support water resources management by providing IbFs and scenarios to help in managing dam releases and
irrigation scheduling.
Economic benefits
287 Improved accuracy and coverage of MHEWS and more effective use of early and anticipatory action will have significant
economic benefits. These economic benefits will be in the form of reduced losses and damages across multiple sectors,
including agriculture, transport and energy. Better design, planning and management of private and public infrastructure
will yield substantive economic returns. The project will also deliver significant economic benefits reducing the projected
impacts of climate change on morbidity and mortality of exposed and vulnerable populations.
Social benefits
288 The health sector is likely to benefit significantly from disaster preparedness and anticipatory action to prevent the
spread of diseases in the wake of disasters. The project will directly support the livelihoods of agricultural communities,
including those engaged in raising livestock and fisheries. Advisories and warnings will reduce the loss of live and
livelihoods by supporting decisions to adopt climate resilient practices and reducing and avoiding risk from extreme
weather events, particularly among fishing and coastal communities. The project will also help prepare relevant agencies
and communities for possible conflicts over resources and access that emerge from climate mediated hazards. This is
most relevant to the northern and eastern African context where migratory pastoral communities can come in conflict
with settled farmers.
122 UN, “Sendai Framework for DRR,” 2015.
123 All countries have accessible, understandable, usable and relevant disaster risk information and assessment available to people at national and local
levels.
124 Luis Nunes, “The WMO Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) A WIGOS Approach to Securing Observational Data for Critical Global Weather and
Climate Applications,” 2018.
125 Michael Peter Schwab et al., “Bridging the Gap between Operational Meteorology and Hydrology: Including Hydrological Forecasts into the WMO
Integrated Processing and Prediction System (WIPPS/GDPFS),” Other (pico, May 2023).
126 WMO, “Systematic Observations Financing Facility.”
127 World Meteorological Organization (WMO), SOFF Series, 02. The Gaps in the Global Basic Observing Network (GBON).
128 Luis Nunes, “The WMO Global Basic Observing Network (GBON) A WIGOS Approach to Securing Observational Data for Critical Global Weather and
Climate Applications,” 2018.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71
D
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
289 Least Developed Countries, SIDS and most African countries are particularly vulnerable to a range of climate change
impacts and climate-related hazards, which affect people, livelihoods, assets and economy. Affected countries have
highlighted the urgent need for better climate information and early warnings to help adapt to, mitigate and recover
from increasingly frequent climate induced disasters. Early warning systems are a critical need to improve the resilience
of their population to natural hazards and to strengthen and scale up early and anticipatory action. It is noted that
national policies on areas related to EWS and DRM often neglect the differential needs of people with disabilities and
those with special needs on account of age, gender and social and cultural exclusion129. The country projects will address
such gaps through an inclusivity strategy that is mainstreamed across project activities.
290 The project will address the following needs of recipients:
• Strengthening climate information services through enhancing institutions, coordination mechanisms, policies
and financial mechanisms and frameworks. This will sustainably address the needs and priorities of the NMHS
and NDMAs by leveraging modern technologies, automation, digitisation and establishing a MHEWS. The
enhanced capacity of these agencies will meet the needs for enhanced IbF , access to data and effective and
anticipatory actions to safeguard lives, livelihoods and assets against climate risks. The NMHSs and NDMAs will
be key responsible parties in the respective projects, which directly addresses their needs and priorities.
• Through this project, systems building of national and local actors will be addressed. This can include
strengthening the decision-making upon the early warnings received by setting up and equipping the national
emergency operations centres, improving logistics and supply chains for disaster preparedness and response
along with relevant procurement processes, establishing partnerships/MoUs between NMHSs, NDMAs,
ministries, agencies and departments responsible for critical climate vulnerable sectors, National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies and others.
• The project will address the needs of vulnerable groups within communities who are often neglected in the
design of MHEWS, their dissemination and for disaster preparedness and planning. These specifically include
people with disabilities, elderly, women, youth, cultural minorities, urban and rural communities. In addition,
specific attention will be given to women headed households, households with infants, elderly, children and
youth.
• Needs of communities exposed to climate-related hazard for timely and accurate early warning that will enable
them to take anticipatory actions. Populations living in coastal areas, along floodplains and in mountainous areas
are particularly vulnerable to climate-related hazards. The specific climate information needs of women, elderly
and disabled people require particular attention considering their increased socio-economic vulnerabilities and
relatively weaker representation and more limited access to resources and channels of communication.
• Communities dependent on natural resources, especially those reliant on rain-fed agriculture, pastoralism,
forest resources and fisheries are disproportionately affected by climate-related hazards. These communities are
often socially and economically more vulnerable and spend a high proportion of their income on subsistence
which limits their ability to adapt. Climate change impacts often undermine progress that has been made in
poverty reduction in countries with large proportion of such populations, adversely impacting food security and
economic growth, particularly in rural areas. This project will help these rural populations reduce these
associated risks.
• Pastoral communities practising transhumance, particularly those countries in Sub-Saharan, Eastern and the
Horn of Africa, face unique challenges associated with climate change. Pastoral communities are often forced to
migrate to wetter areas which are already inhabited in order to adapt to changing conditions and overgrazing.
129 Aleksandra Kosanic et al., “An Inclusive Future: Disabled Populations in the Context of Climate and Environmental Change,” Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability 55 (April 2022): 101159, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2022.101159.

--- Table 1 on Page 74 ---
 | D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72
D
This often creates conflicts.130 People moved by climate-related events are often treated differently from those
displaced by conflict, mostly because climate shocks, such as floods, are seen as temporary and affected people
are expected to move back to their original areas. However, the occurrence of climate-related displacements
have and will continue to increase. Overall, conflicts are expected to increase over rights and access to water
and natural resources.131 Early warnings about the onset of adverse climatic conditions and disasters can help
avert such conflicts by providing timely information to agencies involved in humanitarian work, peace building
and development.
• The project will address needs of sectors such as agriculture, tourism, health and water infrastructure for
targeted and actionable climate information products to facilitate adaptation planning and action.
291 A summary of the needs of each country is presented below
Antigua and Barbuda
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)
292 As a SIDS, Antigua and Barbuda is particularly vulnerable to extreme climate events such as hurricanes, droughts and
coastal flooding, ranking 85th on the ND-GAIN index. The country’s NDC identifies five primary reasons for the country’s
vulnerability, including: i) inefficient planning and management of the built environment; ii) high costs of repairing
damage caused by recurrent extreme climate events; iii) the composition of the country’s economy; iv) high population
density in the coastal zone; and v) limited availability of freshwater resources.
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population
293 Climate change is increasing the frequency of high-intensity hurricanes, which will have severe impacts on the country,
including loss of life, economic losses and damage to infrastructure. These impacts are further exacerbated by the
potential to disrupt key economic activities, including tourism which makes up the largest proportion of the country’s
GDP (~60%) and accounts for the highest overall investment, at ~40%. Antigua and Barbuda is also heavily reliant on
imports of basic supplies, including food, medicine and building materials, increasing vulnerability to disruptions to
shipping routes and associated increases in insurance costs during and after extreme events. Fisherfolk are also
particularly vulnerable given the limited availability of risk information and forecasts for ocean conditions or
environmental impacts of climate change on reef fisheries.
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government from
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)
294 While Antigua and Barbuda invests heavily in building resilience, there capacity to do so is severely constrained by the
current economic conditions in the country. Although classified as high-income in terms of per capita GDP, the
distribution of wealth is largely skewed by a few high-income persons who have moved to the country from abroad, with
much of the local population having much lower income. Moreover, the country’s small tax and market base, as well as
its high public debt — more than 87% its GDP in 2022 — constrain the government’s ability to allocate funding from the
national budget for adaptation. External investment is therefore critical to enhance MHEWS and Anticipatory Action
measures needed to build climate resilience and preparedness of Antigua and Barbuda’s population.
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
295 The gap assessment conducted for Antigua and Barbuda identified several areas where capacity development and
institutional strengthening is needed to enable effective MHEWS and Anticipatory Action. This includes the need for: the
revitalization of the linkages between national development organisations and each major stakeholder ministries
responsible for key parts of the economy; updates to key policies for disaster management, emergency response, and
environmental management; strengthening the institutional and human capacity of ABMS.
Ecuador
130 BRACED, “Building Climate Resilience in Fragile Contexts: Key Findings of BRACED Research in South Sudan,” 2018.
131 Christopher B. Field, ed., Global and Sectoral Aspects, Climate Change 2014, Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability ; Part A (New York, NY:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2014).

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73
D
Vulnerability of the Country and/or Specific Vulnerable Groups, Including Gender Aspects (for Adaptation Only)
296 Ecuador is highly vulnerable to a range of climate-related hazards, including floods, landslides, and droughts. These
events disproportionately affect vulnerable populations, including Indigenous communities, low-income households, and
women, who often have less access to resources and information needed for effective disaster preparedness and
response. The project’s focus on integrating gender-sensitive approaches into EWSs directly addresses these
vulnerabilities. Through tailoring climate services and early warning messages to the needs of these groups, the project
aims to reduce their exposure to climate risks and enhance their resilience.
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country and the Affected Population
297 Ecuador’s economic and social development is uneven, with significant disparities between urban and rural areas. Many
rural and Indigenous communities rely on agriculture and natural resources, making them particularly susceptible to
climate hazards. The MHEWS project will contribute to enhance the resiliance of these vulnerable populations by
providing timely and accurate early warnings, which can prevent significant economic losses and support sustainable
development.
Absence of Alternative Sources of Financing
298 Ecuador faces significant fiscal constraints, including a high debt burden and limited access to international capital
markets, which hinder the government’s ability to independently finance large-scale climate adaptation initiatives. The
MHEWS project addresses this gap by establishing a National Climate Finance Framework, which will help mobilise and
sustain funding for climate services and disaster preparedness efforts.
Need for Strengthening Institutions and Implementation Capacity
299 Ecuador’s institutions, while developing, still require significant strengthening to effectively manage and implement
comprehensive climate adaptation strategies. The MHEWS project addresses this by enhancing governance structures,
improving inter-ministerial and multi-stakeholder coordination, and building technical capacities within key institutions
such as the National Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (INAMHI). The project also emphasises the development
of a harmonized MEAL strategy, which will improve institutional learning and adaptability, ensuring that Ecuador’s
climate adaptation efforts are both effective and sustainable over the long term.
Cambodia
Vulnerability of the Country and/or Specific Vulnerable Groups, Including Gender Aspects (for Adaptation Only)
300 Cambodia, a country still recovering from decades of conflict, faces significant development challenges and is particularly
susceptible to compounding and cascading risks. These risks disproportionately affect vulnerable populations, including
rural communities, women, children, and ethnic minorities. Climate change intensifies the frequency and severity of
floods, droughts, and storms, exacerbating poverty and food insecurity. Economic downturns and health crises further
amplify poverty, unemployment, and inequality, while discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, and disability
exacerbates vulnerability to shocks and stresses. Specific examples in Cambodia include rural communities highly
vulnerable to climate-related shocks, women and girls facing gender-based discrimination and limited economic
opportunities, children affected by displacement and lack of education, and ethnic minorities experiencing discrimination
and increased vulnerability to exploitation.
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country and the Affected Population
301 Between 2014 and 2021/22, Cambodia made significant progress in reducing poverty, dropping the poverty incidence
from 36.7% to 16.6%. However, after the 2019 COVID-19 outbreak and economic shock, approximately 4.5 million people
were still classified as falling under ID poor 1 or 2, and at-risk households are in danger of falling into poverty due to
economic instabilities, natural hazard-related disasters, and environmental degradation. Cambodia is highly vulnerable to
the impacts of climate change, which is projected to exacerbate flooding and drought risks and decrease the country's
GDP by as much as 10% by 2050.
Absence of Alternative Sources of Financing
302 This GCF project will make a critical difference in its systemic approach to addressing the vital EW/EA value chain gaps,
from risk knowledge to early response. Over the years, funding has been ad hoc and has primarily focused on forecasting

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74
D
and response. Using the newly developed consultative Cambodia EW4AII Roadmap, this project will emphasise the
linkages and gaps between the four EWS pillars, with a particular emphasis on ‘joined-up’ data management and a new
approach to early warning dissemination leading to increasingly effective detection and response.
Need for Strengthening Institutions and Implementation Capacity
303 The project aims to enhance Cambodia's ability to collect and utilize weather data to mitigate the impact of disasters and
build resilient communities. By establishing a system for providing early warning information to at-risk communities, the
project seeks to transform uninformed and unprepared populations into proactive and well-prepared communities. The
focus is on addressing gaps in the existing EWS by bringing stakeholders together in a coordinated effort to create a more
significant impact.
Chad
Vulnerability of the Country and/or Specific Vulnerable Groups, Including Gender Aspects (for Adaptation Only)
304 Chad’s extreme vulnerability to the impacts of climate change is reflected in its position on the ND-GAIN index (185): a
combination of high poverty, frequent conflicts, and the risk of both droughts and floods have placed Chad as the lowest
ranked country overall, with a score of 27.0. In 2024, Chad had an Inform risk index of 7,8, placing it in the “very high” risk
class, meaning that the country is at substantial risk of a humanitarian crisis in case of natural or man-made disaster. The
gender inequality index is 0.7, indicating pervasive inequality in women’s empowerment. With a literacy rate of 28.1%
(compared to 57.6% for men), women face challenges in accessing information. The specific vulnerabilities of refugees,
returnees, minority groups and people living with disabilities also need to be considered.
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country and the Affected Population
305 Chad remains among the poorest and least developed countries in the world, with a 2023/4 Human Development Index
ranking of 189 out of 193. The World Bank estimates that 40% of Chadians live in poverty and face severe deprivation of
a range of basic needs. The percentage of households with access to electricity is 8% (NAP). Climate change itself is also
having a negative impact on the viability of rural production systems including agricultural production, rangeland
production capacity and livestock watering possibilities. This has led to increased competition between users of rural
areas and a deterioration in social cohesion.
Absence of Alternative Sources of Financing
306 Access to climate finance is insufficient to meet the acute challenges posed by climate change. There is a financing
shortfall to build climate resilience in Chad, with annual climate finance are estimated at a quarter of annual needs.
Recently-approved projects are investing in critical aspects of the EW/EA value chain, however additional financing is
needed to ensure that effective, actionable and intelligible communication and dissemination strategies are delivered, to
work specifically on institutional governance and coordination challenges, and to deliver a MHEWS that is functional,
impact-based, people-centered, and end-to-end.
Need for Strengthening Institutions and Implementation Capacity
307 Due to fragility and conflict within the country and beyond its borders, individuals, households and communities in Chad
are vulnerable to shocks and climate change. Fragile national and sub-national institutions (e.g. governmental, legal and
financial) are responsible for under-investment and weak systems for essential services, disaster and climate risk
management, and natural resource management.
Fiji
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects
308 Fiji faces a high risk from various natural hazards, including tropical cyclones, storm surges, floods, landslides, droughts,
extreme temperatures, earthquakes, and tsunamis. The country is particularly vulnerable to the anticipated effects of
climate change, such as rising sea levels, more severe tropical cyclones, and heavy rainfall. For Fiji, the probability of
catastrophic damage and loss of life from meteorological and geophysical hazards is considered very high. Fiji’s extreme
vulnerability to natural, human-induced, and technological hazards increases associated risks, particularly due to rising
population numbers, poorly regulated land use, and climate change. Although key hazards and risks have been identified
and priority issues recognised, they are not integrated into national and sector plans and policies, often resulting in a lack

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75
D
of preparedness. Agriculture in Fiji, mainly rain-fed and small-scale, supports over 117,000 people, primarily in rural
areas. Economic impact does not fully capture its nutritional and livelihood significance. However, agricultural livelihoods
are vulnerable to climatic extremes like cyclones, droughts, and floods.
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population
309 Fiji’s GDP is around US$4.98 billion, with a per capita GDP of US$5,356.2. The economy is mainly driven by tourism and
agriculture with 91% of the population living near the coastline. By the end of the century, natural hazards may annually
push over 4% of the population into poverty. Cyclones result in loss of life, injuries, property damage, and disease spread.
A 100-year river flood in Fiji can lead to 12. 5% falling into poverty, with an average annual loss of $130 million attributed
to storm surges and high winds. In Fiji, impoverished remote communities face water security challenges and rely on
subsistence fishing. Climate change worsens their situation, impacting future extreme weather events. Recognized for
their vulnerability, these populations will suffer more from tropical cyclones and floods. There is a rising risk of disasters
and losses in Fiji due to increased vulnerability. Unplanned development rose by 24% between 2007 and 2015, with new
developments in hazard-prone coastal areas. Climate impacts such as floods, droughts, coastal erosion, and coral
bleaching pose significant threats to Fijian communities, the economy, and infrastructure, potentially resulting in loss of
life and displacement. Key sectors of Fiji's economy, including agriculture and tourism, are especially vulnerable to
changing climate conditions.
Absence of alternative sources of financing
310 Though Fiji has access to many global and regional donors and has been the recipient of numerous projects, either
bilateral or multinational, none have focused on establishing an end-to-end Early Warning System (EWS) in Fiji. Most
projects have been fragmented, concentrating on one or two pillars, mainly Pillar 2 (strengthening observation) and Pillar
4 (enhancing preparedness and response). This is the first project on EW4All in Fiji, and there are a few other
multinational projects in the pipeline or in their early stages that also focus on EWS, which includes Fiji (such as Weather
ready and CREWS 2.0). Directly relevant to this project, NDMO is currently leading a US$500K initiative titled "Mapping,
Assessing and Planning for Comprehensive Multi-Hazard Early Warning Capabilities for Fiji." This project aligns well with
the EWA4All Fiji component, particularly in the areas of risk management, multi-hazard early warning systems, and
capacity building. Consequently, it allocates the entire project budget of US$500K as co-financing.
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
311 However, despite efforts to improve the quality, reach, and effectiveness of an Early Warning System (EWS), there are
still gaps and challenges across four essential pillars in Fiji. These challenges stem from fragmented investments, limited
technical capacity, and a lack of coordination among key stakeholders in the EWS. To address these issues, it is necessary
to enhance observation equipment and ensure its proper use and maintenance. Additionally, there is a need to improve
the accessibility and inclusivity of early warning messages, establish community feedback mechanisms, and integrate
traditional knowledge into EWSs. The current early warning system faces challenges due to the absence of a designated
WMO Registered Alerting Authority and lack of cell broadcast implementation. The regulatory framework for mobile
manufacturers/importers to support cell broadcast is also missing. There is no automated systems in place to mitigate
impacts in the case of events with a short time frame. Certain remote areas have poor mobile coverage, hindering receipt
of warnings by fishermen at sea. Furthermore, there is no coordination stocktake among different actors working in
communities, which can lead to potential overlaps, gaps, and inefficiencies in response efforts. Coordination with other
stakeholders, including government agencies, NGOs, and community groups, can be challenging due to differing
priorities, mandates, and approaches. It is necessary to conduct studies to understand how people access and interpret
early warning messages. The findings from these studies should then be incorporated into message formats and
dissemination processes. Additionally, the lack of feedback mechanisms and surveys currently negatively impacts the
quality of warnings. Therefore, it would be beneficial to invest further in feedback mechanisms.
Somalia

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76
D
Vulnerability of the Country and/or Specific Vulnerable Groups, Including Gender Aspects
312 Somalia is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world, with a ranking of 178 out of 182 countries on the
ND-GAIN Index 2024, and with the least capacity to respond and recover from extreme weather events.132 Somalia
consistently undergoes prevalent violence, conflict and fragility, which in turn has resulted in (and vice versa) harsh and
severe environmental conditions, affecting the depletion, use and access to natural resources and livelihoods. Moreover,
Somalia has a large number of IDPs and is one of the highest refugee-producing countries.133
Economic and Social Development Level of the Country and the Affected Population
313 Somalia is a low-income country with a fragile economy that relies largely on agriculture, livestock, remittances and
international assistance. Desertification is reducing the viability of rain-fed agriculture and livestock production.
Unemployment, particularly among youth, is alarmingly high while poverty rates are highest in rural areas.
Absence of Alternative Sources of Financing
314 Somalia has faced recurrent humanitarian crises, including droughts, famines, and displacement due to conflict. These
crises have exacerbated food insecurity, malnutrition, and displacement, with millions of Somalis reliant on humanitarian
assistance for survival. Somalia is considered the world’s fifth-poorest country134, and with ongoing and regular climate
induced disasters, Somalia’s early warning and response needs are significant, without the domestic resources to invest
effectively in MHEWS and Anticipatory Action.
Need for Strengthening Institutions and Implementation Capacity
315 In Somalia, interagency coordination gaps exist alongside overlapping mandates, resulting in poor coordination among
governmental agencies and non-governmental organisations as well as a duplication of efforts and inefficient resource
utilisation. There is a need for policy development and policy harmonisation, which means creating and enforcing
comprehensive climate policies that align with international standards. There is also the need for capacity building by
training policymakers and stakeholders to improve implementation and compliance.
Ethiopia
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only)
316 Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to a range of climate-related hazards, including recurrent droughts, floods, landslides, and
wildfires, which are increasingly exacerbated by climate change. This vulnerability significantly impacts specific
populations, particularly women, children, and rural communities that heavily depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.
Women of reproductive age face substantial challenges due to systemic inequalities, with over 22% suffering from
chronic under-nutrition. Furthermore, more than 1.2 million children under five are affected by acute malnutrition,
illustrating the severe repercussions of climate-induced food insecurity on these vulnerable demographics. Addressing
these vulnerabilities is crucial for enhancing preparedness through effective EWSs, ensuring that critical information
reaches those most at risk, and empowering them to respond proactively to climate-related shocks.
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population
317 Ethiopia, despite notable economic growth over recent years, remains a low-income country with a significant reliance on
agriculture, which is particularly susceptible to climate variability. Approximately 80% of the population resides in rural
areas where livelihoods are closely tied to rain-fed agriculture. Rural households are often severely impacted by climate
shocks, leading to food insecurity, displacement, and heightened poverty rates. This economic vulnerability is
compounded by limited access to essential services such as healthcare, education, and financial resources, further
exacerbating the challenges faced by these communities. As part of the feasibility preparation for the GCF-funded Multi-
Hazard EWSs (MHEWS) project, it is vital to improve resilience and support sustainable economic development by
integrating climate risk data into national and regional planning processes, thereby addressing the specific needs of the
most affected populations.
132 ND-GAIN Index Country Rankings, Somalia. https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/somalia [accessed 7 July 2024]
133 https://www.ifad.org/en/web/operations/w/country/somalia
134 https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/poorest-countries-in-the-world

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77
D
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government from
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)
318 Ethiopia faces substantial fiscal constraints that hinder its ability to effectively address the extensive needs for climate
adaptation and disaster risk reduction. The country grapples with a persistent balance of payments gap, which limits the
financial resources available for critical climate resilience projects. Additionally, the depth of the local capital market is
insufficient to mobilize the necessary investments for large-scale climate initiatives. Consequently, the Ethiopian
government heavily relies on external financial support, such as that provided by the Green Climate Fund (GCF), to bridge
these funding gaps. This reliance underscores the urgent need for effective investment in EWSs, disaster preparedness,
and community resilience initiatives to mitigate the impacts of climate change on vulnerable populations as part of the
feasibility preparation process.
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
319 Ethiopia’s institutional capacity for managing climate risks and implementing EWSs requires significant strengthening.
While key institutions such as the Ethiopian Meteorological Institute (EMI) and the Ethiopian Disaster Risk Management
Commission (EDRMC) exist, they often lack the resources, coordination, and technical expertise necessary for effectively
managing multi-hazard EWSs. In the context of feasibility preparation for the GCF Early Warning for All project, there is a
critical need to support initiatives such as establishing a National Risk Data Hub for climate risk information, modernizing
and expanding hydro-meteorological observing stations, and integrating anticipatory action into emergency response and
disaster risk reduction programs. Additionally, strengthening or establishing Community-Based EWSs (CEWS) in priority
vulnerable communities is essential for ensuring that local populations are better prepared for climate-related events
and can respond effectively to emerging risks.
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
320 This project will equip countries to establish state of the art EWS which increase the resilience of the most vulnerable
communities to climate hazards. It will facilitate a paradigm shift wherein global and regional collaborations and
responsive, people centred policies will enable the production and delivery timely, targeted and contextual, community-
centred early warnings. These will be coupled with mechanisms for sustainable financial and technical support to NDMAs
and NMHSs. The project will substantively support the call of the UN Secretary General for EW4All by 2027.
321 By focusing on multiple delivery mechanisms, enhancing capacities to be able to deliver support and create a knowledge
base through national projects, the project will lead to participating countries developing timely, credible, holistic and
easily accessible climate, weather information designed to reach and equip communities with actionable and targeted
early warning. It will reduce vulnerability of communities to climate risks by supporting countries to reduce their own
exposure through timely alerts and protocols designed to reach the grassroots. Furthermore, the project will establish
links between participating countries and international financial and development institutions for sustainable financing
and support for adaptation and disaster recovery.
322 In each country, the NDA was approached with an idea note of the project to explain what the aim would be, and to
present the initial architecture of the project. There were extensive discussions and consultations with the NDA in each
country during the FP development. Furthermore, the NDA convened larger consultations with a wide range of
stakeholders including CSOs and CBOs, to anchor the project design as much as possible on ground realities. National and
regional DAEs were engaged with to establish their willingness to contribute to the design of country specific projects
(through both output 1 & 3). Where DAEs are financial institutions, these discussions and those with other lenders were
used to ascertain the potential for GCF grant funding to be used to unlock additional loans/lending through de-risking
measures.
National priorities, as expressed through NAPs, NDCs, communications to the UNFCCC and the Sendai framework have
been used as a basis for discussions and determining of appropriate actions. Further engagement on private sector
financing and insurance, gaps in national and regional MHEWS and regional coordination mechanisms were conducted
with national and regional agencies, including the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC), Southern
African Development Community (SADC), Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), IGAD

--- Table 1 on Page 80 ---
 | D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78
D
Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC), Pacific Community (SPC), Asian Disaster Preparedness Center (ADPC),
Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System for Africa and Asia (RIMES), etc. Antiqua and Barbuda
323 The project ensures country ownership by closely aligning with Antigua and Barbuda’s national climate strategy and
relevant frameworks. By integrating these national commitments and plans, the project not only supports the country’s
climate goals but also strengthens its institutional and technical capacity for DRM.
Alignment with national climate strategy and frameworks
The project is designed to complement Antigua and Barbuda’s NDCs, which focus on enhancing climate resilience and
reducing vulnerability to climate-induced hazards. By updating the national disaster management legislation and
integrating disaster risk reduction into sectoral policies, the project directly supports the NDCs' objectives of improving
adaptive capacity and resilience. The project also supports the implementation of the NAP by addressing key areas such
as enhanced risk knowledge, observation systems, and community-based EWSs. These efforts align with the strategic
priorities outlined in the NAP, particularly in building adaptive capacity and integrating climate resilience into national
and sectoral planning.
Engagement with stakeholders
324 The project approach was developed through an extensive multi-stakeholder engagement process, including two
stakeholder workshops to identify gaps and implementation actions, culminating in an implementation roadmap for
reinforcing a people-centred MHEWS in the country. These multi-stakeholder workshops were followed by multiple bi-
lateral engagements with key stakeholders in country, as well as the EW4All regional pillar leads, to drill into the specifics
of the various gaps and needs identified, shaping them into an actionable project.
325 Civil Society Organisations: The project engages a wide range of stakeholders, including CSOs, by incorporating their input
into the planning and implementation phases. Civil society organisations are involved in the development of community-
based EWSs and response plans, ensuring that local knowledge and needs are considered. Local communities are also
consulted to integrate their traditional knowledge and practices into the disaster management framework, enhancing
cultural relevance and effectiveness.
326 Women and vulnerable groups: The project prioritises the inclusion of women and other vulnerable groups by specifically
addressing their needs in disaster preparedness and response strategies. This includes developing inclusive
communication frameworks for early warnings and ensuring that women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable
communities are actively involved in the planning and execution of community-based EWSs. Training and capacity-
building activities are designed to empower these groups and enhance their participation in DRM processes.
327 By fostering strong partnerships with national institutions, civil society, and local communities, the project ensures that
all stakeholders are actively engaged and that their perspectives are integrated into the project’s design and execution.
This participatory approach not only enhances the relevance and sustainability of the interventions but also strengthens
national ownership and commitment to achieving the project’s goals.
Chad
328 This initiative is fully in line with the priorities of the Government of Chad reflected in its development programs and
plans, particularly in terms of disaster and risk management programs. This project supports the Government’s National
Development Plan 2024-2028 which is undergoing validation for adoption, and the objectives of the 2030 vision,
specifically under “Pillar 4: Improving the quality of life of the Chadian population". The project is also in line with
Priority #10 “Climate Risk Management” under the First National Adaptation Plan of Action and in line with the updated
National Determined Contributions (October 2021).
329 This project will ensure that gender issues are addressed equitably across all its components by being aligned with the
National Policy on Gender for 2011-2020, which aims at the following: "By 2020, Chad is a country free from all forms of
gender inequalities and inequities, from all forms of violence, where men and women have equal opportunities to access
and control resources and participate equitably in decision-making processes in the interests of achieving sustainable
development."
Cambodia

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79
D
330 Cambodia published an updated NDC in 2020135 . The project has developed various activities to address the NDAs EWS
priorities. These activities are aligned with specific pillars and coordination efforts. The proposed activities include
establishing a standard information management system through PRISM, implementing a cross-pillar approach with a
focus on gender and inclusion in EWS/EA, improving sectoral EWS in agriculture and health, reinstating the multi-sectoral
monsoon forum, and focusing on IBF in Capacity Development activities for the MoWRAM. Additionally, the project aims
to involve youth in developing community-based EWS, improve public knowledge of climate change risks and EWS, and
build the capacities of the NDCM and the NAP-DRR at national and sub-national levels. Overall, the activities are designed
to address the prioritized NDC EWS needs and enhance coordination across different pillars.
Ecuador
331 The MHEWS project aligns seamlessly with Ecuador's national climate strategy, GCF Country Programme, and existing
policies like NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs. It aims to improve EWSs, enhancing climate resilience in vulnerable sectors.
332 The project will be implemented by accredited entities with strong track records in climate resilience and DRM, such as
the INAMHI. These institutions are being further strengthened through the project's capacity-building components,
ensuring they have the technical expertise and institutional capacity to deliver on the project's objectives. By enhancing
the capabilities of these entities, the project contributes to the long-term sustainability and effectiveness of Ecuador's
climate adaptation efforts.
333 The NDA plays a pivotal role in coordinating and endorsing projects that align with the country's climate priorities. For the
MHEWS project, the NDA will ensure that the project is integrated into national planning processes and receives the
necessary governmental support and coordination. This ensures that the project is aligned with national climate
strategies and receives the political backing needed for successful implementation.
334 The MHEWS project emphasizes inclusive stakeholder engagement, ensuring that civil society organizations, Indigenous
peoples, women, and other vulnerable groups are actively involved in the project's design and implementation. This
approach ensures that the project addresses the specific needs and vulnerabilities of these groups, making the EWSs
more effective and equitable. The integration of IKS and gender-sensitive approaches also ensures that the project is
culturally relevant and socially inclusive, enhancing its overall impact on community resilience. in feedback mechanisms
Somalia
335 The proposed project activities for Somalia directly respond to the needs outlined in the Roadmap for Implementation of
the EW4ALL Initiative 2024-2027 in Somalia. The National Multi-Hazard Early Warning Centre (NMHEWC) was established
to provide effective and timely warnings of possible risks posed by hazards. However, the country lacks a robust EWS
infrastructure and an enabling policy and institutional environment for the dissemination of warnings. The Roadmap for
EW4All builds on the country’s existing National MHEWS. It is also concurrent with Somalia’s commitment to the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030). In this context, the SoDMA has called for the national rollout of the
EW4All initiative, finalising gap analysis, and agreeing on a roadmap to consolidate and grow coverage of MHEWS to
empower and enable early action by individuals and communities, especially those most in need. In collaboration with
the UNDP Somalia country office, the EW4ALL initiative is now operationalised under the leadership of the NMHEWC.
336 The activities are also represented in Somalia’s NDRMP, and the Roadmap development process has been accompanied
by a systematic reform initiative aimed at aligning it to Article 3, para 6 and Article 7 para 2, of the establishment Law
17/2016 of the SoDMA. These Articles state the clear responsibility of SODMA to gather information and report on
disasters and the risks facing the country and send out early warnings in collaboration with organizations inside the
country and abroad working on those activities. Aside from implementing the interventions also link with Somalia’s 2013
NAPA which includes an adaptation strategy and risk mitigation plan.136, Somalia’s NAP Framework137, the 2021 Initial
135 https://ncsd.moe.gov.kh/sites/default/files/2021-01/20201231_NDC_Update_Cambodia.pdf
136Federal republic of Somalia National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change (NAPA) April 2013
137 Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework, 2022, https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-
framework.pdf

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80
D
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC)138 Report to the UNFCCC139, draft 2021 National Climate Change
Policy140 which provides framework for addressing climate change impacts, and the 2018 Initial National Communication
(INC)141 to the UNFCCC vulnerability assessments, and adaptation strategies.
Fiji
337 The Fiji National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) 2018-2030 is the instrument to protect Fiji’s development priorities from
current, future, and intergenerational climate change risks. It also aims to anchor Fiji’s national climate change response
and nationally determined commitment under the Paris agreement within national policy and planning processes. The
policy identifies and ustilises interlinked and related priorities in DRR and climate change adaptation to allow for the
advancement of integrated actions that effectively address both fast and slow onset hazard events, as well as long-term
climate impacts and risks.
338 All community service organizations involved with the EWS, including church groups, women's groups, and people with
disabilities and other minorities, fall under the umbrella of the Fiji Council of Social Services (FCOSS). The FCOSS office
coordinates with the government whenever there is a disaster, and the FCOSS director is a member of the NDRM Council.
The importance of early warning to these CSOs is to assist in planning for response and recovery purposes. Therefore,
accurate and timely early warning is crucial for these organizations.
Ethiopia
Alignment with national climate strategy and frameworks
339 The GCF Early Warning for All project aligns strategically with Ethiopia's national climate and disaster management
strategies, reinforcing essential frameworks such as the NDRMP and the Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE)
strategy. Specifically, the Roadmap for Multi-Hazard, Impact-Based Early Warning and Early Action System (2023–2030)
provides a comprehensive plan for implementing a robust EWS that integrates IbF and anticipatory actions. The National
Framework for Climate Services, alongside the Strategic Programme and Investment Framework (SPIF), outlines priority
actions and investments needed to enhance Ethiopia’s DRM system. Additionally, the project supports Ethiopia's updated
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), emphasizing the integration of climate resilience measures into
development initiatives. As part of feasibility preparation, the project reinforces Ethiopia’s commitments to sustainable
development and climate adaptation by embedding EWSs into broader national and regional strategies.
Engagement with national stakeholders
340 The feasibility preparation for the GCF-funded Early Warning for All project has involved extensive engagement with
national stakeholders, coordinated through the Emergency Coordination Center (ECC) led by the EDRMC. The EW4All
Coordination Platform serves as an integrated framework to strengthen national EWSs by coordinating actions across
four key pillars: Risk Knowledge, Monitoring and Forecasting, Communication and Dissemination, and Response
Capability. This platform is designed to align stakeholders at all levels—government agencies, civil society organizations,
international partners, and local communities—ensuring that EWSs are effective, inclusive, and sensitive to the local
socio-political context. Given Ethiopia's complex landscape of socio-economic challenges, conflict dynamics,
environmental risks, and gender inequality, the EW4All platform will adopt a multi-sectoral and context-specific
approach, ensuring that early warning mechanisms are not only operationally effective but also conflict-sensitive and
gender-responsive.
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
138 The Federal Republic of Somalia updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), July 2021
139The Federal Republic of Somalia Ministry of Environment and climate change Somalia’s first biennial update report under the United Nations
Framework Convention on climate change (UNFCCC).
140The Federal Republic of Somalia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Somalia National Climate Change Policy, https://moecc.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2023/07/Somalia-National-Climate-Change-Policy.pdf
141 https://moecc.gov.so/initial-national-communication-inc/ . https://moecc.gov.so/2023/07/24/national-communication/

--- Table 1 on Page 83 ---
 | D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81
D
341 This project will ensure a cost-effective alternative to reactive approaches to climate-related hazards that focus on ad-
hoc recovery and investment. It will significantly enhance the risk knowledge and early action capabilities of sectors and
communities and will contribute to the capacity building of relevant stakeholders. The enhanced risk knowledge will
enable stakeholders, particularly local communities and first responders, to take pro-active action based on timely and
accurate information, thereby reducing the impacts of disasters on lives, livelihoods and assets. The project will ensure a
larger spatial coverage of ibF for vulnerable regions and establish protocols, supported by national policies and
procedures, for communities to prepare for and take pre-emptive action against disasters.
342 A high expected benefit-cost ratio (BCR) on investments in strengthening the hydrological and meteorological agencies
and all partners in the MHEWS value cycle can only be achieved with a sizeable and multi-year investment which
addresses gaps in the value cycle and ensures that actionable warnings reach the last mile and those at risk being able to
respond. Improvements in MWEWS and preparedness make it possible to limit losses from hydrometeorological hazard-
induced disasters, which would not be possible without the informed use of constantly improving meteorological,
hydrological, social, behavioural and related information, which this programme will seek to do sustainably by leveraging
additional co-finance, as well as ensuring country ownership by governments that are able to fund the ongoing costs of
maintaining all elements of the MHEWS cycle.142
343 MHEWS are a public good and for under-developed countries and SIDS, the financial and technical barriers that prevent
the implementation of a reliable, robust, widely accessible and effective MHEWS for disaster preparedness and planning
can only be removed by public investment financed by grant resources from international development institutions. The
project does not entail revenue generation or cost recovery during its duration and cannot be expected to attract
investments from the private sector, which is nascent in many of the targeted counties. However, the project does plan
to engage the private sector by stimulating demand for climate information-based value-added products and services, by
engaging with the private sector particularly in telecommunications, agri-businesses, tourism and transport – with a focus
on aviation and financial services such as insurance. The level of engagement and the type of industry will be determined
by the national context. These engagements may generate some revenue and cost sharing or co-financing in the future
and could support the project’s financial sustainability beyond its proposed duration.
344 On the other hand, there is overwhelming evidence of substantial benefits of investing in weather and climate
information and DRR. Reported benefit to cost ratios are four and higher143, the socioeconomic benefits are estimated to
be at least US$ 160 billion per year144 and the net benefit of investing in the resilience of infrastructure in developing
countries would be $4.2 trillion over the lifetime of new infrastructure145. The return on investment from DRR offer
“triple dividends” from avoiding direct impact, enhancing economic potential and generating sustainable development
co-benefits.146
Efficiency and effectiveness
345 Efficiency and effectiveness will be ensured by building on existing national capacities and infrastructure across the
MHEWS value chain and leveraging investments from other donors, particularly from SOFF and CREWS. Existing
institutional capacities and linkages will be effectively used at all levels across government, non-government, private
sector – particularly telecommunications and among community based organizations. This will minimize time and costs
and provide a foundation to strengthen and enhance MHEWS to the community level.
142 WMO, “Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological and Hydrological Services” (World Meteorological Organization,
2015).
143 United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR). ‘Costs and Benefits of Disaster Risk Reduction’. High Level Dialogue. Geneva,
Switzerland, 10 May 2007; World Bank. ‘World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity - Managing Risk for Development’, 2023. World.;
WMO. ‘Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological and Hydrological Services’. World Meteorological Organization, 2015.
144 SOFF. ‘The Value of Surface-Based Meteorological Observation Data: Costs and Benefits of the Global Basic Observing Network’. Information Brief.
Systematic Observations Financing Facility, 2020.
145 Stéphane Hallegatte, Jun Rentschler, and Julie Rozenberg. ‘Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity’. World Bank Group, 2019.
146 Thomas, Tanner, Swenja Surminski, Emily Wilkinson, Robert Reid, Jun Rentschler, and Sumati Rajput. ‘The Triple Dividend of Resilience: Realising
Development Goals Through the Multiple Benefits of Disaster Risk Management’. Overseas Development Institute (ODI), International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development / International Development Association or The World Bank., 2015.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82
D
346 Synergies between ongoing government initiatives and projects, including those supported through vertical funds will be
used to co-finance and share costs. Coordination with ongoing initiatives will prevent duplication of effort while
optimizing investments and operation and maintenance of observation infrastructure. Technical support from regional
facilities, multilateral agencies and the private sector will be used to minimise costs of analysis, technology transfer,
training and data acquisition. Costs of hiring technical staff and their training and capacity building within NMHS, NDMA
and other relevant partners will also be reduced through collaborations with regional and national technical and research
agencies.
347 The choice of technologies for observation, networking and dissemination for each country are governed by a scientific
gap analysis and consideration of operation and maintenance costs and capacities. An optimal mix of technologies will be
used, including gridded and remotely sensed datasets from other agencies to complement and supplement expensive
observation infrastructure. Conformance to WMO and international public standards for data and communication and
the use of open-source software and IoT devices for local observations will further ensure inter-operability and reduce
costs. The development of support networks comprising regional and national academic institutions and centres of
expertise is expected to be more cost effective and ensure longer term sustainability. By working with NDAs, DAEs and
regional coordinating bodies (SPC, SPREP, SADC, IGAD, CCCCC, CAF etc) investments will be able to target the most critical
gaps and ensure the full MHEWS cycle is achieved, reaching as many people, businesses and communities as possible.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83
E
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.
E.1. Project/Programme Focus
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both.
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages)
Current state (baseline)
Potential target scenario How the project/programme will contribute
Assessment Dimension
(Description) (Description)
Description Rating
Persistent and widening gaps Paradigm shift would imply the establishment of This project is based on an unprecedented level of
between climate risks and 1) increased community resilience to climate cooperation and collaboration among key actors
support to countries that are hazards through well-coordinated, responsive and across the EWS value chain, from global to
highly sensitive to climate inclusive disaster adaptation and preparedness regional, national and sub-national levels. The
change prevents the through early and anticipatory action which is project establishes a global support architecture
establishment and informed by an effective end-to-end MHEWS; and sustainable mechanism to support countries
management of MHEWS for and 2) mechanisms for long term support to the both technically and financially in rolling out a
early and anticipatory action, entire EWS value chain, both technical and comprehensive EW4All value chain through: i)
perpetuating the financial, which raise and leverage resources from robust scientific information and analytics on
Scale Low
vulnerability of 3.3 to 3.6 both national as well as regional, multilateral and weather, water and climate hazards and
billion people living in these international agencies, including private vulnerabilities within NMHS; ii) optimised internal
countries. corporations. coordination among various government entities
that are responsible for different elements of
managing a national EWS; and iii) a long-term
financing plan to maintain the necessary
hydrometeorological infrastructure, and
community level capacities to receive, understand
and respond to EWS.

--- Table 1 on Page 86 ---
 | LOGICAL FRAMEWORK | 
 | This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme | 
 | contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 86 ---
 | E.1. Project/Programme Focus | 
 | Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. | 
 | ☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) | 
 | ☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) | 

--- Table 3 on Page 86 ---
 | E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Assessment Dimension |  | Current state (baseline) |  |  |  |  |  | Potential target scenario
(Description) | How the project/programme will contribute
(Description) | 
 |  |  | Description |  |  | Rating |  |  |  | 
Scale |  | Persistent and widening gaps
between climate risks and
support to countries that are
highly sensitive to climate
change prevents the
establishment and
management of MHEWS for
early and anticipatory action,
perpetuating the
vulnerability of 3.3 to 3.6
billion people living in these
countries. |  |  | Low |  |  | Paradigm shift would imply the establishment of
1) increased community resilience to climate
hazards through well-coordinated, responsive and
inclusive disaster adaptation and preparedness
through early and anticipatory action which is
informed by an effective end-to-end MHEWS;
and 2) mechanisms for long term support to the
entire EWS value chain, both technical and
financial, which raise and leverage resources from
both national as well as regional, multilateral and
international agencies, including private
corporations. | This project is based on an unprecedented level of
cooperation and collaboration among key actors
across the EWS value chain, from global to
regional, national and sub-national levels. The
project establishes a global support architecture
and sustainable mechanism to support countries
both technically and financially in rolling out a
comprehensive EW4All value chain through: i)
robust scientific information and analytics on
weather, water and climate hazards and
vulnerabilities within NMHS; ii) optimised internal
coordination among various government entities
that are responsible for different elements of
managing a national EWS; and iii) a long-term
financing plan to maintain the necessary
hydrometeorological infrastructure, and
community level capacities to receive, understand
and respond to EWS. | 

--- Table 4 on Page 86 ---
Potential target scenario
(Description)

--- Table 5 on Page 86 ---
How the project/programme will contribute
(Description)

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84
E
Investments in developing The establishment of selected IbF schemes and The project will make comprehensive country-
countries in the CIEWS sector Anticipatory Action initiatives have a high level investments in select countries to ensure the
are typically one-off and potential for replication within and across the roll-out of EW4All. Regional and international
project-based. Technological target countries. mechanisms that are being put in place provide
innovations and gains and There is a substantial potential for replicating the framework for continuous cross learning and
lessons in institutional innovations. This includes i) the use of emerging collaboration as well as for rapid scale-up and
collaboration and successes technologies such as cloud computing, AI and replication to other countries.
at the community level remotely sensed acquisition of observations; ii)
Replicability remain in isolated silos, with Low IoT and mobile ICT devices for community based
little opportunity for cross EWS, and communication protocols and
learning. There are limited technologies for targeted dissemination; but
mechanisms or opportunities perhaps more importantly iii) in terms of multi-
for replicating lessons institutional coordination and collaboration for
learned or scaling up these technical and financial support, and support for
projects to other countries or on-ground implementation of interventions, such
even across sectors and as in fragile and conflict affected states.
regions in the same country.
Many developing countries The targeted scenario would involve long term The project will create increased opportunities for
struggle with establishing regional and global support for country level regional cooperation and up-scaling of climate
and operating a broad based, actions towards the EW4All goals, including resilient sustainable development. It will link
end-to-end MHEWS to countries with fiscal and technical constraints and sectoral and technical government entities,
inform adaptation to climate those facing challenges due to insecurity. Long science institutions, civil society and other
hazards. There is a gap in term and continuous investments will be ensured stakeholders to promote anticipatory actions. This
institutional structures and through mechanisms such as SOFF and will result will contribute to an enabling environment where
resources required for a in improved hydrometeorological infrastructure, climate risk information is effectively produced
broad based, community its O&M and strengthened human and and disseminated, in a sustainable fashion, to the
centered system for disaster institutional capacities of NMHS and NDMAs for most vulnerable groups to safeguard their lives,
preparedness and planning generation and international sharing of weather livelihoods and assets in the long-term.Legal
which makes effective use of and climate data. Strengthened institutional frameworks for DRM and protocols for inter-
Sustainability Low
the MHEWS through early coordination and collaboration will result in agency coordination and involvement of local
and anticipatory action. effective use of climate information to trigger and institutions will be strengthened along with
MHEWS is fundamentally a support decisions for anticipatory action. regional and international level collaborations and
public service and resources Deliberate and detailed impact assessments will partnerships.
for its operation, lead to increased awareness and knowledge
maintenance and expansion targeted at increased political commitment
to vulnerable communities coupled with institutional mechanisms that
need to be raised from ensure community involvement in disaster
scarce public funds for which preparedness and planning.
political will is often lacking
in poor and developing
countries.

--- Table 1 on Page 87 ---
Replicability | Investments in developing
countries in the CIEWS sector
are typically one-off and
project-based. Technological
innovations and gains and
lessons in institutional
collaboration and successes
at the community level
remain in isolated silos, with
little opportunity for cross
learning. There are limited
mechanisms or opportunities
for replicating lessons
learned or scaling up these
projects to other countries or
even across sectors and
regions in the same country. | Low | The establishment of selected IbF schemes and
Anticipatory Action initiatives have a high
potential for replication within and across the
target countries.
There is a substantial potential for replicating
innovations. This includes i) the use of emerging
technologies such as cloud computing, AI and
remotely sensed acquisition of observations; ii)
IoT and mobile ICT devices for community based
EWS, and communication protocols and
technologies for targeted dissemination; but
perhaps more importantly iii) in terms of multi-
institutional coordination and collaboration for
technical and financial support, and support for
on-ground implementation of interventions, such
as in fragile and conflict affected states. | The project will make comprehensive country-
level investments in select countries to ensure the
roll-out of EW4All. Regional and international
mechanisms that are being put in place provide
the framework for continuous cross learning and
collaboration as well as for rapid scale-up and
replication to other countries.
Sustainability | Many developing countries
struggle with establishing
and operating a broad based,
end-to-end MHEWS to
inform adaptation to climate
hazards. There is a gap in
institutional structures and
resources required for a
broad based, community
centered system for disaster
preparedness and planning
which makes effective use of
the MHEWS through early
and anticipatory action.
MHEWS is fundamentally a
public service and resources
for its operation,
maintenance and expansion
to vulnerable communities
need to be raised from
scarce public funds for which
political will is often lacking
in poor and developing
countries. | Low | The targeted scenario would involve long term
regional and global support for country level
actions towards the EW4All goals, including
countries with fiscal and technical constraints and
those facing challenges due to insecurity. Long
term and continuous investments will be ensured
through mechanisms such as SOFF and will result
in improved hydrometeorological infrastructure,
its O&M and strengthened human and
institutional capacities of NMHS and NDMAs for
generation and international sharing of weather
and climate data. Strengthened institutional
coordination and collaboration will result in
effective use of climate information to trigger and
support decisions for anticipatory action.
Deliberate and detailed impact assessments will
lead to increased awareness and knowledge
targeted at increased political commitment
coupled with institutional mechanisms that
ensure community involvement in disaster
preparedness and planning. | The project will create increased opportunities for
regional cooperation and up-scaling of climate
resilient sustainable development. It will link
sectoral and technical government entities,
science institutions, civil society and other
stakeholders to promote anticipatory actions. This
will contribute to an enabling environment where
climate risk information is effectively produced
and disseminated, in a sustainable fashion, to the
most vulnerable groups to safeguard their lives,
livelihoods and assets in the long-term.Legal
frameworks for DRM and protocols for inter-
agency coordination and involvement of local
institutions will be strengthened along with
regional and international level collaborations and
partnerships.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85
E
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)
Target
IRMF
GCF Result Area Means of Verification (MoV) Baseline Assumptions / Note
Indicator Mid-term Final147
Direct: Surveys and feedback Population estimates may be
forms, including USSD and Ecuador: 0/0 Ecuador : 128475 Ecuador : 513900 revised for some countries.
electronic means, statistics Cambodia: 0/0 (62592, 65883)/ (250367, Agencies, including private
from mobile network 3500000 263533)/ mobile network operators, may
Antigua and
operator and radio call-in (1705169, 14000000 be unwilling to share statistics.
Barbuda: 0/0
statistics. 1794831) (6820675, Field based assessments and
Fiji: 0/0
Indirect: Radio, cell phone Antigua and 7179325) surveys may not be possible in
network coverage and Ethiopia: 0/0 Barbuda : 22875 Antigua and some inaccessible or insecure
population statistics from Chad: 0/0 (10928, 11947)/ Barbuda : 91500 areas.
national statistical authorities Somalia: 0/0 28500 (13615, (43712, 47788)/
or other recognized data 14885) 114000 (54461,
sources. Cambodia : 59539)
128524.5 (63581, Cambodia :
64944)/ 538257 514098 (254324,
ARA1 Most vulnerable Core 2: Direct and indirect
(266276, 271981) 259774)/ 2153028
people and communities beneficiaries reached
Fiji : 208,141 (1065103,
(106,152/101,989 1087925)
)/ 244,154 Fiji : 416282
(124,519/119,635 (211217,
) 205065)/ 488308
Ethiopia : (247762, 240546)
4000000 Ethiopia :
(2008800, 16000000
1991200)/ (8035200,
5400000 7964800)/
(2711880, 21600000
2688120) (10847520,
Chad : 425000 10752480)
(210354, Chad : 1700000
147 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total
lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

--- Table 1 on Page 88 ---
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
GCF Result Area | IRMF
Indicator | Means of Verification (MoV) | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note
 |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final147 |  | 
ARA1 Most vulnerable
people and communities | Core 2: Direct and indirect
beneficiaries reached | Direct: Surveys and feedback
forms, including USSD and
electronic means, statistics
from mobile network
operator and radio call-in
statistics.
Indirect: Radio, cell phone
network coverage and
population statistics from
national statistical authorities
or other recognized data
sources. | Ecuador: 0/0
Cambodia: 0/0
Antigua and
Barbuda: 0/0
Fiji: 0/0
Ethiopia: 0/0
Chad: 0/0
Somalia: 0/0 | Ecuador : 128475
(62592, 65883)/
3500000
(1705169,
1794831)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 22875
(10928, 11947)/
28500 (13615,
14885)
Cambodia :
128524.5 (63581,
64944)/ 538257
(266276, 271981)
Fiji : 208,141
(106,152/101,989
)/ 244,154
(124,519/119,635
)
Ethiopia :
4000000
(2008800,
1991200)/
5400000
(2711880,
2688120)
Chad : 425000
(210354, |  | Ecuador : 513900
(250367,
263533)/
14000000
(6820675,
7179325)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 91500
(43712, 47788)/
114000 (54461,
59539)
Cambodia :
514098 (254324,
259774)/ 2153028
(1065103,
1087925)
Fiji : 416282
(211217,
205065)/ 488308
(247762, 240546)
Ethiopia :
16000000
(8035200,
7964800)/
21600000
(10847520,
10752480)
Chad : 1700000 |  | Population estimates may be
revised for some countries.
Agencies, including private
mobile network operators, may
be unwilling to share statistics.
Field based assessments and
surveys may not be possible in
some inaccessible or insecure
areas.

--- Table 2 on Page 88 ---
IRMF
Indicator

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86
E
214647)/ 1275000 (841414,
(631061, 643940) 858586)/ 5100000
Somalia : 292500 (2524242,
(145070, 2575758)
147430)/ 1950000 Somalia : 1170000
(967137, 982863) (580282,
589718)/ 7800000
(3868548,
3931452
Direct: Surveys and feedback To be provided in Ecuador : 256950 Ecuador : 436815 Population estimates may be
forms, including USSD and first APR (125184, 131767) (212812,224003) revised.
electronic means, statistics Antigua and Antigua and Agencies, including private
from mobile network Barbuda : 45750 Barbuda : 77775 mobile network operators, may
operator and radio call-in (21856, 23894) (37155,40620) be unwilling to share statistics.
statistics.
Cambodia : Cambodia : Field based assessments and
Indirect: Radio, cell phone 257049 (127162, 436983 surveys may not be possible in
network coverage and 129887) (216175,220808) some inaccessible or insecure
population statistics from Fiji : 208,141 Fiji : 353840 areas.
ARA1 Most vulnerable Supplementary 2.4: national statistical authorities (106,152/101,989 (179534,174305) Assumption: 50% of the direct
people and communities Beneficiaries (female/male) or other recognized data ) Ethiopia : beneficiaries for mid-term and
covered by new or improved sources. Ethiopia : 13600000 85% of direct beneficiaries in long
early warning systems 8000000 (6829920,677008 term
(4017600, 0)
3982400) Chad : 1445000
Chad : 850000 (715202,729798)
(420707, 429293) Somalia : 994500
Somalia : 146250 (493240,501260)
(72535, 73715)
Registers maintained by Missing baselines Baseline figures will be updated
relevant authorities and will be provided in Ecuador: 60% Ecuador: 90% by participating countries in the
Supplementary 2.7: Change in agencies involved in disaster first APR reduction reduction first APR.
A pe R o A p 1 l e M a o n s d t v co u m lne m r u ab n l i e ti es e to x p th ec e t i e m d p lo ac ss t e o s f o e f x l t i r v e e m s e d ue r s e u s r p ve o y n s s e, field based sample E cuador: 220: C A a n m tig b u o a d a ia n : d 6 0% C A a n m tig b u o a d a ia n :9 d 0 % A sh g a e r n e c d ie a s t a m ay be unwilling to
climate-related disasters in Barbuda: 10% Barbuda:30% Data may be inaccurate
the geographic area of the Fiji:80% reduction Field based assessments and
GCF intervention Ethiopia: 20% Fiji: 95% surveys may not be possible in
some inaccessible or insecure
Chad: 20% Ethiopia: 50%
areas.

--- Table 1 on Page 89 ---
 |  |  |  | 214647)/ 1275000
(631061, 643940)
Somalia : 292500
(145070,
147430)/ 1950000
(967137, 982863) | (841414,
858586)/ 5100000
(2524242,
2575758)
Somalia : 1170000
(580282,
589718)/ 7800000
(3868548,
3931452 | 
ARA1 Most vulnerable
people and communities | Supplementary 2.4:
Beneficiaries (female/male)
covered by new or improved
early warning systems | Direct: Surveys and feedback
forms, including USSD and
electronic means, statistics
from mobile network
operator and radio call-in
statistics.
Indirect: Radio, cell phone
network coverage and
population statistics from
national statistical authorities
or other recognized data
sources. | To be provided in
first APR | Ecuador : 256950
(125184, 131767)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 45750
(21856, 23894)
Cambodia :
257049 (127162,
129887)
Fiji : 208,141
(106,152/101,989
)
Ethiopia :
8000000
(4017600,
3982400)
Chad : 850000
(420707, 429293)
Somalia : 146250
(72535, 73715) | Ecuador : 436815
(212812,224003)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 77775
(37155,40620)
Cambodia :
436983
(216175,220808)
Fiji : 353840
(179534,174305)
Ethiopia :
13600000
(6829920,677008
0)
Chad : 1445000
(715202,729798)
Somalia : 994500
(493240,501260) | Population estimates may be
revised.
Agencies, including private
mobile network operators, may
be unwilling to share statistics.
Field based assessments and
surveys may not be possible in
some inaccessible or insecure
areas.
Assumption: 50% of the direct
beneficiaries for mid-term and
85% of direct beneficiaries in long
term
ARA1 Most vulnerable
people and communities | Supplementary 2.7: Change in
expected losses of lives due
to the impact of extreme
climate-related disasters in
the geographic area of the
GCF intervention | Registers maintained by
relevant authorities and
agencies involved in disaster
response, field based sample
surveys | Missing baselines
will be provided in
first APR
Ecuador: 220: | Ecuador: 60%
reduction
Cambodia: 60%
Antigua and
Barbuda: 10%
Fiji:80%
Ethiopia: 20%
Chad: 20% | Ecuador: 90%
reduction
Cambodia:90%
Antigua and
Barbuda:30%
reduction
Fiji: 95%
Ethiopia: 50% | Baseline figures will be updated
by participating countries in the
first APR.
Agencies may be unwilling to
share data
Data may be inaccurate
Field based assessments and
surveys may not be possible in
some inaccessible or insecure
areas.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87
E
Somalia: 20% Chad: 50%
Somalia: 50%
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.
Baseline context Rating for current state Target scenario How the project will
Core Indicator Coverage
(description) (baseline) (description) contribute
Most participating countries Country specific policies, road-
have significant challenges in maps and strategies will be
governance, institutional strengthened and developed
collaboration and Strengthened governance and through a process of
Core Indicator 5: Degree to coordination as well as policy coordination amongst consultation with relevant
which GCF investments frameworks for the delivery of relevant actors, including stakeholders. Roles,
contribute to strengthening comprehensive and effective government agencies, private procedures and protocols for
institutional and regulatory MHEWS. These challenges are sector, community and faith information sharing and
Low Multi-countries
frameworks for low emission particularly acute in fragile based organisations for dissemination will be
climate-resilient development and conflict affected states efficient exchange of established and mechanisms
pathways in a country-driven such Somalia, Chad and information and effective instituted for coordination
manner Ethiopia. dissemination of warnings for between agencies involved in
early and anticipatory action . the generation of EWS and
disaster information, its
dissemination and its use by
vulnerable communities.
Most countries have Observation and Formal linkages of the NMHS
rudimentary or dysfunctional dissemination systems and NDMA with multiple
observation and optimized to local conditions sources for long term
Core Indicator 6: Degree to communication systems, that leverage technologies technical and financial support
which GCF investments inadequate analysis of climate and technical collaborations including local, regional and
contribute to technology information, uncoordinated for long term investments and international research
low Multi-countries
deployment, dissemination, dissemination and weak sustained technical support . agencies, multilateral agencies
development or transfer and institutional mechanisms and Coordinated early and and international corporations
innovation capacities for on ground anticipatory actions down to including those involved in
disaster preparedness and the level of communities, technical innovations in
planning. They usually lack adopting best practices in AI/machine learning, cloud
formal collaborations which terms of institutional computing, remote sensing

--- Table 1 on Page 90 ---
 |  |  |  | Somalia: 20% | Chad: 50%
Somalia: 50% | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 90 ---
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Core Indicator |  | Baseline context |  | Rating for current state
(baseline) |  | Target scenario |  | How the project will
contribute | Coverage
 |  | (description) |  |  |  | (description) |  |  | 
Core Indicator 5: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to strengthening
institutional and regulatory
frameworks for low emission
climate-resilient development
pathways in a country-driven
manner | Most participating countries
have significant challenges in
governance, institutional
collaboration and
coordination as well as policy
frameworks for the delivery of
comprehensive and effective
MHEWS. These challenges are
particularly acute in fragile
and conflict affected states
such Somalia, Chad and
Ethiopia. |  |  | Low | Strengthened governance and
coordination amongst
relevant actors, including
government agencies, private
sector, community and faith
based organisations for
efficient exchange of
information and effective
dissemination of warnings for
early and anticipatory action . |  |  | Country specific policies, road-
maps and strategies will be
strengthened and developed
through a process of
consultation with relevant
stakeholders. Roles,
procedures and protocols for
information sharing and
dissemination will be
established and mechanisms
instituted for coordination
between agencies involved in
the generation of EWS and
disaster information, its
dissemination and its use by
vulnerable communities. | Multi-countries
Core Indicator 6: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to technology
deployment, dissemination,
development or transfer and
innovation | Most countries have
rudimentary or dysfunctional
observation and
communication systems,
inadequate analysis of climate
information, uncoordinated
dissemination and weak
institutional mechanisms and
capacities for on ground
disaster preparedness and
planning. They usually lack
formal collaborations which |  |  | low | Observation and
dissemination systems
optimized to local conditions
that leverage technologies
and technical collaborations
for long term investments and
sustained technical support .
Coordinated early and
anticipatory actions down to
the level of communities,
adopting best practices in
terms of institutional |  |  | Formal linkages of the NMHS
and NDMA with multiple
sources for long term
technical and financial support
including local, regional and
international research
agencies, multilateral agencies
and international corporations
including those involved in
technical innovations in
AI/machine learning, cloud
computing, remote sensing | Multi-countries

=== PAGE 91 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88
E
would facilitate technology mechanism and protocols for and low cost citizen based
transfer and build local disaster preparedness and the EWS.
capacities in these diverse use of IbFs and triggers .
areas where there is rapid
innovation and development
at the global level.
Investments in CIEWS have Increased capability for the
typically been one-off with production, access to and
limited effort on knowledge application of quality, timely
generation and learning from and contextually relevant risk
earlier experiences. External information at the national,
consultants and firms are sub-national and local levels.
typically engaged for analysis Improved capacities of
and development of models relevant agencies in data
with no mechanisms to access, metrics and analysis to
develop in-house expertise or support decision-making, and
sharing and replicating the learning and incorporation of
learnings. risk knowledge into EWS.
Creating enabling conditions
Systematic and deliberate
for better integration and use
documentation, sharing of
of existing capacities of
knowledge and lessons and
relevant ministries and
Core indicator 8: Degree to building of technical capacities
entities with the work of
which GCF investments in-house within NMHS and
NDMAs and NMHS.
contribute to effective NDMA . Establishment of
knowledge generation and low formal partnerships and Raising awareness on crucial Multi-countries
learning processes, and use of collaborations with academia intersections of MHEWS with
good practices, methodologies and facilities at the national, gender inequality and social
and standards regional and global level to exclusion.
ensure long term technical Strengthened collaboration
support, development and and risk knowledge capability
innovation . between key ministries,
academia and the private
sector, including at the
community level.
Combining local, traditional,
Indigenous, generational and
scientific knowledge to enable
resilience under a range of
future risk scenarios.
Strengthen locally led, people-
centred and citizen science-
based and innovative
approaches to leverage new
and existing technologies to

--- Table 1 on Page 91 ---
 | would facilitate technology
transfer and build local
capacities in these diverse
areas where there is rapid
innovation and development
at the global level. |  | mechanism and protocols for
disaster preparedness and the
use of IbFs and triggers . | and low cost citizen based
EWS. | 
Core indicator 8: Degree to
which GCF investments
contribute to effective
knowledge generation and
learning processes, and use of
good practices, methodologies
and standards | Investments in CIEWS have
typically been one-off with
limited effort on knowledge
generation and learning from
earlier experiences. External
consultants and firms are
typically engaged for analysis
and development of models
with no mechanisms to
develop in-house expertise or
sharing and replicating the
learnings. | low | Systematic and deliberate
documentation, sharing of
knowledge and lessons and
building of technical capacities
in-house within NMHS and
NDMA . Establishment of
formal partnerships and
collaborations with academia
and facilities at the national,
regional and global level to
ensure long term technical
support, development and
innovation . | Increased capability for the
production, access to and
application of quality, timely
and contextually relevant risk
information at the national,
sub-national and local levels.
Improved capacities of
relevant agencies in data
access, metrics and analysis to
support decision-making, and
learning and incorporation of
risk knowledge into EWS.
Creating enabling conditions
for better integration and use
of existing capacities of
relevant ministries and
entities with the work of
NDMAs and NMHS.
Raising awareness on crucial
intersections of MHEWS with
gender inequality and social
exclusion.
Strengthened collaboration
and risk knowledge capability
between key ministries,
academia and the private
sector, including at the
community level.
Combining local, traditional,
Indigenous, generational and
scientific knowledge to enable
resilience under a range of
future risk scenarios.
Strengthen locally led, people-
centred and citizen science-
based and innovative
approaches to leverage new
and existing technologies to | Multi-countries

=== PAGE 92 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89
E
expand risk knowledge
capability at all scales,
including continuous
monitoring / crowdsourcing of
important vulnerability
metrics as a basis for
responding to and anticipating
emerging crises and disasters.
Improved monitoring,
evaluation and learning
systems integrated within
project and national
structures to provide up to
date status of activities and
emerging risks and measuring
effectiveness of EWS to
promote adaptive approaches
to the implementation of
MHEWS.
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)
Target
Project/programme results Project/programme
Means of Verification (MoV) Baseline Assumptions / Note
(outcomes/ outputs) specific Indicator Mid-term Final
Assumptions: Participating
countries agree to
Each region has at least
collaborations, joint
one technical and one
Outcome 1: Sustained 1 Technical and programmes and road-maps
financial mechanism in Agreements, conventions,
support for global place for sustained letters of support. 0 0 1 Financial with the regional agencies/
coordination and support mechanism in consortia.
support to countries
architecture for EW4All place Data sources: Global and
implementing the EW4All
regional offices of respective
MCP
coordination
agencies/consortia
Output 1.1. Enhancing Global (1) and regional (4) Agreements and resolutions Assumption: Participating
0 1, 0 1, 4
enabling conditions globally structures for affirming the formation and countries agree to

--- Table 1 on Page 92 ---
 |  |  |  | expand risk knowledge
capability at all scales,
including continuous
monitoring / crowdsourcing of
important vulnerability
metrics as a basis for
responding to and anticipating
emerging crises and disasters.
Improved monitoring,
evaluation and learning
systems integrated within
project and national
structures to provide up to
date status of activities and
emerging risks and measuring
effectiveness of EWS to
promote adaptive approaches
to the implementation of
MHEWS. | 

--- Table 2 on Page 92 ---
 | E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme results
(outcomes/ outputs) |  |  |  |  |  | Means of Verification (MoV) |  |  | Baseline |  | Target |  |  | Assumptions / Note |  | 
 |  |  |  | Project/programme |  |  |  |  |  | Mid-term |  | Final |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  | specific Indicator |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Outcome 1: Sustained
support for global
coordination and support
architecture for EW4All |  |  | Each region has at least
one technical and one
financial mechanism in
place for sustained
support to countries
implementing the EW4All
MCP |  |  | Agreements, conventions,
letters of support. |  |  | 0 | 0 |  | 1 Technical and
1 Financial
mechanism in
place |  |  | Assumptions: Participating | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | countries agree to | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | collaborations, joint | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programmes and road-maps | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | with the regional agencies/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | consortia. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: Global and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regional offices of respective | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | coordination | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agencies/consortia | 
 | Output 1.1. Enhancing |  |  | Global (1) and regional (4) |  |  | Agreements and resolutions |  | 0 | 1, 0 |  | 1, 4 |  |  | Assumption: Participating | 
 | enabling conditions globally |  |  | structures for |  |  | affirming the formation and |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | countries agree to | 

--- Table 3 on Page 92 ---
Project/programme results
(outcomes/ outputs)

--- Table 4 on Page 92 ---
Each region has at least
one technical and one
financial mechanism in
place for sustained
support to countries
implementing the EW4All
MCP

--- Table 5 on Page 92 ---
Outcome 1: Sustained
support for global
coordination and support
architecture for EW4All

--- Table 6 on Page 92 ---
Agreements, conventions,
letters of support.


--- Table 7 on Page 92 ---
1 Technical and
1 Financial
mechanism in
place

=== PAGE 93 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90
E
and regionally to promote coordination of technical formalization of the global and collaborations, joint
country-level actions and financial support for regional support structures programmes and road-maps
towards the EW4All goals EW4All, built on existing with the regional agencies/
mechanisms in the region. consortia.
Data sources: Global and
regional offices of respective
coordination
agencies/consortia; EW4All
Financial Observatory.
Ecuador : 128475
(62592, 65883) Ecuador : 513900
(250367, 263533)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 22875 Antigua and
(10928, 11947) Barbuda : 91500
(43712, 47788)
Cambodia :
128524.5 (63581, Cambodia :
64944) 514098 (254324,
259774) Assumption: Full participation
of relevant countries in project
Improved resilience of Fiji : 208,141
implementation
communities in seven (106,152/101,989) Fiji : 416282
Outcome 2: End-to-end EWS countries to climate Impact surveys and (211217, 205065) Data sources: Govt. agencies
that is inclusive and builds (NDMA, NMHS, statistical
community resilience to hazards. Population (m, f) assessments including disaster 0 Ethiopia : 4000000 Ethiopia : bureaus), sub-national line and
climate hazards in targeted sites losses and damages reports (2008800, 16000000 extension agencies,
supported by end-to-end 1991200) (8035200, telecommunication companies,
EWS. 7964800)
local DRM committees,
communities
Chad : 300000
1200000 (593939,
(148485, 151515) 606061)
Somalia : Somalia:
Somalia : 7,800,000
2,600,000 (3889080/391092
(1296369/130363 0)
1)
Assumption: Full participation
Output 2.1: Accelerating Number of countries with CHDs
of relevant countries in project
actions in select countries operational end-to-end Country disaster risk 0 3 7 implementation
towards EW4All EWS assessments and common
Data sources: Govt. agencies

--- Table 1 on Page 93 ---
and regionally to promote
country-level actions
towards the EW4All goals | coordination of technical
and financial support for
EW4All, built on existing
mechanisms in the region. | formalization of the global and
regional support structures |  |  |  |  |  |  | collaborations, joint | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | programmes and road-maps | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | with the regional agencies/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | consortia. | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: Global and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | regional offices of respective | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | coordination | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | agencies/consortia; EW4All | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Financial Observatory. | 
Outcome 2: End-to-end EWS
that is inclusive and builds
community resilience to
climate hazards | Improved resilience of
communities in seven
countries to climate
hazards. Population (m, f)
in targeted sites
supported by end-to-end
EWS. | Impact surveys and
assessments including disaster
losses and damages reports | 0 |  | Ecuador : 128475 |  | Ecuador : 513900
(250367, 263533)
Antigua and
Barbuda : 91500
(43712, 47788)
Cambodia :
514098 (254324,
259774)
Fiji : 416282
(211217, 205065)
Ethiopia :
16000000
(8035200,
7964800)
1200000 (593939,
606061)
Somalia:
7,800,000
(3889080/391092
0) | Assumption: Full participation
of relevant countries in project
implementation
Data sources: Govt. agencies
(NDMA, NMHS, statistical
bureaus), sub-national line and
extension agencies,
telecommunication companies,
local DRM committees,
communities |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (62592, 65883) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Antigua and |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Barbuda : 22875 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (10928, 11947) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Cambodia : |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 128524.5 (63581, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 64944) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Fiji : 208,141
(106,152/101,989) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Ethiopia : 4000000 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (2008800, |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1991200) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Chad : 300000 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (148485, 151515) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Somalia : |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | Somalia : |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 2,600,000 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | (1296369/130363 |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | 1) |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Output 2.1: Accelerating
actions in select countries
towards EW4All | Number of countries with
operational end-to-end
EWS | CHDs
Country disaster risk
assessments and common | 0 | 3 |  |  | 7 |  | Assumption: Full participation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of relevant countries in project
implementation | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: Govt. agencies | 

--- Table 2 on Page 93 ---
and regionally to promote
country-level actions
towards the EW4All goals

--- Table 3 on Page 93 ---
coordination of technical
and financial support for
EW4All, built on existing
mechanisms in the region.

--- Table 4 on Page 93 ---
formalization of the global and
regional support structures

--- Table 5 on Page 93 ---
Ecuador : 513900
(250367, 263533)

Antigua and
Barbuda : 91500
(43712, 47788)

Cambodia :
514098 (254324,
259774)
Fiji : 416282
(211217, 205065)
Ethiopia :
16000000
(8035200,
7964800)

1200000 (593939,
606061)


Somalia:
7,800,000
(3889080/391092
0)


--- Table 6 on Page 93 ---
Assumption: Full participation
of relevant countries in project
implementation
Data sources: Govt. agencies
(NDMA, NMHS, statistical
bureaus), sub-national line and
extension agencies,
telecommunication companies,
local DRM committees,
communities

--- Table 7 on Page 93 ---
Improved resilience of
communities in seven
countries to climate
hazards. Population (m, f)
in targeted sites
supported by end-to-end
EWS.

--- Table 8 on Page 93 ---
Outcome 2: End-to-end EWS
that is inclusive and builds
community resilience to
climate hazards

--- Table 9 on Page 93 ---
assessments including disaster
losses and damages reports

--- Table 10 on Page 93 ---
Output 2.1: Accelerating
actions in select countries
towards EW4All

--- Table 11 on Page 93 ---
Number of countries with
operational end-to-end
EWS

--- Table 12 on Page 93 ---
CHDs
Country disaster risk
assessments and common

=== PAGE 94 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91
E
country analysis reports (NDMA, NMHS, statistical
bureaus), sub-national line and
extension agencies,
telecommunication companies,
local DRM committees,
communities
Project/programme co-benefit indicators
Assumptions: Security
Number of people environment and logistics
Co-benefit 1: Improved dependent on natural 50% of NR 85% of NR conducive to field work for
livelhoods and food security resources (including Baseline surveys at start, mid dependent dependent impact assessments and
of communities dependent agriculture) provided with point and end of project 0 communities in communities in surveys
on climate-sensitive natural climate information to
project areas project areas Data sources: field surveys
resources. support adaptation and
using a mix of methods
resilience building.
Government records
Assumptions: The concerned
Area under critical
Co-benefit 2: Improved country has resources
ecosystems conserved # management # management
management and Management plans utilizing # management plans dedicated to management and
and managed using plans to be plans to be
conservation of the climate information products to be provided by conservation of critical
climate information provided by provided by
environment and critical based on project interventions country projects ecosystems
services for decision country projects country projects
ecosystems. Data sources: Relevant
support.
ministries and departments
Assumptions: The concerned
Population living in
country has operational
settlements benefiting Infrastructure design and town
Co-benefit 3: Better design # settlements to be # settlements to # settlements to processes and procedures in
from design and planning planning documents utilizing
and planning of settlements provided by country be provided by be provided by place for design and planning
of infrastructure informed climate information products
and infrastructure. projects country projects country projects of settlements
by climate information generated by the project
Data sources: Relevant
generated by the project.
ministries and departments
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables
Activities Description Sub-activities Deliverables

--- Table 1 on Page 94 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | country analysis reports |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | (NDMA, NMHS, statistical | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | bureaus), sub-national line and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | extension agencies, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | telecommunication companies, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | local DRM committees, | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | communities | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Co-benefit 1: Improved
livelhoods and food security
of communities dependent
on climate-sensitive natural
resources. |  |  | Number of people
dependent on natural
resources (including
agriculture) provided with
climate information to
support adaptation and
resilience building. |  |  | Baseline surveys at start, mid
point and end of project |  |  | 0 |  |  | 50% of NR
dependent
communities in
project areas |  |  | 85% of NR
dependent
communities in
project areas |  |  |  | Assumptions: Security | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | environment and logistics | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | conducive to field work for | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | impact assessments and
surveys | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: field surveys | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | using a mix of methods | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Government records | 
Co-benefit 2: Improved
management and
conservation of the
environment and critical
ecosystems. |  |  | Area under critical
ecosystems conserved
and managed using
climate information
services for decision
support. |  |  | Management plans utilizing
climate information products
based on project interventions |  |  | # management plans
to be provided by
country projects |  |  | # management
plans to be
provided by
country projects |  |  | # management
plans to be
provided by
country projects |  |  |  | Assumptions: The concerned | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | country has resources | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | dedicated to management and | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | conservation of critical | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ecosystems | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: Relevant | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ministries and departments | 
Co-benefit 3: Better design
and planning of settlements
and infrastructure. |  |  | Population living in
settlements benefiting
from design and planning
of infrastructure informed
by climate information
generated by the project. |  |  | Infrastructure design and town
planning documents utilizing
climate information products
generated by the project |  |  | # settlements to be
provided by country
projects |  |  | # settlements to
be provided by
country projects |  |  | # settlements to
be provided by
country projects |  |  |  | Assumptions: The concerned | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | country has operational | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | processes and procedures in | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | place for design and planning | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | of settlements | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Data sources: Relevant | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ministries and departments | 

--- Table 2 on Page 94 ---
Number of people
dependent on natural
resources (including
agriculture) provided with
climate information to
support adaptation and
resilience building.

--- Table 3 on Page 94 ---
Co-benefit 1: Improved
livelhoods and food security
of communities dependent
on climate-sensitive natural
resources.

--- Table 4 on Page 94 ---
50% of NR
dependent
communities in
project areas

--- Table 5 on Page 94 ---
85% of NR
dependent
communities in
project areas

--- Table 6 on Page 94 ---
Area under critical
ecosystems conserved
and managed using
climate information
services for decision
support.

--- Table 7 on Page 94 ---
Co-benefit 2: Improved
management and
conservation of the
environment and critical
ecosystems.

--- Table 8 on Page 94 ---
Management plans utilizing
climate information products
based on project interventions

--- Table 9 on Page 94 ---
# management plans
to be provided by
country projects

--- Table 10 on Page 94 ---
# management
plans to be
provided by
country projects

--- Table 11 on Page 94 ---
# management
plans to be
provided by
country projects

--- Table 12 on Page 94 ---
Population living in
settlements benefiting
from design and planning
of infrastructure informed
by climate information
generated by the project.

--- Table 13 on Page 94 ---
Co-benefit 3: Better design
and planning of settlements
and infrastructure.

--- Table 14 on Page 94 ---
Infrastructure design and town
planning documents utilizing
climate information products
generated by the project

--- Table 15 on Page 94 ---
# settlements to be
provided by country
projects

--- Table 16 on Page 94 ---
# settlements to
be provided by
country projects

--- Table 17 on Page 94 ---
# settlements to
be provided by
country projects

--- Table 18 on Page 94 ---
 | E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Activities |  |  | Description |  |  | Sub-activities |  |  | Deliverables | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 95 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92
E
Sub- Activity 1.1.1: Develop normative
Enhancing coordination and providing
guidance and tools across all four pillars & at 1.1.1: Guidance and tools developed for four
Activity 1.1: Enhanced Coordination and comprehensive joint technical support to
the inter-pillar level pillars and at the inter-pillar level.
Technical Support for EW4All Implementation ensure the effective implementation of the
Sub-Activity 1.1.2: Accelerate Technical 1.1.2: Technical support to 7 EW4All countries
Early Warnings for All (EW4All) initiative
Support to Countries for EWS implementation
Sub-Activity 1.2.1: Develop and operationalise 1.2.1: EW4All maturity index developed and
Enhanced and expanded global M&E the EW4All maturity index operationalized
framework for EW4All, including the EW4All Sub-Activity 1.2.2: Strengthen global EW4All 1.2.2: EW4All M&E global report and reporting
Activity 1.2: Strengthened M&E to support
Maturity index, a regularly updated dashboard M&E and reporting to enable regular progress for 7 countries
EW4All Implementation
to track progress of the initiative globally and updates 1.2.3: EW4All dashboard updated annually at
at country levels across all four pillars Sub-Activity 1.2.3: Regular update of EW4All global/regional level and periodically for 7
Dashboard countries
Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Development of
knowledge management framework that 1.3.1: Knowledge management framework
Support knowledge exchange among guides learning and exchange (one report)
Activity 1.3: Strengthened knowledge countries at different stages of Sub-Activity 1.3.2: Documentation and 1.3.2: Reports on good practices and lessons
management and lessons learned implementation of the EW4All EAP across all dissemination of good practices and lessons from seven EW4All countries (one report)
Pillars and implementing partners learned 1.3.3: One global and four regional technical
Sub-Activity 1.3.3: Development of global and working groups formed
regional technical expert working groups
2.1.1: Formal coordination mechanisms (SOPs,
Sub-Activity 2.1.1: Strengthened coordination
protocols) developed for seven countries.
mechanisms
Facilitate coordinated dissemination of 2.1.2: Governance arrangements for seven
Activity 2.1: Strengthened Governance and Sub-Activity 2.1.2: Enhanced governance
warnings between different actors, including countries enhanced through capacity
Coordination capacities
strengthening of policies development of relevant institutions
Sub-Activity 2.1.3: Monitoring, Evaluation and
2.1.3: MEAL systems established in seven
Learning
countries and at the global PMU level
2.2.1: Seven countries establish disaster risk
Systematic collection of risk data, information Sub-Activity 2.2.1: Develop disaster risk knowledge system (dashboards, data-bases)
and analysis leading to improved awareness knowledge systems 2.2.2: Gaps in climate/weather observation
Activity 2.2: Disaster risk knowledge and about hazards, exposure populations, Sub-Activity 2.2.2: Broaden observation and and monitoring networks addressed in seven
observations services, infrastructure, vulnerabilities of monitoring networks countries
communities, and improved loss and damage Sub-Activity 2.2.3: Strengthen MHEWS 2.2.3: Capacities of seven countries enhanced
accounting forecasting capacity in IbF and trigger development for
early/anticipatory action
Strengthening and/or establishment of Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Strengthen early warning 2.3.1: Seven countries with enhanced
Activity 2.3: Warning dissemination and meteorological, hydrological and climate dissemination systems dissemination systems geared towards
preparedness forecast and monitoring systems for each Sub-Activity 2.3.2: Develop preparedness and reaching communities and first responders
participating country anticipatory action protocols 2.3.2: Contextual SoPs and protocols for

--- Table 1 on Page 95 ---
 |  |  | 
Activity 1.1: Enhanced Coordination and
Technical Support for EW4All Implementation | Enhancing coordination and providing
comprehensive joint technical support to
ensure the effective implementation of the
Early Warnings for All (EW4All) initiative | Sub- Activity 1.1.1: Develop normative
guidance and tools across all four pillars & at
the inter-pillar level
Sub-Activity 1.1.2: Accelerate Technical
Support to Countries for EWS implementation | 1.1.1: Guidance and tools developed for four
pillars and at the inter-pillar level.
1.1.2: Technical support to 7 EW4All countries
Activity 1.2: Strengthened M&E to support
EW4All Implementation | Enhanced and expanded global M&E
framework for EW4All, including the EW4All
Maturity index, a regularly updated dashboard
to track progress of the initiative globally and
at country levels across all four pillars | Sub-Activity 1.2.1: Develop and operationalise
the EW4All maturity index
Sub-Activity 1.2.2: Strengthen global EW4All
M&E and reporting to enable regular progress
updates
Sub-Activity 1.2.3: Regular update of EW4All
Dashboard | 1.2.1: EW4All maturity index developed and
operationalized
1.2.2: EW4All M&E global report and reporting
for 7 countries
1.2.3: EW4All dashboard updated annually at
global/regional level and periodically for 7
countries
Activity 1.3: Strengthened knowledge
management and lessons learned | Support knowledge exchange among
countries at different stages of
implementation of the EW4All EAP across all
Pillars and implementing partners | Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Development of
knowledge management framework that
guides learning and exchange
Sub-Activity 1.3.2: Documentation and
dissemination of good practices and lessons
learned
Sub-Activity 1.3.3: Development of global and
regional technical expert working groups | 1.3.1: Knowledge management framework
(one report)
1.3.2: Reports on good practices and lessons
from seven EW4All countries (one report)
1.3.3: One global and four regional technical
working groups formed
Activity 2.1: Strengthened Governance and
Coordination | Facilitate coordinated dissemination of
warnings between different actors, including
strengthening of policies | Sub-Activity 2.1.1: Strengthened coordination
mechanisms
Sub-Activity 2.1.2: Enhanced governance
capacities
Sub-Activity 2.1.3: Monitoring, Evaluation and
Learning | 2.1.1: Formal coordination mechanisms (SOPs,
protocols) developed for seven countries.
2.1.2: Governance arrangements for seven
countries enhanced through capacity
development of relevant institutions
2.1.3: MEAL systems established in seven
countries and at the global PMU level
Activity 2.2: Disaster risk knowledge and
observations | Systematic collection of risk data, information
and analysis leading to improved awareness
about hazards, exposure populations,
services, infrastructure, vulnerabilities of
communities, and improved loss and damage
accounting | Sub-Activity 2.2.1: Develop disaster risk
knowledge systems
Sub-Activity 2.2.2: Broaden observation and
monitoring networks
Sub-Activity 2.2.3: Strengthen MHEWS
forecasting capacity | 2.2.1: Seven countries establish disaster risk
knowledge system (dashboards, data-bases)
2.2.2: Gaps in climate/weather observation
and monitoring networks addressed in seven
countries
2.2.3: Capacities of seven countries enhanced
in IbF and trigger development for
early/anticipatory action
Activity 2.3: Warning dissemination and
preparedness | Strengthening and/or establishment of
meteorological, hydrological and climate
forecast and monitoring systems for each
participating country | Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Strengthen early warning
dissemination systems
Sub-Activity 2.3.2: Develop preparedness and
anticipatory action protocols | 2.3.1: Seven countries with enhanced
dissemination systems geared towards
reaching communities and first responders
2.3.2: Contextual SoPs and protocols for

=== PAGE 96 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93
E
Sub-Activity 2.3.3: Strengthen disaster early/anticipatory action developed for seven
response capacity countries
2.3.3: Institutions and communities in seven
countries trained for effective disaster
preparedness and response

--- Table 1 on Page 96 ---
 |  | Sub-Activity 2.3.3: Strengthen disaster
response capacity | early/anticipatory action developed for seven
countries
2.3.3: Institutions and communities in seven
countries trained for effective disaster
preparedness and response

=== PAGE 97 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements
348 Monitoring and evaluation will be at two levels, at the global project level and at the country level in each of the seven
countries. The global MEAL system will feed into overall project management and oversight, reporting as well as
knowledge management. It will prompt the global teams of experts to support national projects and to ensure a
continuous, two-way flow of information. The national MEL system will support adaptive management, reporting and
knowledge sharing at the national level.
349 Project-level monitoring and evaluation at both levels, will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the
UNDP Evaluation Policy. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the
respective Project Managers. The Project Managers will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient
implementation of the project. The Project Managers will inform their respective Project Boards and the UNDP Country
Offices of any delays or difficulties during implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the
appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Managers will also ensure that all project staff
maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.
350 The UNDP Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (BPPS) will support the global Project Manager through the
Technical Specialist on Climate Change Adaptation through regular meetings and oversight.
The UNDP Country Office will support their respective Project Managers as needed, including through annual supervision
missions.
351 The BPPS and the respective UNDP Country Offices are responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E
requirements as outlined in the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). Additional M&E,
implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor
as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal Point will be involved as much as possible
in national project-level M&E.
352 A project inception workshop will be held globally and at each country after the UNDP project document has been signed
by all relevant parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall
context that influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including
reporting and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess
baselines as needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E
plan; d) review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the
annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project
Manager will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception
report will be cleared by the BPPS and the Technical Specialist on Climate Change Adaptationat the global level and the
respective UNDP Country Offices and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor at the national level. These will be approved
by the respective Project Boards.
353 A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation at both the global and national
levels. The respective Project Managers, the BPPS and respective UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Technical Specialist
Climate Change Adaptation and Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the Annual Performance
Report (APR).
354 The global and national Project Managers will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are
monitored annually well in advance of the APR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the
Development Objective tab of the APR. The annual APR will be shared with the respective Project Board and other
stakeholders. The UNDP Country Offices will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the
APR. The quality rating of the previous year’s APR will be used to inform the preparation of the next APR. The final
project APR, along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final
project report package. The national APRs will be collated and consolidated into a global APR which will be reviewed and
shared with the global Project Board and other stakeholders for comments.

--- Table 1 on Page 97 ---
 | E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements | 

=== PAGE 98 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95
355 An independent Interim Evaluation (IE) will be undertaken at the mid-term of the project, and the findings and responses
outlined in the management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during
the final half of the project’s duration. The report will be based on an evaluation of both the global project as well as the
country level projects. The terms of reference, the review process and the final IE report will follow the standard
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The national level IE report will be cleared by
the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor and will be approved by each of the national level the
Project Boards. These approved reports will then be collated and consolidated into a project level IE. The final IE report
will be available in English.
356 An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of the
project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and
guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre. The national TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser and will be approved by the respective national Project Board after
which they will be consolidated into the project level TE report. The TE report will be available in English. Each UNDP
Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan and will
upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation
Resource Centre (ERC) (www.erc.undp.org). The IE and TE will be carried out by an independent evaluator. The
evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent
Evaluation Office.
357 The BPPS and each UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project
financial closure in order to support ex-post evaluations as part of the data management and M&E continuous
learning and evaluation as project management cycle and beyond, UNDP stores all records up to seven years.
A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document.
358 UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the Reporting Period, including semi-annual reporting, in
accordance with the AMA and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform
such functions. In the event of any additional post-implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will
discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in in the final year of the project and will prepare a post-implementation
monitoring plan and budget for approval by the GCF Board as necessary.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96
Figure 4: Conceptual relationship between the Global Output and Activities and the Country-level Outputs and Activities Note: specific
wording of titles used for Outputs and Activities in the country projects may differ based on each country context

=== PAGE 100 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97
E
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions,
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices
Selected Risk Factor 1 Gaps in governance and institutional mechanism at the national level
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium High
Description
Some countries may lack or have gaps in their NMHS and NDMA and in governance and institutional mechanisms necessary for coordinated
action required for an operational EWS, disaster preparedness and response. This is often on account of local or regional conflict and
insecurity, which is a risk to implementing the proposed activities, particularly under Output 2 of the project.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project will work towards strengthening government structures for delivery of EWS to communities. It will simultaneously engage with
national and local agencies, including offices of pillar leads such as local societies of the IFRC, multilateral agencies and NGOs to implement
activities that are aligned with their core areas of expertise and comparative strengths. This implementation will, as far as possible, involve
government agencies and seek to build their capacities through partnerships and hand holding.
Selected Risk Factor 2 Operational delays due to cumbersome procedures
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
Cumbersome procurement and administrative procedures may result in delays in procurement of critical equipment necessary to set up the
hydrometeorological observation networks and communications as well as hiring of technical expertise from outside the country.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The UNDP Country Offices will extend support to executing entities and responsible parties where necessary, including support for procuring
and importing equipment and technical expertise during project implementation. This will reduce the risk to low.
Selected Risk Factor 3 Risk of damage to equipment due to vandalism
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium High
Description
Levels of insecurity in some participating countries may constrain the number and types of investments in observation and communications
equipment and its regular operation and maintenance. This may lead limit the gathering of observational data and dissemination of early
warnings affecting both the quality of climate information products as well as their effective communications to those in need.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The selection of equipment and its siting were done based on a comprehensive analysis of risks of vandalism and damage, keeping in mind
constraints on O&M operations. The project will site equipment in secure government owned and operated sites or on telecommunications
towers and installations where possible. The project will also utilise in-expensive IoT based community managed and operated EWS with an
emphasis on their ownership of the systems through mobilization and sensitization of local groups and leaders. The equipment will be
maintained and replaced as necessary, timing the field missions ahead of the relevant season, so that it is operational at the time when
climate hazards are most likely to occur.

--- Table 1 on Page 100 ---
 | RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT | 

--- Table 2 on Page 100 ---
 | F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions,
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 1 Gaps in governance and institutional mechanism at the national level |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Governance |  |  | Medium |  |  | High |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Some countries may lack or have gaps in their NMHS and NDMA and in governance and institutional mechanisms necessary for coordinated
action required for an operational EWS, disaster preparedness and response. This is often on account of local or regional conflict and
insecurity, which is a risk to implementing the proposed activities, particularly under Output 2 of the project. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The project will work towards strengthening government structures for delivery of EWS to communities. It will simultaneously engage with
national and local agencies, including offices of pillar leads such as local societies of the IFRC, multilateral agencies and NGOs to implement
activities that are aligned with their core areas of expertise and comparative strengths. This implementation will, as far as possible, involve
government agencies and seek to build their capacities through partnerships and hand holding. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 2 Operational delays due to cumbersome procedures |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Cumbersome procurement and administrative procedures may result in delays in procurement of critical equipment necessary to set up the
hydrometeorological observation networks and communications as well as hiring of technical expertise from outside the country. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The UNDP Country Offices will extend support to executing entities and responsible parties where necessary, including support for procuring
and importing equipment and technical expertise during project implementation. This will reduce the risk to low. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 3 Risk of damage to equipment due to vandalism |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Governance |  |  | Medium |  |  | High |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Levels of insecurity in some participating countries may constrain the number and types of investments in observation and communications
equipment and its regular operation and maintenance. This may lead limit the gathering of observational data and dissemination of early
warnings affecting both the quality of climate information products as well as their effective communications to those in need. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The selection of equipment and its siting were done based on a comprehensive analysis of risks of vandalism and damage, keeping in mind
constraints on O&M operations. The project will site equipment in secure government owned and operated sites or on telecommunications
towers and installations where possible. The project will also utilise in-expensive IoT based community managed and operated EWS with an
emphasis on their ownership of the systems through mobilization and sensitization of local groups and leaders. The equipment will be
maintained and replaced as necessary, timing the field missions ahead of the relevant season, so that it is operational at the time when
climate hazards are most likely to occur. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98
E
Selected Risk Factor 4 Poor inter-agency coordination and collaboration
Category Probability Impact
Governance Medium High
Description
Poor coordination and cooperation both within and between government, multilateral and private agencies can reduce the collection and
sharing of observational data, the sectoral analysis of climate information, its dissemination and effective use for disaster preparedness and
response. Private telecommunication companies can be reluctant to adopt standards and share data on customers which may be required to
operationalize technologies such as cellular broadcast. Coordination and collaboration can be even more difficult for countries where climate
hazards are of a trans-boundary nature, such as floods that originate in a neighbouring country, or where communications networks in one
country overlap with another.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project will strengthen institutional arrangements and governance mechanisms between agencies both at the national and regional level.
This will be done by leveraging the national and regional initiatives, programmes and facilities being led by the EW4All pillar leads and other
partner agencies. Where possible, policies, procedures and road-maps will be strengthened and formulated to ensure governments play a
coordinating role and ensure compliance and cooperation between agencies, including the private sector such as telecommunication
companies. This will ensure key dissemination mechanisms such as the CAP and technologies such as cellular broadcast can be deployed and
leveraged.
Selected Risk Factor 5 Poor community outreach and engagement in disaster preparedness
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium High
Description
The reach of government and non-governmental agencies to communities can constrains their ability to support communities to prepare and
plan for disasters or to build their capacities to adapt. Community level preparedness and planning is critical for effective early and
anticipatory action, particularly for marginalized and more vulnerable groups such as women, people with disabilities, elderly and households
with infants and children. This poses a significant risk to the project’s effectiveness in fragile and conflict affected countries as well as
countries with limited access to remote areas.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The analysis of hazards, exposure and vulnerabilities done in the feasibility studies identifies the regions where communities are most at risk.
This has informed the design of community engagement strategies, leveraging local actors from both within government and non-
government agencies and innovative technologies where available. The project will strengthen the capacities of relevant agencies such as
extension and health services and line departments to better equip them to support community level disaster planning and preparedness. It
will strengthen institutional linkages between sub-national agencies and community level institutions and invest in preparedness activities
and infrastructure at the village level with specific attention to vulnerable and marginalized groups.
Selected Risk Factor 6 Limited technical and financial capacities to sustain the EWS value-chain
Category Probability Impact
Technical and operational Medium Medium
Description
There is a risk that the gains made by the project are not backed up by sufficient resources, both technical and financial, to ensure the O&M
of equipment and infrastructure or to sustain the production of MHEWS, specifically IbFs and decision support systems to inform early and
anticipatory action. This is a risk to projects sustainability, particularly in poor and developing countries which have severe fiscal and technical
constraints.
Mitigation Measure(s)
The project will address this risk through a multipronged approach. The knowledge management strategy will specifically target policy
makers, presenting them with compelling evidence of financial returns from investments into the early warnings value chain, demonstrating
the savings through avoiding and mitigating the impacts of climate hazards through adaptation and early and anticipatory action. Institutional
linkages and collaborations will be established with national and regional agencies and academia to ensure ongoing and continuous support
to the NMHS and NDMA with the latest technologies and techniques. This will help steer these away from any dependence on consultancies
and one-off assignments for technical inputs. Finally, the project will strengthen existing regional financial facilities and funding mechanisms
for long term support to national governments in sustaining their MHEWS. As part of this effort, the project will also foster collaborations with
large technical firms to offset costs of data and computational facilities and technologies.
Selected Risk Factor 7: Funds from the project are used for money laundering and terrorist financing
Category Probability Impact

--- Table 1 on Page 101 ---
Selected Risk Factor 4 Poor inter-agency coordination and collaboration |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Governance |  |  | Medium |  |  | High |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Poor coordination and cooperation both within and between government, multilateral and private agencies can reduce the collection and
sharing of observational data, the sectoral analysis of climate information, its dissemination and effective use for disaster preparedness and
response. Private telecommunication companies can be reluctant to adopt standards and share data on customers which may be required to
operationalize technologies such as cellular broadcast. Coordination and collaboration can be even more difficult for countries where climate
hazards are of a trans-boundary nature, such as floods that originate in a neighbouring country, or where communications networks in one
country overlap with another. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The project will strengthen institutional arrangements and governance mechanisms between agencies both at the national and regional level.
This will be done by leveraging the national and regional initiatives, programmes and facilities being led by the EW4All pillar leads and other
partner agencies. Where possible, policies, procedures and road-maps will be strengthened and formulated to ensure governments play a
coordinating role and ensure compliance and cooperation between agencies, including the private sector such as telecommunication
companies. This will ensure key dissemination mechanisms such as the CAP and technologies such as cellular broadcast can be deployed and
leveraged. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 5 Poor community outreach and engagement in disaster preparedness |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  | High |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The reach of government and non-governmental agencies to communities can constrains their ability to support communities to prepare and
plan for disasters or to build their capacities to adapt. Community level preparedness and planning is critical for effective early and
anticipatory action, particularly for marginalized and more vulnerable groups such as women, people with disabilities, elderly and households
with infants and children. This poses a significant risk to the project’s effectiveness in fragile and conflict affected countries as well as
countries with limited access to remote areas. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The analysis of hazards, exposure and vulnerabilities done in the feasibility studies identifies the regions where communities are most at risk.
This has informed the design of community engagement strategies, leveraging local actors from both within government and non-
government agencies and innovative technologies where available. The project will strengthen the capacities of relevant agencies such as
extension and health services and line departments to better equip them to support community level disaster planning and preparedness. It
will strengthen institutional linkages between sub-national agencies and community level institutions and invest in preparedness activities
and infrastructure at the village level with specific attention to vulnerable and marginalized groups. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Selected Risk Factor 6 Limited technical and financial capacities to sustain the EWS value-chain |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 
Technical and operational |  |  | Medium |  |  | Medium |  | 
 | Description |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
There is a risk that the gains made by the project are not backed up by sufficient resources, both technical and financial, to ensure the O&M
of equipment and infrastructure or to sustain the production of MHEWS, specifically IbFs and decision support systems to inform early and
anticipatory action. This is a risk to projects sustainability, particularly in poor and developing countries which have severe fiscal and technical
constraints. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
The project will address this risk through a multipronged approach. The knowledge management strategy will specifically target policy
makers, presenting them with compelling evidence of financial returns from investments into the early warnings value chain, demonstrating
the savings through avoiding and mitigating the impacts of climate hazards through adaptation and early and anticipatory action. Institutional
linkages and collaborations will be established with national and regional agencies and academia to ensure ongoing and continuous support
to the NMHS and NDMA with the latest technologies and techniques. This will help steer these away from any dependence on consultancies
and one-off assignments for technical inputs. Finally, the project will strengthen existing regional financial facilities and funding mechanisms
for long term support to national governments in sustaining their MHEWS. As part of this effort, the project will also foster collaborations with
large technical firms to offset costs of data and computational facilities and technologies. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Selected Risk Factor 7: Funds from the project are used for money laundering and terrorist financing |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Category |  |  | Probability |  |  | Impact | 

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99
E
ML/FT Low Low
Description
There is a small risk of the funds from the project are used for money laundering and terrorist financing in some of the participating countries.
Mitigation Measure(s)
This project will be implemented under UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) and as such the entire execution of the project will fall
under the responsibility of UNDP. UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same entity, is
beholden to the United Nations Security Council Sanctions List and the UN General Assembly Resolutions. As such, the sanctions regime is
embedded in all aspects of UNDP's operations and UNDP screens against the list for any entities being considered to be contracted by or
partner with UNDP.
Pursuant to the terms and requirements set out in its own framework of policies and procedures, UNDP will, as an integral part of its due
diligence process for this Project, carry out the requisite partner capacity assessments and AML/CFT screening of any proposed partner that
may be engaged for the delivery of some of the intended activities or any vendor procured for the purpose of delivery of goods or services to
the project.

--- Table 1 on Page 102 ---
ML/FT |  | Low | Low | 
 | Description |  |  | 
There is a small risk of the funds from the project are used for money laundering and terrorist financing in some of the participating countries. |  |  |  | 
 | Mitigation Measure(s) |  |  | 
This project will be implemented under UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) and as such the entire execution of the project will fall
under the responsibility of UNDP. UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same entity, is
beholden to the United Nations Security Council Sanctions List and the UN General Assembly Resolutions. As such, the sanctions regime is
embedded in all aspects of UNDP's operations and UNDP screens against the list for any entities being considered to be contracted by or
partner with UNDP.
Pursuant to the terms and requirements set out in its own framework of policies and procedures, UNDP will, as an integral part of its due
diligence process for this Project, carry out the requisite partner capacity assessments and AML/CFT screening of any proposed partner that
may be engaged for the delivery of some of the intended activities or any vendor procured for the purpose of delivery of goods or services to
the project. |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 103 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100
F
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)
359 The UNDP Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP) is provided in Annex 6 for the global project. The project
is assigned a risk category of "C" for GFC (and low risk based on the UNDP SESP). The project’s activities are mainly
focused on cooperation, dialogue, capacity building and training. The main risk of these activities is that they are not
inclusive of all stakeholders, including Indigenous peoples, women, people with disabilities and other marginalized groups
which is well-managed through project design as well as Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEPs) and Gender Analysis and
Action Plans (GAAPs) prepared . In order to avoid these risks, Output 2 will involve extensive engagement with
communities, including vulnerable and marginalized groups. These consultations will ensure representation of and
equitable benefits and consideration to the needs of women, Indigenous groups, people with disabilities, elderly and
groups who may otherwise be culturally and economically excluded. The project recognizes the differential access to
resources, information and social roles and will proactively work towards overcoming cultural biases and other
limitations which may prevent women and marginalized groups from equitable participation and sharing of project
benefits. The project therefore embeds consultations and stakeholder engagement in its activities from project design
through implementation. Gender Analysis and Actions Plans (GAAP) , as well as Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEP) have
been prepared, which will integrate considerations relevant for Indigenous peoples. These plans will help to ensure that
the project is inclusive of stakeholder’s needs, and that vulnerable groups access constraints and opportunities are taken
into account to ensure they can effectively benefit from the project’s activities.
360 Output 2 also has minor EWS small works activities that are being defined. These will be small-scale, such as small
hydrometeorological observation stations that carry small footprints which will need to be sited, small boreholes , or
repairs or small upgrades to buildings, such as waterproofing and installing toilets. The repairs/upgrade/installation of
these would be site-specific and contained, with limited, predictable, site-specific impacts that can be readily addressed
through standard mitigation measures. These impacts would mainly include limited pollution, waste and risks of
Occupational Health and Safety (OHS). The project excludes activities from project financing which require an ESIA/ESMP
or which would have a GCF Category A or B rating. The project has developed an Environment and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) which includes an assessment of all these risks and proposes mitigation measures, including through
an Environment and Social Code of Practice (ESCOP) which would guide the implementation of small works. There will be
no displacement of people or their livelihoods as a result of project interventions. No installation or works will be done in
sites of cultural, historical or environmental importance and as such no biodiversity impacts are expected. New
installations will be sited on government property or public areas free of encumbrances, with existing access so that
O&M operations do not require crossing private lands, biodiversity areas or other zones that would pose any impact to
the environment, workers or communities (including zones where there are ongoing conflicts). As a result of limited
numbers of staff, consultants and workers implementing project activities, there could also be some potential low risks of
Gender Based Violence (GBV)/Sexual Harassment (SH). Preventing SEAH guidance has been provided in the ESMF, as well
as guidance to prepare country-specific SEAH plans during implementation if SEAH risks (moderate or higher) are
identified.
361 In some countries, the population includes indigenous peoples. The project will not negatively impact Indigenous
Peoples. The project does not envision any small works on IP lands, and in the unlikely event this was identified during
project implementation, or any other impact to IPs identified, Indigenous Peoples Plans would need to be prepared
following the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) annex in the ESMF. Nevertheless, it is important that
meaningful consultations are conducted with IP representatives during project implementation, to ensure their needs are
considered in EWs and that they are able to receive EW in a way that is meaningful to them. Guidance for consultations
and general stakeholder engagement, including specifically with IP groups, is included in the global SEP.
362

--- Table 1 on Page 103 ---
 | GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS | 

--- Table 2 on Page 103 ---
 | G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) | 

=== PAGE 104 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101
F
The project complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards which were reviewed by the GCF accreditation
panel and deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects.
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
363 A global Gender Analysis and Gender Action plan (GAAP) is provided in Annex 8. The project proposal emphasises gender
inclusiveness and gender responsive design of outputs and activities. It recognises the differential impacts of climate
change on women on account of the disadvantages they face in terms of representation in decision making, ownership
and access to resources, finances and information. The project also acknowledges the impact of gender roles and cultural
biases on the ability of women to prepare and plan for climate hazards and to receive timely and actionable early
warnings. The project design factors in the dependence of women on climate sensitive natural resources and their roles
in livelihoods, particularly those related to agriculture. Activities pertaining to climate change adaptation and
preparedness and response to climate mediated disasters, incorporate critical elements of gender mainstreaming and
equity.
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)
364 The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations.
Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and Operations
Policies and Procedures (POPP), which also includes comprehensive procurement policies as outlined in the ‘Contracts
and Procurement’ section. These policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the
procurement process and apply to all procurements in UNDP.
365 National projects will be implemented following the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) by UNDP country offices. The
DIM project management and implementation approach takes full responsibility for executing a project, with no further
delegation of the implementation to a government entity or other partner.
366 If the NGO or private sector to be engaged as a Responsible Parties they will be engaged through Responsible Party
Agreements. Each Responsible party who will be engaged to support the implementation of project, following the
Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT). All
projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines
and policies. The HACT framework consists of four processes: (1) macro assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash
transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews
(spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and special audits. Weaknesses identified during micro-
assessments will require actions to addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will
mean that the level of assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing
partner will have to be reviewed if necessary, as described here.
367 The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together with
any specific requirements agreed in the AMA established between GCF and UNDP, signed on 16 of March 2023 and
made effective in May 3, 2023. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. Scheduled
audits are performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, based on the implementing
partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the
implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit
can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.
368 All GCF resources will be provided to the responsible party, less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under UNDP’s direct
implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the responsible party for the
implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP standard policies-. The
responsible party reports back expenditure via a financial report on quarterly basis to UNDP. Any additional requirements
will be in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed
and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) is provided in Annex XIII.
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be

--- Table 1 on Page 104 ---
 | G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

--- Table 2 on Page 104 ---
 | G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) | 

--- Table 3 on Page 104 ---
 | G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal | 
 | ☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be | 

=== PAGE 105 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102
F
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be
disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is
providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information.

--- Table 1 on Page 105 ---
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. | 
 | ☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not be | 
 | disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity is | 
 | providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: | 
 | • full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with | 
 | an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the | 
 | accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and | 
 | • redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. | 
 | The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential information. | 

=== PAGE 106 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103
ANNEXES
H.1. Mandatory annexes
☐ Annex 1 NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)
☐ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable
☐ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)
☐ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
- Annex 6a SESP
- Annex 6b ESMF
☐ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan
☐ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan
☐ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)
☐ Annex 10 Procurement plan (template provided)
☐ Annex 11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)
☒ Annex 12 AE fee request (template provided)
☒ Annex 13 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)
☒ Annex 14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule
H.2. Other annexes as applicable
☐ Annex 15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)
☐ Annex 16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions
☐ Annex 17 Multi-country project/programme information (template provided)
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed
by the entity
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)
☐ Annex 22 Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross
cutting-projects)148
148 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

--- Table 1 on Page 106 ---
 | ANNEXES |  |  | 
 | H.1. Mandatory annexes |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 1 | NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 2 | Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable | 
☐ |  | Annex 3 | Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format | 
☒ |  | Annex 4 | Detailed budget plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 5 | Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 6 | E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):
- Annex 6a SESP
- Annex 6b ESMF | 
☐ |  | Annex 7 | Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan | 
☐ |  | Annex 8 | Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan | 
☐ |  | Annex 9 | Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 10 | Procurement plan (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 11 | Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 12 | AE fee request (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 13 | Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) | 
☒ |  | Annex 14 | Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule | 
 | H.2. Other annexes as applicable |  |  | 
☐ |  | Annex 15 | Evidence of internal approval (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 16 | Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions | 
☐ |  | Annex 17 | Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) | 
☐ |  | Annex 18 | Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot project | 
☐ |  | Annex 19 | Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed
by the entity | 
☐ |  | Annex 20 | First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment | 
☐ |  | Annex 21 | Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) | 
☐ |  | Annex 22 | Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross
cutting-projects)148 | 

=== PAGE 107 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105
Appendices
Appendix 1: Climate hazards and associated risks (impacts, exposures and vulnerabilities) in participating countries
Antigua and Barbuda
369 Antigua and Barbuda is on the frontline of climate change, facing a range of intensifying climatic hazards that threaten
their very existence. Ranked as the 5th highest in the World Risk Index in 2023, the islands are exposed to an array of
baseline hazards, including hurricanes, extreme rainfall, droughts, and rising sea levels. These risks are exacerbated by
the islands' geographical position and limited land area, making them particularly vulnerable to the cascading and
compounding impacts of climate change.
370 Hurricanes pose the most significant threat in Antigua and Barbuda, with the country having faced 15 hurricanes and 14
tropical storms between 1995 and 2021. The devastation from Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017 serving as stark
reminders of the destructive power of these storms. These hurricanes not only caused widespread destruction of
infrastructure but also disrupted essential services such as healthcare, electricity, water, and waste management. In
Barbuda, nearly 90% of the island’s infrastructure was destroyed, rendering the island temporarily uninhabitable. The
increasing intensity of these storms, fueled by climate change, is expected to lead to even more catastrophic events in
the future. Moreover, hurricane intensity is anticipated to increase by 18% for category 4 and 5 hurricanes over the next
30 years, based on General Circulation Models (GCMs)149. By 2030, the general building stock in Antigua and Barbuda,
using RCP 8.5, will experience direct losses from storm surges and wind in the amount of USD 451 million for a historic
event, USD 4.03 billion for a 1:100-year event, and USD 9.4 billion for a maximum credible event (MCE). 150
371 Droughts, while less dramatic than hurricanes, pose a persistent and growing threat to the islands. Historically, droughts
have led to severe water shortages, impacting utilities, agriculture, and even leading to economic crises, such as the need
to import water during the drought of 1983-1985. With projections indicating a 30%-50% reduction in annual rainfall by
2090, droughts are expected to become more severe, further straining the already limited water resources. 151 Under the
RCP 4.5 scenario, models predict 9 drought years for the period 2040–2069, representing an 8% increase in drought
severity152.
372 The low-lying geography of Antigua and Barbuda makes it particularly susceptible to land loss due to sea-level rise, which
presents a long-term existential threat to Antigua and Barbuda. Projections indicate that by 2060, Antigua could lose
approximately 20 km² of land, while Barbuda could lose 15 km². This loss of land, combined with rising sea surface
temperatures and increased ocean acidification, threatens not only the islands' ecosystems but also the livelihoods of
those who depend on the sea, particularly in the tourism and fishing sectors. 153
373 The interplay of these climatic hazards creates a highly vulnerable environment for Antigua and Barbuda, where the
effects of one event can exacerbate the impacts of another. For example, a severe hurricane can lead to flooding, which
disrupts essential services and exacerbates water shortages caused by droughts. The cascading effects of these hazards,
coupled with the islands' low-lying topography and concentration of economic activities along the coast, underscore the
urgent need for comprehensive climate adaptation strategies.
374 Local stakeholders have identified several key areas that require urgent attention to strengthen the islands' resilience.
The first is the need for improved observation and forecasting systems, particularly for marine hazards. Given the islands'
exposure to ocean-related hazards such as storm surges and coastal erosion, there is a critical need for accurate and
locally specific advisories to protect vulnerable groups. The built environment is another area of concern, as many
buildings are not resilient to high-intensity storms due to the cost of building to code and the existence of outdated
149 Caribsave. 2012. Caribsave Climate Change Risk Profile for Antigua & Barbuda.
150 GoAB 2022. Adaptation Communication for Antigua and Barbuda
151 GoAB 2022. Food Security Sectoral Action Plan
152 Johnston, Janeil. 2021. Sectoral Adaptation Planning for Climate Resilience in Antigua and Barbuda: Risk Modelling Data and Adaptation.
Presentation at Workshop on Sectoral Adaptation Planning for Climate Resilience in Antigua & Barbuda, July 29, 2021.
153 GoAB 2022. Adaptation Communication for Antigua and Barbuda.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106
infrastructure. An improved understanding of building resilience is crucial for planning emergency responses, including
evacuations and sheltering.
375 The tourism sector, which employs a large percentage of the population and is heavily concentrated in exposed coastal
areas, also requires targeted preparatory actions. International visitors, who may lack local knowledge of climate hazards,
are particularly vulnerable, highlighting the need for better integration of the tourism sector into the islands' Multi-
Hazard EWSs (MHEWS) and Anticipatory Action systems. Finally, the island of Barbuda, still recovering from the
devastating impacts of Hurricane Irma, has been flagged as a key focus area for improving preparedness and response
capabilities.
Ecuador
376 Due to a combination of political, geographic, and social factors, Ecuador is recognized as vulnerable to climate change
impacts, ranking 115th out of 185 countries in the 2021 ND-GAIN Index154. When coupled with a low readiness score, this
makes Ecuador highly susceptible to climate-related impacts. These impacts, such as droughts, floods, and landslides,
undermine development and reduce the availability of natural resources, affecting the majority of the population. This
vulnerability was evident during the droughts of 2023155 and 2024156, as well as the floods of 2016157, 2023158, and
2024159.
377 Ecuador’s climate is highly diverse due to its location on the equator and its varied topography, which includes the
Amazon rainforest, the Andes mountains, and the Pacific coast.
378 From 1960 to 2010, Ecuador experienced increases in temperature as well as spatial and seasonal variations in rainfall
across its territory. The observed average temperature increase was 1.4°C, with maximum temperatures rising by 1.0°C
and minimum temperatures increasing by 1.1°C in the Galapagos Islands160. These changes varied across the country’s
regions, leading to impacts such as: (i) approximately 40% loss of glacier cover on the Antisana, Carihuayrazo, Cotopaxi,
and Chimborazo volcanoes; (ii) severe droughts affecting 66.7% of agricultural areas and 53.7% of livestock areas
(pastures); and (iii) extreme rainfall increasing the floodable surface area by 15.9%, affecting 49.5% of the population.
379 Projections foresee changes in the frequency and magnitude of both average and extreme precipitation and temperature
values. By the 2090s, average temperatures in Ecuador are projected to rise significantly, potentially increasing by 3.5°C
to 4.0°C under the highest emissions pathway (RCP8.5), compared to the baseline of 1986–2005161. Annual precipitation
is expected to decrease in the Amazon (by 2–6%) but increase along the coast and in the mountain areas under the
highest emissions pathway by the 2090s162. Intense precipitation is also expected to rise across the country, especially in
the central mountain region, with increases of up to 50 mm for the average largest 1-day precipitation163.
380 Floods are the most frequent hydro-meteorological disaster in Ecuador and rank second in terms of casualties, with
landslides, storms, and droughts also contributing significantly. According to the Desinventar database164, there has been
an increase in both the number of events and deaths over the past 40 years, although with significant fluctuations. The
rise in the intensity and frequency of these extreme climatic events has caused economic damages and losses to goods
154 University of Notre Dame (2023). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/
155 https://www.wwf.org.ec/?uNewsID=385722
156 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-68835127
157 https://reliefweb.int/report/ecuador/informe-de-situaci-n-emergencia-inundaciones-etapa-invernal-en-esmeraldas-fecha-29-de
158 https://elpais.com/internacional/2023-06-08/las-lluvias-dejan-15077-damnificados-en-cuatro-ciudades-de-ecuador.html
159 https://www.primicias.ec/noticias/sociedad/fuertes-lluvias-balance-inundaciones-27febrero/
160 https://unfccc.int/documents/77568
161 Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador (MAATE). (2022). Fourth National Communication to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. MAATE, Quito, Ecuador
162 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/
163 Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador (MAATE). (2022). Fourth National Communication to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. MAATE, Quito, Ecuador

=== PAGE 110 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107
and services, with annual losses reaching between $927 million and $3.3 billion165. Associated non-economic losses
include loss of life, health impacts, human mobility, biodiversity, cultural heritage, and indigenous knowledge. In this
context, 18 indigenous peoples and 13 nationalities are at risk from the threats and impacts of climate change166.
381 Climate change projections indicate significant impacts, including the continued melting of glacier cover on volcanoes,
variations in sea surface temperatures, changes in spatial and temporal precipitation patterns, expansion of flood-prone
areas, intensification of droughts, reduced water quantity and quality, the spread of disease-transmitting vectors (such as
dengue and malaria), and loss of biodiversity. The increased intensity and frequency of both extreme and slow-onset
climatic events will continue to cause economic and non-economic losses to goods, services, and human well-being167.
Fiji
382 Historical Climate Trends: According to the NextGen Projections report168, Fiji has warmed up by 0.7 degrees relative to
the pre-industrial baseline of 1850-1900, up to the period of 2011-2020. In Fiji, observed and projected warming shows
that 2°C of global warming corresponds to 1.2 to 1.9°C in Fiji. The temperatures in Fiji have increased at a faster rate in
recent decades, as shown by commonly used baselines (WMO – 1981 to 1991, AR5 – 1986 to 2005, AR6 – 1995 to 2014,
and 2011 to 2020). The strongest increase has been in daily maximum temperatures (around 0.2°C per decade) and a
similar increase in daily minimum temperatures (around 0.1°C per decade). There are no significant trends in gridded
rainfall datasets for the entire region of Fiji including surrounding oceans. Historical observations show large year-to-year
variability in rainfall with no significant trends since 1960. The average of all climate models considered shows no
significant change in annual rainfall for Fiji between the pre-industrial baseline of 1850-1900 to the more recent
baselines.169
383 Projected changes in climate: Projections for Fiji are presented for a range of ‘global warming levels’ (defined as the
warming of the global average temperature since the pre-industrial era), including the 1.5°C and 2°C limits from the Paris
Agreement. The range of possible change is larger under higher global warming levels compared to lower levels.170
384 Temperatures: Historical and projected changes in temperatures (relative to 1850 – 1900) are:
- There is a warming by 0.7°C up to 2011-2020.
- By 2030, the warming is 1.2°C regardless of the emission pathway.
- By 2050, the warming is 1.3°C (RCP2.6) to 1.9°C (RCP8.5).
- By 2070, the warming is 1.3°C (RCP2.6) to 2.5°C (RCP8.5).
385 According to the World Bank report, based on the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) models,
under the medium warming scenario (RCP4.5), Fiji is projected to experience a warming of 0.9°C by 2040-2059 and 1.3°C
by 2080-2099 and under the high warming scenario (RCP8.5), the projected warming is 1.3°C and 2.7°C, respectively.
386 The Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projections in rainfall are
less certain with a high degree of variability which indicates that average annual rainfall may remain the same, but there
will be increase in the intensity for extreme rainfall events.171 The NextGen Report states that future changes in rainfall
are uncertain but could range from wetter to drier, depending on the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ). The SPCZ is
one of the main climate drivers in the south Pacific and is influenced by the presence of El Niño and La Niña.
165 UNDRR. https://www.desinventar.net/
166 Secretaría de Gestión de Riesgos. https://www.gestionderiesgos.gob.ec/
167 Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador (MAATE). (2022). Fourth National Communication to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. MAATE, Quito, Ecuador
168 ibid
169 NextGen’ Projections for the Western Tropical Pacific: Current and Future Climate for Fiji.
170 ibid
171 Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2018

=== PAGE 111 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108
387 Southwest Pacific tropical cyclone (TC) activity projection for a 2°C global warming indicates a likely decrease in the total
number of TCs, and a possible increase in the frequency of severe (category 4-5) TCs. The projected increase in average
TC intensity, combined with sea level rise and increases rainfall rate would increase TC impacts.
388 Resulting Impacts: Fiji is considered a high-risk country due to its vulnerability to natural hazards, ranking 75th out of 193
countries in the World Risk Report 2023. The country faces significant impacts from TCs and floods, with annual asset
losses exceeding F$500 million, reaching over 5% of the GDP. In extreme cases like a 100-year fluvial flood, losses could
surpass F$2 billion, affecting the transport and building sectors the most. Droughts, particularly during El Niño events,
have led to reduced crop production and the need for emergency water and food supplies in Fiji. Climate change poses a
threat to food security, especially in coastal areas impacted by sea level rise and salinity intrusion. Traditional crops
exhibit more resilience to climate change than non-traditional ones, but staples like rice, taro, and yams remain
vulnerable. Fiji's limited capacity to manage and adapt to climate risks contributes to health risks and increased poverty
rates. Natural hazards like TCs and floods annually push around 25,700 people into poverty, disproportionately affecting
communities reliant on subsistence fishing and facing water security challenges. Changing weather patterns also threaten
sectors like agriculture and tourism, critical to Fiji's economy, as evidenced by the increasing impact of 124 natural
hazards over the past 37 years, with TCs, floods, and earthquakes being the most frequent occurrences.
Chad
389 Between 1971 and 2022, 62 natural disasters were recorded in Chad, of which 68 percent (42 events) occurred since
2000 (EM-DAT, 2024). Successive droughts have affected the food security and livelihoods of households across large
swathes of the country, with 1.5 million people affected in 1981-85, and 2.4 million people affected in 2009-2010. The
most recent drought in 2022 affected 2.1 million people while floods in the same year rendered 121,088 people
homeless. Floods and droughts have also been associated with outbreaks of disease, and with undernutrition. Together,
these disasters led to a total of 10,556 recorded deaths, of which two thirds were a result of viral or bacterial disease
epidemics such as cholera, meningitis and measles.
390 Over the past 10 years, IFRC has launched 18 Disaster Relief Emergency Fund (DREF) operations supporting the national
Red Cross society in Chad; and raised a further 30 emergency appeals to mobilise resources to respond to 21
emergencies, targeting 5.8 million people affected by emergencies.
391 Studies have shown a continuous increase in temperatures, as well as increased variability in rainfall in the subregion
since the 1990s. After a sequence of wet years covering the 1950s and 1960s, followed by a sequence of dry years in the
1970s and especially dry years in the 1980s, inter-annual variations have become more irregular since the 1990s, though
with relatively better rainfall. Overall precipitation in Chad has been above average over several years since the 1990s,
particularly in the Sahelian zone, but with variability in its distribution over the year. The spatial distribution of
precipitation has changed, with the retreat of the 300 mm and the 1,200 mm isohyets.
392 Air temperature is expected to increase by 2.1°C to 4.3°C (very likely range) by 2080. Relative to pre-industrial levels, the
median temperature increase from climate models in Chad is 2.1°C in 2030, 2.6°C in 2050, and 3.5°C in 2080 under
RCP6.0. The number of very hot days per year is also expected to increase across the country with a high degree of
certainty. For the RCP6.0 scenario, the median of the multiple models (averaged over the entire country) predicts 17
additional very hot days per year in 2030, 31 additional days in 2050 and 49 additional days in 2080, compared to 2000.
In some parts of the country, particularly in the center, this equates to over 300 very hot days per year by 2080.
393 Projections of precipitation and variations in rainfall for 2030, 2050 and 2100 vary greatly, according to the country’s
zones owing to the high natural variability from year to year and high level of uncertainty and differences between
models. The more conservative models would lead to a reduction in precipitation while the models with higher emissions
driving higher global temperature increases suggest higher precipitation, with higher variability. Critically, all models
project more variability in precipitation than the pre-1980 situation.
394 Chad remains among the poorest and least developed countries in the world and is ranked 119th of 125 countries of the
global hunger index 2023, with a level of hunger classified as serious. A combination of high poverty, frequent conflicts,
and the risk of both droughts and floods have placed Chad as the lowest ranked country overall on the ND-GAIN index,
with a score of 27.0.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109
395 With rain-fed agriculture accounting for almost 46% of GDP in 2019, and 77% of the labour force working in agriculture,
the food production and livelihood systems in Chad are highly dependent on climatic factors, particularly rainfall patterns
and distribution. The effects of high temperatures, and of hunger, are more acute for children, the elderly, and those
with chronic diseases.
396 Chad also faces severe environmental degradation, exemplified by the drying up of Lake Chad, increased desertification,
declining fish stocks, the disappearance of certain animal and plant species, and soil degradation (National Adaptation
Plan, 2022). Increased competition for access to pasture and water, soil depletion and lower agricultural productivity
have the potential to exacerbate existing conflict factors or contribute to new forms of dispute.
397 The proposed project aims to provide technical support and capacity building at national, institutional level to ensure
essential climate services can be delivered on a sustainable basis. Improved data on vulnerability and risk, knowledge
management, governance of multi-hazard EWSs and disaster preparedness/disaster management will be improved at
national and sub-national levels. The intervention addresses the fact that people’s information needs are not being met,
in the face of changing climate patterns with increased exposure to the impacts of droughts and floods, where they can
no longer rely solely on traditional knowledge and experience. The project will equip communities with relevant and
timely risk education, training and advice on adaptation and preparedness measures and early warning information to
reduce both the loss of life and the economic impact of disasters. It will support the piloting, and integration of early
action protocols by WFP and the Red Cross, into national systems and will engage with communities on their needs in
terms of information, preparedness and disaster management to ensure these processes are inclusive, needs-based and
people-centered.
Ethiopia
398 Ethiopia's climate varies significantly across its regions, classified into three primary zones based on seasonal rainfall
patterns. The northern and central western areas experience a single rainy season, with peak precipitation occurring in
July and August. The southern areas are characterized by two distinct rainy seasons: a short rainy period from September
to November and a long rainy period from March to May. The eastern and central parts experience two rainy periods: a
spring season from February to May and a summer rainy season from June to September (Paleoclimate Research
Institute, 2021). The variability in Ethiopia's rainfall is influenced by large-scale climatic phenomena such as the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and sea surface temperatures (SSTs) in the Indian and Pacific oceans. SSTs, with their gradual
variations, affect long-term rainfall patterns and are crucial for improving the accuracy of regional-scale climate
predictions (World Meteorological Organization, 2022)
399 Climate change poses a significant threat to Ethiopia’s development, exacerbating existing vulnerabilities. The country
faces high impacts from natural hazards and increasing climate variability, which threaten its development goals.
Ethiopia's ambitious reform agenda aims to address these challenges amidst conflict and inflation. Balancing
development needs with climate adaptation and mitigation efforts is crucial for ensuring sustainable growth (World Bank
Group, 2023).
400 Ethiopia is committed to a green development path, adopting various policies, strategies, and plans to guide its climate
interventions. The legal framework for climate action includes specific sectoral responsibilities and coordination
mechanisms. However, gaps and overlaps in institutional mandates require further refinement. Ethiopia's climate change
targets and commitments are integrated into public expenditure management, with efforts to mainstream climate action
across sectors and levels of government (World Bank Group, 2023).
401 Climate change impacts various sectors in Ethiopia, including water, agriculture, energy, transport, and urban
development. The country faces significant water challenges, with variable and unpredictable rainfall affecting millions of
people. Essential adaptation measures include improving storage efficiency and integrated watershed management. The
agricultural sector must become more productive and climate-resilient, while energy, transport, and urban infrastructure
need to be adapted to withstand climate impacts. Additionally, diversifying the economy through mining and tourism can
enhance resilience (World Bank Group, 2023).

=== PAGE 113 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110
402 Climate change has profound implications for Ethiopia's macroeconomic stability and poverty levels. Rising temperatures
and increased rainfall variability threaten economic growth and exacerbate poverty. Structural reforms are crucial to
expanding fiscal space and enabling private sector participation in climate adaptation. Managing residual risks and
mobilizing external finance are essential for addressing climate impacts. Supporting the most vulnerable populations
through targeted interventions is critical to building resilience and ensuring equitable development (World Bank Group,
2023).
403 Ethiopia faces significant economic losses from various climate hazards. Droughts cause substantial economic damage,
with a drought event having a 1-in-5 year return period leading to losses exceeding US$1 billion, and a 1-in-100 year
drought event resulting in losses of over US$3 billion. Flooding also has a severe impact on GDP, with a flood event with a
25-year return period causing a 3.3% deviation in GDP baselines, and a 100-year flood leading to a 7% deviation.
Additionally, heat stress results in significant losses due to its impact on labor productivity and livestock yields.
Infrastructure damage, particularly to roads and bridges, can incur annual costs of up to US$755 million under certain
scenarios. These economic impacts highlight the urgent need for effective climate adaptation and mitigation strategies in
Ethiopia (World Bank Group, 2023). The country faces critical challenges, including ethnic conflicts and climate-related
risks such as droughts and floods, which impact agriculture and water resources. Effective climate services and EWSs are
essential for enhancing resilience (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2021).
Somalia
404 Somalia is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world. Somalia is ranked 178 out of 182 countries on the
ND-GAIN Index 2024, with the least capacity to respond and recover from extreme weather events.172 Located in the
Horn of Africa, Somalia extends south of the Equator northward to the Gulf of Aden, between sub-Saharan Africa and the
Middle East. As a predominately arid and semi-arid country with a hot desert climate173, the country is susceptible to
both droughts and flash floods. Prolonged dry seasons result in water scarcity, reduced grazing land, reduced livestock
production, livestock perishes, reduced agricultural productivity, food insecurity, and ultimately, famine and the loss of
human life.174 Somalia’s chronic climate-associated shocks, including cycles of floods, droughts, and locust infestation, are
compounded by increased conflict and insecurity, and have aggravated the nation’s growth and slowed the transition
from fragility. Climate change has exacerbated this vulnerability by increasing the frequency, persistence and intensity of
droughts in Somalia.175
405 Historical and projected climate change impacts in Somalia are drought and flood, although Somalia is also affected by
cyclones and coastal flooding is also classified as being high.176 Daily temperature maximums have increased over the last
two decades177 and are projected to continue over the next decade.178 The very southern areas of Somalia are projected
to experience extreme heat, and the southern and some parts of the northern areas are projected to experience very
high heat.179 Climate change projections suggest that the duration, frequency and intensity of droughts will increase by
the end of the 21st Century under all scenarios and that drought areas will increase by 16 per cent, 36 per cent and 54
per cent under increasing Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) (2.6, 4.6, 8.5 respectively).180 At the same time,
172 ND-GAIN Index Country Rankings, Somalia. https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/somalia [accessed 7 July 2024]
173 classified according to the Köppen-Geiger Classification 1991-2020, World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia,
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia
174 National Drought Plan For Somalia, 2020.
https://www.unccd.int/sites/default/files/country_profile_documents/FINAL%20NATIONAL%20DROUGHT%20PLAN%20FOR%20SOMALIA%28final%29%2016%20
Dec%202020%28%20PDF%20version%29.pdf
175 Somalia: Drought Situation Report No.2 (As of 21 December 2021), https://www.unocha.org/publications/report/somalia/somalia-drought-situation-report-
no2-21-december-2021
176 GFDRR 2024, Somalia Coastal Flood: https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/226-somalia/CF
177 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, II – Variability and Change in Variability
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/trends-variability-historical
178 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, I – Trends within Variability
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/trends-variability-projections
179 World Bank 2021, Climate Change Knowledge Portal: Somalia, High-level Summary: Compound Heat Risk
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/somalia/heat-risk
180 Haile, G.G., Tang, Q., Hosseini-Moghari, S., Liu, X., Gebremicael, T.G., Leng, G., Kebede, A., Xu, X., & Yun, X. (2020). ‘Projected impacts of climate change on
drought patterns over East Africa’, Earth’s Future, 8(7). https://doi. org/10.1029/2020EF001502

=== PAGE 114 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111
higher rainfall and runoff are expected across the various climate scenarios, leading to increased flash flooding.181 The
frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events are projected to increase with potential impacts of flooding and soil
erosion.182
406 Drought is a critical issue for Somalia, which disparately affects nomadic and agro-pastoral communities who are more
vulnerable to such droughts. During 2015 – 2022, 6.1 million people were affected by the drought, and 760,000 - 1.2
million people were displaced by drought.183 However, the following year of 2023 saw a further 468,000 people impacted
by flood, including 247,000 displaced people.184 Somalia experiences regular river floods and flash flooding that result in
major economic impacts and damage, as well as many human casualties, with riverine flooding typically occurring along
the Juba and Shabelle Rivers in southern Somalia and flash flooding tending to occur in the north along intermittent
watercourses.185 Yet, intense rainfall events and subsequent floods have become more frequent, resulting in water runoff
on the earth's surface, washing away fertile soil and causing widespread devastation. Most recently, the 2023 Deyr flood
has been reportedly the worst flood Somalia has faced, resulting in total damages of US$126.6 million and total losses of
$49.5 million across sixteen districts, mostly affecting agriculture, livestock, and WATSAN and transport.186 Around 2.48
million people were affected, with over 1.2 million displaced from their homes. 187 The floods also resulted in the loss of
188 lives.188 Cyclones, such as Cyclone Sagar (2018) and coastal inundation, tend to affect northern Somalia’s Somaliland
and Puntland regions189 rather than the southern areas.
Cambodia
407 This table lists major disasters in the past 25 years with over 200 deaths, mainly due to riverine or flash floods. However,
while droughts and lightning strikes caused fewer deaths, they still had significant impacts.
Year Deaths Houses Destroyed Houses Damaged Directly affected Evacuated Damages in crops Ha.
2000 388 1,305 7,920 3,305,648 80,599 574,236
2011 458 963 1,838 1,890,178 155,102 359,515
2013 375 2,684 7,509 1,921,502 191,587 209,013
2018 206 1,385 3,112 754,000 65,125 167,264
408 Historically, Cambodia has experienced consistent temperatures that peak above 32°C in early summer and range from
25 to 27°C annually. The summer monsoon from May to November brings the heaviest rainfall to the southeast and
northwest regions. Annual rainfall varies from 1,400–2,000 millimetres, with coastal and highland areas receiving higher
181 Government of Somalia. (2021). National Water Resource Strategy 2021–2025. Ministry of Energy and Water Resources. https://www.climate-
laws.org/geographies/somalia/policies/national-water-resource-strategy-2021-2025
182 Seneviratne, S. I. & Zhang, X. (2021) Chapter 11: Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate [MassonDelmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L.
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi,
R. Yu & B. Zhou. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change In Press, Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/ wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Chapter_11.pdf.
183 IOM, OCHA, UNHCR 2022 Somalia: Drought and Famine Displacement Monitoring Dashboard (September 2022), https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-
drought-and-famine-displacement-monitoring-dashboard-september-2022
184 OCHA 2023, Somalia: Gu rainy season 2023 Flash Floods Update No. 3 (13 April 2023), UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-gu-rainy-season-2023-flash-floods-update-no-3-13-april-2023
185 FAO 2022. Somalia water and land information management. Food and Agriculture Organization. http://www.faoswalim. org
186 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-
pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf
187 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-
pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf
188 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-
pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf
189 FOA(2019) Drought Action Plan https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/98faacae-9ab5-4d18-bfbb-57c5cdbbe5b7/content

--- Table 1 on Page 114 ---
 | Year |  |  | Deaths |  |  | Houses Destroyed |  |  | Houses Damaged |  |  | Directly affected |  |  | Evacuated |  |  | Damages in crops Ha. | 
2000 |  |  | 388 |  |  | 1,305 |  |  | 7,920 |  |  | 3,305,648 |  |  | 80,599 |  |  | 574,236 |  | 
2011 |  |  | 458 |  |  | 963 |  |  | 1,838 |  |  | 1,890,178 |  |  | 155,102 |  |  | 359,515 |  | 
2013 |  |  | 375 |  |  | 2,684 |  |  | 7,509 |  |  | 1,921,502 |  |  | 191,587 |  |  | 209,013 |  | 
2018 |  |  | 206 |  |  | 1,385 |  |  | 3,112 |  |  | 754,000 |  |  | 65,125 |  |  | 167,264 |  | 

=== PAGE 115 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112
amounts. El Niño Southern Oscillation impacts monsoons, leading to warmer and drier winters during El Niño and cooler
conditions during La Niña.
409 Under SSP3-7.0, projected precipitation patterns show increased regional variability by mid-century and drier dry seasons
nationally. Annual precipitation is expected to rise by 14.48 mm from Cambodia's 1995–2014 reference period over
2020–2039. Conversely, a decrease of 11.27 mm is projected over 2040–2059, with southern and eastern provinces
seeing the most significant increases and northern areas experiencing the greatest decreases in annual precipitation.
410 Climate change will likely exacerbate Cambodia's vulnerability to extreme weather events such as floods and droughts,
which can damage infrastructure, disrupt agriculture, and lead to food insecurity. Rising temperatures and changing
precipitation patterns may affect water resources and biodiversity, threatening ecosystems and livelihoods—additionally,
sea-level rise risks coastal areas, potentially displacing communities and impacting the nation's economic stability.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113
H
Appendix 2: Summary of climate hazards across critical sectors and proposed interventions for the participating seven countries
Country Sector Climate Hazard Climate Impact Proposed Intervention and its expected impact
Cambodia Water resources Increasingly intense The likely impacts of increasingly intense precipitation events Improved data management and sharing, both before and after
precipitation events within Cambodia and upstream on the Mekong include disasters.
both within severe flooding, which can destroy homes, infrastructure, Enhanced forecasting particularly in terms of timeliness of
Cambodia, as well as and crops, leading to economic losses and displacement of dissemination and relevance.
upstream on the communities. Upstream, intense rainfall can exacerbate river
Country wide improvements to the speed and utility of early
Mekong. flooding and affect water management and hydroelectric
warning messaging.
Increasingly drier dry operations, causing disruptions downstream.
Heightened awareness around preparedness activities and
seasons with higher Increasingly drier dry seasons with higher numbers of
upgraded response options.
numbers of extreme extreme heat events can lead to water scarcity, negatively
Systemic coordination, legislation and monitoring across pillars.
heat events. impacting agriculture and reducing crop yields. This can
result in food insecurity and strain on water resources,
affecting both rural and urban populations. Additionally,
extreme heat events can increase the risk of heat-related
illnesses and stress on public health systems
Fiji Agriculture, water, Drought, TCs and Water scarcity, coastal erosion, food security (reduction in Standardizing risk assessment methods, establishing a
health extreme weather subsistence crop), outbreak of climate-sensitive diseases centralized database, and enhancing data collection and analysis
events (high intensity (usually occurs soon after floods and TCs) capabilities for climate projections, evaluating hazard impacts
rainfall and winds), and future risks.
flooding, and sea level Efforts to improve coverage in certain areas include expanding
rise or upgrading observation networks with AWS and enhancing
EWS with historical climate data. AI and a centralized database
will be utilized for forecasting and early warning.
Develop National Emergency Telecom Plan (NETP) to strengthen
emergency structure, and review Emergency
Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) and create SOPs for
stakeholders. Automate geo-targeted messaging, implement
cell broadcasting for mass messaging, and improve translation
of early warning messages.
Developing communication strategies based on risk perception
studies and integrating anticipatory actions into national plans.
Expanding the Community Based DRM Program to improve
community level preparedness and capacity.
Chad Meteorology and Flash floods, Loss of life. Lost livestock. Damages to houses, damages to Sustainability of climate services, multihazard warning systems
hydrology River flooding community and household assets (wells, latrines), and disaster preparedness / management at national and
infrastructure, crops, seed and food stores. Displacement. subnational levels.
Agriculture Drought, dry spells
Vector borne and epidemic disease.
Improved data on vulnerability and risk, improved data transfer,
Loss of crops, reduced crop yields. Water scarcity. Loss of life analysis and sharing, and knowledge management
Disaster
preparedness
through malnutrition and increased disease burden.
Increased conflict over natural resources including pasture

--- Table 1 on Page 116 ---
Country | Sector | Climate Hazard | Climate Impact | Proposed Intervention and its expected impact
Cambodia | Water resources | Increasingly intense
precipitation events
both within
Cambodia, as well as
upstream on the
Mekong.
Increasingly drier dry
seasons with higher
numbers of extreme
heat events. | The likely impacts of increasingly intense precipitation events
within Cambodia and upstream on the Mekong include
severe flooding, which can destroy homes, infrastructure,
and crops, leading to economic losses and displacement of
communities. Upstream, intense rainfall can exacerbate river
flooding and affect water management and hydroelectric
operations, causing disruptions downstream.
Increasingly drier dry seasons with higher numbers of
extreme heat events can lead to water scarcity, negatively
impacting agriculture and reducing crop yields. This can
result in food insecurity and strain on water resources,
affecting both rural and urban populations. Additionally,
extreme heat events can increase the risk of heat-related
illnesses and stress on public health systems | Improved data management and sharing, both before and after
disasters.
Enhanced forecasting particularly in terms of timeliness of
dissemination and relevance.
Country wide improvements to the speed and utility of early
warning messaging.
Heightened awareness around preparedness activities and
upgraded response options.
Systemic coordination, legislation and monitoring across pillars.
Fiji | Agriculture, water,
health | Drought, TCs and
extreme weather
events (high intensity
rainfall and winds),
flooding, and sea level
rise | Water scarcity, coastal erosion, food security (reduction in
subsistence crop), outbreak of climate-sensitive diseases
(usually occurs soon after floods and TCs) | Standardizing risk assessment methods, establishing a
centralized database, and enhancing data collection and analysis
capabilities for climate projections, evaluating hazard impacts
and future risks.
Efforts to improve coverage in certain areas include expanding
or upgrading observation networks with AWS and enhancing
EWS with historical climate data. AI and a centralized database
will be utilized for forecasting and early warning.
Develop National Emergency Telecom Plan (NETP) to strengthen
emergency structure, and review Emergency
Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) and create SOPs for
stakeholders. Automate geo-targeted messaging, implement
cell broadcasting for mass messaging, and improve translation
of early warning messages.
Developing communication strategies based on risk perception
studies and integrating anticipatory actions into national plans.
Expanding the Community Based DRM Program to improve
community level preparedness and capacity.
Chad | Meteorology and
hydrology
Agriculture
Disaster
preparedness | Flash floods,
River flooding
Drought, dry spells | Loss of life. Lost livestock. Damages to houses, damages to
community and household assets (wells, latrines),
infrastructure, crops, seed and food stores. Displacement.
Vector borne and epidemic disease.
Loss of crops, reduced crop yields. Water scarcity. Loss of life
through malnutrition and increased disease burden.
Increased conflict over natural resources including pasture | Sustainability of climate services, multihazard warning systems
and disaster preparedness / management at national and
subnational levels.
Improved data on vulnerability and risk, improved data transfer,
analysis and sharing, and knowledge management

=== PAGE 117 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114
H
and water. Proliferation of crop pests. Enhanced forecasting in terms of timeliness as well as relevance,
. including IbF.
Developing capability to disseminate risk information,
preparedness and early warning messaging to end users
ensuring messaging meets the needs of users.
Heightened awareness around preparedness activities and
upgraded response options.
Ecuador Agriculture Droughts Reduced crop yields due to insufficient water; increased risk Intervention: Improve drought monitoring.
of crop failure. Expected Impact: Timely alerts will allow farmers to adjust
planting schedules and use water-efficient practices, reducing
crop losses and enhancing resilience to drought conditions.
Extreme Weather Damage to crops and soil erosion from heavy rainfall; Intervention: Develop flood EWSs and integrate them with
Events (Floods) potential loss of harvest. agricultural risk management practices.
Expected Impact: Early warnings will help farmers take
protective actions to safeguard crops, minimising damage and
losses from flooding.
Water Resources Changes in Water Reduced river flows and water availability for irrigation and Intervention: Implement hydrological forecasting.
Availability (Droughts) consumption. Expected Impact: Improved water resource management and
planning will mitigate the impacts of drought on water supply,
ensuring more effective use of available resources.
Extreme Weather Flooding of water infrastructure, affecting water supply and Intervention: Enhance EWSs for flooding and integrate them
Events (Floods) quality. with water management practices to protect infrastructure.
Expected Impact: Reduced damage to water infrastructure and
better preparedness for flood events will ensure continued
water supply and quality.
Energy Hydrological Changes Decreased water availability for hydropower generation; Intervention: Implement hydrological forecasting activities for
(Droughts and potential for reduced energy production and reliability. hydropower.
Reduced Expected Impact: Improved anticipation of water availability
Precipitation) issues will enable adjustments in energy production, reducing
the risk of power shortages and maintaining energy reliability.
Extreme Weather Damage to hydropower infrastructure (e.g., turbines, dams) Intervention: Develop and implement flood EWSs specifically for
Events (Floods) from flooding; potential for energy production disruptions. hydropower infrastructure and integrate these with
maintenance and response plans.
Expected Impact: Enhanced infrastructure resilience and
preparedness will minimise damage and operational disruptions
from floods, ensuring stable energy production.
Antigua All Increasingly intense Hydrometeorological hazards are the primary threats in the Intervention: The project will improve the marine observation
and country. A significant recent disaster was the combined and forecasting capacity of ABMS to generate more accurate

--- Table 1 on Page 117 ---
 |  |  | and water. Proliferation of crop pests.
. | H
Enhanced forecasting in terms of timeliness as well as relevance,
including IbF.
Developing capability to disseminate risk information,
preparedness and early warning messaging to end users
ensuring messaging meets the needs of users.
Heightened awareness around preparedness activities and
upgraded response options.
Ecuador | Agriculture | Droughts | Reduced crop yields due to insufficient water; increased risk
of crop failure. | Intervention: Improve drought monitoring.
Expected Impact: Timely alerts will allow farmers to adjust
planting schedules and use water-efficient practices, reducing
crop losses and enhancing resilience to drought conditions.
 |  | Extreme Weather
Events (Floods) | Damage to crops and soil erosion from heavy rainfall;
potential loss of harvest. | Intervention: Develop flood EWSs and integrate them with
agricultural risk management practices.
Expected Impact: Early warnings will help farmers take
protective actions to safeguard crops, minimising damage and
losses from flooding.
 | Water Resources | Changes in Water
Availability (Droughts) | Reduced river flows and water availability for irrigation and
consumption. | Intervention: Implement hydrological forecasting.
Expected Impact: Improved water resource management and
planning will mitigate the impacts of drought on water supply,
ensuring more effective use of available resources.
 |  | Extreme Weather
Events (Floods) | Flooding of water infrastructure, affecting water supply and
quality. | Intervention: Enhance EWSs for flooding and integrate them
with water management practices to protect infrastructure.
Expected Impact: Reduced damage to water infrastructure and
better preparedness for flood events will ensure continued
water supply and quality.
 | Energy | Hydrological Changes
(Droughts and
Reduced
Precipitation) | Decreased water availability for hydropower generation;
potential for reduced energy production and reliability. | Intervention: Implement hydrological forecasting activities for
hydropower.
Expected Impact: Improved anticipation of water availability
issues will enable adjustments in energy production, reducing
the risk of power shortages and maintaining energy reliability.
 |  | Extreme Weather
Events (Floods) | Damage to hydropower infrastructure (e.g., turbines, dams)
from flooding; potential for energy production disruptions. | Intervention: Develop and implement flood EWSs specifically for
hydropower infrastructure and integrate these with
maintenance and response plans.
Expected Impact: Enhanced infrastructure resilience and
preparedness will minimise damage and operational disruptions
from floods, ensuring stable energy production.
Antigua
and | All | Increasingly intense | Hydrometeorological hazards are the primary threats in the
country. A significant recent disaster was the combined | Intervention: The project will improve the marine observation
and forecasting capacity of ABMS to generate more accurate

=== PAGE 118 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115
H
Barbuda hurricanes impact of Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. Given the and locally specific warnings for ocean conditions, wave action
islands' small size, a single storm can impact the entire and storm surge.
population, leading to severe flooding, storm surges, Impact: Warnings will enable fisherfolk to take better
powerful winds, and widespread destruction. In September precautions when conditions are bad, as well as enable
2017, Hurricane Irma struck as a Category 5 storm, causing preparedness actions for coastal infrastructure (including
extensive damage across many Caribbean islands, including clearing vulnerable areas, securing movable assets, evacuating
Antigua and Barbuda. Essential services like healthcare, flood zones etc.). Preparedness of fisherfolk will be further
electricity, water, sewage, and waste management were enhanced through the development of landing zone disaster
heavily disrupted, and livelihoods were severely affected. On management plans. Such actions will significantly reduce the
Barbuda, the hurricane devastated about 90% of the island’s potential impact of storms and hurricanes on coastal
infrastructure, rendering it uninhabitable for its population infrastructure as well as the reduction in loss of lives.
of over 1,600 people. The country's First Biennial Update
Intervention: Update the crisis response manual for tourism and
Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on
capacity development of the tourism sector to improve
Climate Change (UNFCCC) highlighted the risks posed by
enforcement of DRR regulation for tourism establishments.
hurricanes and the exacerbating effects of climate change on
Impact: Improved emergency response protocols for the
these tropical systems. The report noted that between 1851
tourism sector will reduce impact on tourism sector during
and 2011, the country was impacted by 93 tropical storms,
extreme events, including enabling more efficient evacuations.
44 of which were hurricanes. It also emphasised that
hurricanes frequently result in the total loss of GDP.
Water resources Drought Drought is a recognized hazard within the national risk Intervention: Preparation of a disaster readiness and response
Agriculture planning framework. The 2015 Nationally Determined manual for the agricultural extension service.
Contribution underscores the country's vulnerability to water Impact: Farmers will be better informed on how to prepare for
shortages due to droughts, which typically occur every 5-10 and recover from extreme events.
years. With climate change projected to reduce annual
rainfall by 30%-50% by 2090, in a country that is already
water-scarce, alongside rising temperatures and increased
sea levels leading to saltwater intrusion and contamination
of freshwater supplies, the risk of drought on the islands is a
serious concern. From 1928 to 2007, 24 drought events were
documented on the islands. Between 2014 and 2015, the
country experienced a severe drought that disrupted utilities
nationwide. A drought from 1983 to 1985 significantly
impacted the tourism sector, leading to economic
repercussions as the country had to import water from
Dominica. Historically, droughts have also led to loss of life.
These far-reaching impacts highlight the critical need for
comprehensive planning for drought, especially in the
context of climate change.
All Extreme rainfall and Flood risk is highly prevalent in the country, leading the 2015 Intervention: The project will improve the hydrological
floods Nationally Determined Contribution to emphasise the observation and forecasting capacity of ABMS to generate more
importance of adapting all buildings to withstand extreme accurate and locally specific flash flood warnings.
climate events such as droughts, floods, and hurricanes. Impact: Improved flash flood warnings will enable people to
While flooding is commonly associated with tropical storms avoid flash floods, limiting the potential loss of life as well as
and hurricanes, it can also occur outside these events, with reducing disruptions to other economic activities (for example,
the country experiencing riverine, coastal, and flash flooding. by enabling diversion of traffic).
Antigua's natural topography causes rapid runoff after heavy

--- Table 1 on Page 118 ---
Barbuda |  | hurricanes | impact of Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. Given the
islands' small size, a single storm can impact the entire
population, leading to severe flooding, storm surges,
powerful winds, and widespread destruction. In September
2017, Hurricane Irma struck as a Category 5 storm, causing
extensive damage across many Caribbean islands, including
Antigua and Barbuda. Essential services like healthcare,
electricity, water, sewage, and waste management were
heavily disrupted, and livelihoods were severely affected. On
Barbuda, the hurricane devastated about 90% of the island’s
infrastructure, rendering it uninhabitable for its population
of over 1,600 people. The country's First Biennial Update
Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) highlighted the risks posed by
hurricanes and the exacerbating effects of climate change on
these tropical systems. The report noted that between 1851
and 2011, the country was impacted by 93 tropical storms,
44 of which were hurricanes. It also emphasised that
hurricanes frequently result in the total loss of GDP. | H
and locally specific warnings for ocean conditions, wave action
and storm surge.
Impact: Warnings will enable fisherfolk to take better
precautions when conditions are bad, as well as enable
preparedness actions for coastal infrastructure (including
clearing vulnerable areas, securing movable assets, evacuating
flood zones etc.). Preparedness of fisherfolk will be further
enhanced through the development of landing zone disaster
management plans. Such actions will significantly reduce the
potential impact of storms and hurricanes on coastal
infrastructure as well as the reduction in loss of lives.
Intervention: Update the crisis response manual for tourism and
capacity development of the tourism sector to improve
enforcement of DRR regulation for tourism establishments.
Impact: Improved emergency response protocols for the
tourism sector will reduce impact on tourism sector during
extreme events, including enabling more efficient evacuations.
 | Water resources
Agriculture | Drought | Drought is a recognized hazard within the national risk
planning framework. The 2015 Nationally Determined
Contribution underscores the country's vulnerability to water
shortages due to droughts, which typically occur every 5-10
years. With climate change projected to reduce annual
rainfall by 30%-50% by 2090, in a country that is already
water-scarce, alongside rising temperatures and increased
sea levels leading to saltwater intrusion and contamination
of freshwater supplies, the risk of drought on the islands is a
serious concern. From 1928 to 2007, 24 drought events were
documented on the islands. Between 2014 and 2015, the
country experienced a severe drought that disrupted utilities
nationwide. A drought from 1983 to 1985 significantly
impacted the tourism sector, leading to economic
repercussions as the country had to import water from
Dominica. Historically, droughts have also led to loss of life.
These far-reaching impacts highlight the critical need for
comprehensive planning for drought, especially in the
context of climate change. | Intervention: Preparation of a disaster readiness and response
manual for the agricultural extension service.
Impact: Farmers will be better informed on how to prepare for
and recover from extreme events.
 | All | Extreme rainfall and
floods | Flood risk is highly prevalent in the country, leading the 2015
Nationally Determined Contribution to emphasise the
importance of adapting all buildings to withstand extreme
climate events such as droughts, floods, and hurricanes.
While flooding is commonly associated with tropical storms
and hurricanes, it can also occur outside these events, with
the country experiencing riverine, coastal, and flash flooding.
Antigua's natural topography causes rapid runoff after heavy | Intervention: The project will improve the hydrological
observation and forecasting capacity of ABMS to generate more
accurate and locally specific flash flood warnings.
Impact: Improved flash flood warnings will enable people to
avoid flash floods, limiting the potential loss of life as well as
reducing disruptions to other economic activities (for example,
by enabling diversion of traffic).

=== PAGE 119 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116
H
rains, often resulting in flash floods. Development practices
that increase impermeable surfaces have exacerbated this
problem by increasing runoff and flash flooding. Intense
rainfall further contributes to flooding as waterways
overflow due to limited retention capacity. Coastal flooding
poses another significant risk due to the country's relatively
low-lying topography and the concentration of tourism-
related activities along the coasts. Additionally, other
hydrometeorological hazards contribute to the national risk
profile. Although rare, tsunamis are a recognised threat due
to the country's location in a seismically active region, with
historical earthquakes triggering tele-tsunamis that have
impacted several Caribbean islands. On a much smaller scale,
the country also faces hydrometeorological threats such as
heat and cold waves, hailstorms, downbursts, and tornadoes.
Ethiopia Meteorology and Increasingly drier dry Drought Improved multi-hazard and multi-sector data collection,
hydrology seasons. Riverine and flash floods management and sharing (national risk data hub accessible to
Increasingly intense all).
precipitation events. Improved impact-based risk analysis and forecast, especially for
floods; in high-risk woredas at local levels.
Improvement and continuation of upgrade and coverage of
hydrometeorological observing systems.
Assessment of relevant early warningscommunication channels
in view of most vulnerable. Development of media training and
messaging on disaster risk, Anticipatory Action and mitigation.
Development of an emergency call short code.
Improved community-level early warnings systems in high-risk
locations; with gender focus; linking to Anticipatory Action
recommendations.
Agreement on national Anticipatory Action and Emergency
Thresholds.
Capacity development and integration of Anticipatory Action
into preparedness planning at local levels, linked to financing
mechanism, and integrating social protection mechanisms.
Stockpiling and pre-positioning essential items.
Inter-pilar coordination and monitoring.
Somalia Agriculture and Water scarcity, As a predominately arid and semi-arid country with a hot TBC/under discussion-development
food security, drought desert climate , prolonged dry seasons result in water
Intervention: Integrated Actions for Detection, Monitoring,
livestock, scarcity, reduced grazing land, reduced livestock production,
livelihoods, water livestock perishes, reduced agricultural productivity, food Analysis and Forecasting
resources insecurity, and ultimately, loss of livelihoods, displacement, Impact: harmonise early warning data collection, analysis and
famine and the loss of human life. Drought is a critical issue exchange between federal line ministries, sectorial offices,
for Somalia, which disparately affects nomadic and
humanitarian organisations and regional bodies, as well as
agropastoral communities who are more vulnerable to such
droughts. improving data automation, modelling and forecasting of early

--- Table 1 on Page 119 ---
 |  |  | rains, often resulting in flash floods. Development practices
that increase impermeable surfaces have exacerbated this
problem by increasing runoff and flash flooding. Intense
rainfall further contributes to flooding as waterways
overflow due to limited retention capacity. Coastal flooding
poses another significant risk due to the country's relatively
low-lying topography and the concentration of tourism-
related activities along the coasts. Additionally, other
hydrometeorological hazards contribute to the national risk
profile. Although rare, tsunamis are a recognised threat due
to the country's location in a seismically active region, with
historical earthquakes triggering tele-tsunamis that have
impacted several Caribbean islands. On a much smaller scale,
the country also faces hydrometeorological threats such as
heat and cold waves, hailstorms, downbursts, and tornadoes. | H
Ethiopia | Meteorology and
hydrology | Increasingly drier dry
seasons.
Increasingly intense
precipitation events. | Drought
Riverine and flash floods | Improved multi-hazard and multi-sector data collection,
management and sharing (national risk data hub accessible to
all).
Improved impact-based risk analysis and forecast, especially for
floods; in high-risk woredas at local levels.
Improvement and continuation of upgrade and coverage of
hydrometeorological observing systems.
Assessment of relevant early warningscommunication channels
in view of most vulnerable. Development of media training and
messaging on disaster risk, Anticipatory Action and mitigation.
Development of an emergency call short code.
Improved community-level early warnings systems in high-risk
locations; with gender focus; linking to Anticipatory Action
recommendations.
Agreement on national Anticipatory Action and Emergency
Thresholds.
Capacity development and integration of Anticipatory Action
into preparedness planning at local levels, linked to financing
mechanism, and integrating social protection mechanisms.
Stockpiling and pre-positioning essential items.
Inter-pilar coordination and monitoring.
Somalia | Agriculture and
food security,
livestock,
livelihoods, water
resources | Water scarcity,
drought | As a predominately arid and semi-arid country with a hot
desert climate , prolonged dry seasons result in water
scarcity, reduced grazing land, reduced livestock production,
livestock perishes, reduced agricultural productivity, food
insecurity, and ultimately, loss of livelihoods, displacement,
famine and the loss of human life. Drought is a critical issue
for Somalia, which disparately affects nomadic and
agropastoral communities who are more vulnerable to such
droughts. | TBC/under discussion-development
Intervention: Integrated Actions for Detection, Monitoring,
Analysis and Forecasting
Impact: harmonise early warning data collection, analysis and
exchange between federal line ministries, sectorial offices,
humanitarian organisations and regional bodies, as well as
improving data automation, modelling and forecasting of early

=== PAGE 120 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117
H
Agriculture, Flash flooding, floods Somalia experiences regular river floods and flash flooding warning.
livestock, and inundation that result in major economic impacts and damage, as well Intervention: Activities to improve the interoperability Impact:
transport, as many human casualties, with riverine flooding typically
Improved early warning information exchange between
WATSAN, occurring along the Juba and Shabelle Rivers in southern
meteorology and Somalia and flash flooding tending to occur in the north sectors.
hydrology along intermittent watercourses.190 Yet, intense rainfall Intervention: early warning communication strategies and
events and subsequent floods have become more frequent, SOPs for early warning information, communication and
resulting in water runoff on the earth's surface, washing
dissemination governance, functions, roles and
away fertile soil and causing widespread devastation. Floods
have resulted in huge losses and damage that has been responsibilities.
widespread across districts mostly affecting agriculture, Impact: Accessible nationwide warning dissemination and
livestock, and WATSAN and transport but also result in
communication
displacement and losses of life. 191
Intervention: activities covering simulation exercises, CAP
adoption, telecommunication service provider agreements,
automated system setups and protocols for AA and
communication strategies and feedback mechanisms through
local networks.
Impact: Comprehensive functional infrastructure networks
and early warning dissemination services and equipment
Intervention: Hazard risk assessment methodology
harmonised with regional approaches, and accompanying
hazard risk assessments
Impact: Risk at national and local levels translated for critical
considerations of key vulnerability factors.
Intervention: Disaster risk knowledge materials and
communication for national and local levels that include
hazard maps that identify specific geographic areas, sectors
and groups that may be affected by particular hazards,
tailored for EWS and DRR plans/local risk management plans.
Impact: available climate risk summaries accessible for
national and local levels and considering key vulnerability
factors
Intervention: A database of disaster impact data and loss and
190 FAO 2022. Somalia water and land information management. Food and Agriculture Organization. http://www.faoswalim. org
191 SODMA 2024. Deyr Floods Somalia 2023 Rapid Post-Disaster Needs Assessment: United Nations (UN), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Bank (WB), the European Union (EU) and Government of
Somalia, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2024-06/somalia_deyrfloods_r-pdna_executive_summary_07062024.pdf

--- Table 1 on Page 120 ---
 | Agriculture,
livestock,
transport,
WATSAN,
meteorology and
hydrology | Flash flooding, floods
and inundation | Somalia experiences regular river floods and flash flooding
that result in major economic impacts and damage, as well
as many human casualties, with riverine flooding typically
occurring along the Juba and Shabelle Rivers in southern
Somalia and flash flooding tending to occur in the north
along intermittent watercourses.190 Yet, intense rainfall
events and subsequent floods have become more frequent,
resulting in water runoff on the earth's surface, washing
away fertile soil and causing widespread devastation. Floods
have resulted in huge losses and damage that has been
widespread across districts mostly affecting agriculture,
livestock, and WATSAN and transport but also result in
displacement and losses of life. 191 | H
warning.
Intervention: Activities to improve the interoperability Impact:
Improved early warning information exchange between
sectors.
Intervention: early warning communication strategies and
SOPs for early warning information, communication and
dissemination governance, functions, roles and
responsibilities.
Impact: Accessible nationwide warning dissemination and
communication
Intervention: activities covering simulation exercises, CAP
adoption, telecommunication service provider agreements,
automated system setups and protocols for AA and
communication strategies and feedback mechanisms through
local networks.
Impact: Comprehensive functional infrastructure networks
and early warning dissemination services and equipment
Intervention: Hazard risk assessment methodology
harmonised with regional approaches, and accompanying
hazard risk assessments
Impact: Risk at national and local levels translated for critical
considerations of key vulnerability factors.
Intervention: Disaster risk knowledge materials and
communication for national and local levels that include
hazard maps that identify specific geographic areas, sectors
and groups that may be affected by particular hazards,
tailored for EWS and DRR plans/local risk management plans.
Impact: available climate risk summaries accessible for
national and local levels and considering key vulnerability
factors
Intervention: A database of disaster impact data and loss and

=== PAGE 121 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118
H
damage tracking.
Impact: Improved reporting and analysis of climate disaster
impacts over time.
Intervention: Training and enhancing public awareness and
education
Impact: Capacity and coordination at national and local levels
through empower communities to plan and respond.
Intervention: Developing participatory, gender-responsive
disaster preparedness measures and plans for district levels,
integrating Anticipatory Action and preparedness, forecast
based plans and protocols/EAPs and SOPS for IBFWS, CAP
Impact: building local preparedness capacities.
Table 2: A summary of Name of Funding Source Amount Period Key Achievements Gaps to be addressed/
the relevant projects and Project/Programme complementarity
programmes in each
country. S/N
Cambodia
CREWS/RProj/08/South- CREWS Cambodia and Laos Implemented by USD 5,540,000 June 2022 – Specific technical inputs on flood and
East Asia (Note - CREWS Cambodia WMO, WB - June 2025 drought monitoring and projections
Due to a lack of funding,
and Lao People’s GFDRR, UNDRR being provided including human
more costly infrastructure
Democratic Republic (PDR) resource development especially on
inputs and upgrades remain
phase 2 has been approved IbF .
to be met, however
to start from July 2025)
questions remain around
ongoing O & M capacities
within MoWRAM.Human
resource development needs
for MoWRAM are
considerable and this project
will work on a common HR
strategy with WMO
MoWRAM have requested
inputs on improving their
online presence.
In the pipeline SOFF (Systematic United Nations Estimated USD In the In the pipeline The SOFF project will install 5
Observations Financing Multi-Partner Trust 3.5 million pipeline AWS and one upper air
Facility) Fund (MPTF). station, upgrade data

--- Table 1 on Page 121 ---
 |  |  |  | H
damage tracking.
Impact: Improved reporting and analysis of climate disaster
impacts over time.
Intervention: Training and enhancing public awareness and
education
Impact: Capacity and coordination at national and local levels
through empower communities to plan and respond.
Intervention: Developing participatory, gender-responsive
disaster preparedness measures and plans for district levels,
integrating Anticipatory Action and preparedness, forecast
based plans and protocols/EAPs and SOPS for IBFWS, CAP
Impact: building local preparedness capacities.

--- Table 2 on Page 121 ---
Table 2: A summary of
the relevant projects and
programmes in each
country. S/N | Name of
Project/Programme | Funding Source | Amount | Period | Key Achievements | Gaps to be addressed/
complementarity
Cambodia |  |  |  |  |  | 
CREWS/RProj/08/South-
East Asia | CREWS Cambodia and Laos
(Note - CREWS Cambodia
and Lao People’s
Democratic Republic (PDR)
phase 2 has been approved
to start from July 2025) | Implemented by
WMO, WB -
GFDRR, UNDRR | USD 5,540,000 | June 2022 –
June 2025 | Specific technical inputs on flood and
drought monitoring and projections
being provided including human
resource development especially on
IbF . | Due to a lack of funding,
more costly infrastructure
inputs and upgrades remain
to be met, however
questions remain around
ongoing O & M capacities
within MoWRAM.Human
resource development needs
for MoWRAM are
considerable and this project
will work on a common HR
strategy with WMO
MoWRAM have requested
inputs on improving their
online presence.
In the pipeline | SOFF (Systematic
Observations Financing
Facility) | United Nations
Multi-Partner Trust
Fund (MPTF). | Estimated USD
3.5 million | In the
pipeline | In the pipeline | The SOFF project will install 5
AWS and one upper air
station, upgrade data

=== PAGE 122 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119
H
transmission to regional and
global offices and invest in HR
development.
FP-199 Public-Social-Private GCF USD 42,820,231 April 2022 – As far as early warnings, PEARL has a FAO as part of the Cambodia
Partnerships for of which USD April 2028 primary focus on adapting local EW4AII initiative have
Ecologically-Sound 36,231,981 agricultural systems to the impact of committed to coordinating
Agriculture and Resilient grant is drought and floods. closely on how to ensure
Livelihood in Northern Tonle provided by the linkages and support for
Sap Basin (PEARL) GCF MoWRAM, especially of IbF
for agriculture with an
emphasis on drought.
GEF Project ID: 5235 Strengthening Climate GEF USD 4.9 million Oct 2016 – This project substantially increased MoWRAM was unable to
UNDP/GEF ID: 5318 Information and EWSs in Oct 2020 the capacity of MoWRAM, both in provide a sufficient O & M
Cambodia to Support terms of HR development and hydro- budget to properly maintain
Climate Resilient met infrastructure. the equipment installed and
Development and the production of weather
Adaptation to Climate data remains limited. In
Change Project addition, substantial HR
development needs still
remain.
Applying Seasonal Climate BMU EUR 7977045 April 2018 – The project assisted Cambodia in Funding for the strategies
Forecasting SoutheastAsia June 2024 developing national/regional and plans remains a
adaptation and risk management challenge.
strategies.
Multi-Hazard USAID USD 25 million September This project provided support to the MRC data is critical to the
Hydrometeorological Early 2016 – Mekong River Commission (MRC) work of MoWRAM192.
Warning & Capacity Building September which has been assisting Cambodia Although the Mekong is
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood 2021 with Multi-Hazard EWSs and tracked relatively closely,
Guidance System (FFGS) Advancing Flood Risk Reduction. more remains to be done in
Phase III other river basins in
Cambodia. The project will
assist with the installation of
automated river observation
sensors in the target
provinces.
A number of World Bank World Bank USD 44.2 million I from Jun - Improved rural resilient road Improved financial planning
projects are currently active, 2017 -Mar connectivity. for disaster in the MEF has
including 2022 and II - Financial planning for disaster been a welcome addition.
the Cambodia Southeast in the resilience strengthened the Ministry However, contingency
Asia DRM Project I pipeline. of Economy and Finance (MEF’s) funding remains largely
192 DHRW uploads the water level data from manual stations to MRC’s HYDMET software, and subsequently refers to the water level and flood forecasts through MRC’s flood forecasting portal at http://ffw.mrcmekong.org/bulletin.php.

--- Table 1 on Page 122 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
transmission to regional and
global offices and invest in HR
development.
FP-199 | Public-Social-Private
Partnerships for
Ecologically-Sound
Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihood in Northern Tonle
Sap Basin (PEARL) | GCF | USD 42,820,231
of which USD
36,231,981
grant is
provided by the
GCF | April 2022 –
April 2028 | As far as early warnings, PEARL has a
primary focus on adapting local
agricultural systems to the impact of
drought and floods. | FAO as part of the Cambodia
EW4AII initiative have
committed to coordinating
closely on how to ensure
linkages and support for
MoWRAM, especially of IbF
for agriculture with an
emphasis on drought.
GEF Project ID: 5235
UNDP/GEF ID: 5318 | Strengthening Climate
Information and EWSs in
Cambodia to Support
Climate Resilient
Development and
Adaptation to Climate
Change Project | GEF | USD 4.9 million | Oct 2016 –
Oct 2020 | This project substantially increased
the capacity of MoWRAM, both in
terms of HR development and hydro-
met infrastructure. | MoWRAM was unable to
provide a sufficient O & M
budget to properly maintain
the equipment installed and
the production of weather
data remains limited. In
addition, substantial HR
development needs still
remain.
 | Applying Seasonal Climate
Forecasting SoutheastAsia | BMU | EUR 7977045 | April 2018 –
June 2024 | The project assisted Cambodia in
developing national/regional
adaptation and risk management
strategies. | Funding for the strategies
and plans remains a
challenge.
 | Multi-Hazard
Hydrometeorological Early
Warning & Capacity Building
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood
Guidance System (FFGS)
Phase III | USAID | USD 25 million | September
2016 –
September
2021 | This project provided support to the
Mekong River Commission (MRC)
which has been assisting Cambodia
with Multi-Hazard EWSs and
Advancing Flood Risk Reduction. | MRC data is critical to the
work of MoWRAM192.
Although the Mekong is
tracked relatively closely,
more remains to be done in
other river basins in
Cambodia. The project will
assist with the installation of
automated river observation
sensors in the target
provinces.
 | A number of World Bank
projects are currently active,
including
the Cambodia Southeast
Asia DRM Project I | World Bank | USD 44.2 million | I from Jun
2017 -Mar
2022 and II
in the
pipeline. | - Improved rural resilient road
connectivity.
- Financial planning for disaster
resilience strengthened the Ministry
of Economy and Finance (MEF’s) | Improved financial planning
for disaster in the MEF has
been a welcome addition.
However, contingency
funding remains largely

=== PAGE 123 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120
H
capacity for financial planning for unfunded and instead
disaster resilience. budgets are redirected from
- Contingent emergency response running costs in case of
component. disaster.
Fiji
1 CREWS Pacific SIDS 2.0 CREWS USD 3.8 million Jan 2021- The objective is to further
Implemented by Dec 2024 enhance the effectiveness of
Pre-Approved: CREWS WMO, WB, UNDRR Pacific Island National and
Regional EWSs by improving
Pacific Drought Project (USD
the integration of national
5,000,000) & CREWS Pacific
and regional
SIDS 2.0 Additional
hydrometeorological centres,
Financing (USD 5,500,000)
their production of
meaningful severe hazard
information and its
communication to benefit
local population in times of
need.
2 Multi-Hazard USAID USD 25 million September The goal of this initiative is to
Hydrometeorological Early 2021 – collaborate on advancing
Warning & Capacity Building September hydrometeorological end-to-
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood 2016 end EWSs and capacity to
Guidance System (FFGS) enable countries to take early
Phase III action and reduce the risk of
climate, weather and water
related hazards such as
floods and flash floods,
cyclones, severe weather,
storm surges, extreme
temperatures, droughts
climate variability and change
and other
hydrometeorological
disaster. It will help countries
to reduce impact of weather,
climate and water related
hazards through advancing
EWSs, developing tools,
guidance and plans,
forecasting events and
impact, building capacity and
other actions to enable
people them to access early
warning of these events to
take early action. The
initiative has two major areas

--- Table 1 on Page 123 ---
 |  |  |  |  | capacity for financial planning for
disaster resilience.
- Contingent emergency response
component. | H
unfunded and instead
budgets are redirected from
running costs in case of
disaster.
Fiji |  |  |  |  |  | 
1 | CREWS Pacific SIDS 2.0
Pre-Approved: CREWS
Pacific Drought Project (USD
5,000,000) & CREWS Pacific
SIDS 2.0 Additional
Financing (USD 5,500,000) | CREWS
Implemented by
WMO, WB, UNDRR | USD 3.8 million | Jan 2021-
Dec 2024 |  | The objective is to further
enhance the effectiveness of
Pacific Island National and
Regional EWSs by improving
the integration of national
and regional
hydrometeorological centres,
their production of
meaningful severe hazard
information and its
communication to benefit
local population in times of
need.
2 | Multi-Hazard
Hydrometeorological Early
Warning & Capacity Building
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood
Guidance System (FFGS)
Phase III | USAID | USD 25 million | September
2021 –
September
2016 |  | The goal of this initiative is to
collaborate on advancing
hydrometeorological end-to-
end EWSs and capacity to
enable countries to take early
action and reduce the risk of
climate, weather and water
related hazards such as
floods and flash floods,
cyclones, severe weather,
storm surges, extreme
temperatures, droughts
climate variability and change
and other
hydrometeorological
disaster. It will help countries
to reduce impact of weather,
climate and water related
hazards through advancing
EWSs, developing tools,
guidance and plans,
forecasting events and
impact, building capacity and
other actions to enable
people them to access early
warning of these events to
take early action. The
initiative has two major areas

=== PAGE 124 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121
H
of intervention: Multi-Hazard
EWSs and Advancing Flood
Risk Reduction.
3 WMO HydroHub Phase II SDC CHF 2400000 Jan 2021 –
Aug 2026
4 Intra-ACP Climate-Services EU EUR 85 million Jan 2920 – The project aims to improve
Programme (ClimSA) June 2024 the production, access to and
use of climate information,
services, and applications for
decision makers. The project
will foster sustainable
development through the
prevention of desertification,
preservation of ecological
biodiversity and the
sustainable use of water
management in ACP
countries.
Ecuador
1 ENANDES+ Swiss Agency for 6,359,676USD November To reduce human and socioeconomic Gaps:
Development and (CHF 5,800,000) 2022 - impact caused by National-Level Coordination:
Cooperation (SDC) October hydrometeorological hazards such as ENANDES+ focuses on
2026 floods, droughts, landslides and regional and local levels,
severe weather, through increased particularly in the upper
access to early warnings and risk Pastaza River basin. However,
information. there are gaps in national-
level coordination and
integration of climate
services across different
regions and sectors in
Ecuador.
Broader Hazard Coverage:
ENANDES+ is centered
around hydroclimatic
hazards, like frost, which are
critical but do not cover the
full range of hazards (floods,
landslides, droughts) faced by
Ecuador.
Comprehensive EWSs: While
ENANDES+ includes local
adaptation practices and
forecasts, there is a need for
more comprehensive EWSs
that include real-time data

--- Table 1 on Page 124 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
of intervention: Multi-Hazard
EWSs and Advancing Flood
Risk Reduction.
3 | WMO HydroHub Phase II | SDC | CHF 2400000 | Jan 2021 –
Aug 2026 |  | 
4 | Intra-ACP Climate-Services
Programme (ClimSA) | EU | EUR 85 million | Jan 2920 –
June 2024 |  | The project aims to improve
the production, access to and
use of climate information,
services, and applications for
decision makers. The project
will foster sustainable
development through the
prevention of desertification,
preservation of ecological
biodiversity and the
sustainable use of water
management in ACP
countries.
Ecuador |  |  |  |  |  | 
1 | ENANDES+ | Swiss Agency for
Development and
Cooperation (SDC) | 6,359,676USD
(CHF 5,800,000) | November
2022 -
October
2026 | To reduce human and socioeconomic
impact caused by
hydrometeorological hazards such as
floods, droughts, landslides and
severe weather, through increased
access to early warnings and risk
information. | Gaps:
National-Level Coordination:
ENANDES+ focuses on
regional and local levels,
particularly in the upper
Pastaza River basin. However,
there are gaps in national-
level coordination and
integration of climate
services across different
regions and sectors in
Ecuador.
Broader Hazard Coverage:
ENANDES+ is centered
around hydroclimatic
hazards, like frost, which are
critical but do not cover the
full range of hazards (floods,
landslides, droughts) faced by
Ecuador.
Comprehensive EWSs: While
ENANDES+ includes local
adaptation practices and
forecasts, there is a need for
more comprehensive EWSs
that include real-time data

=== PAGE 125 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122
H
management and user
interfaces for broader
community engagement.
Complementarity:
The proposed MHEWS
project will complement
ENANDES+ by establishing a
national-level coordination
platform that integrates
various climate services,
ensuring broader hazard
coverage beyond
hydroclimatic risks. It will also
enhance the forecasting and
real-time data management
capabilities initiated under
ENANDES+, thereby
improving the overall
resilience of Ecuador’s
communities and productive
sectors.
2 Euroclima+ Project European Union 144 million 2019-2022 Energy Component of Ecuador's NDC Gaps to be Addressed:
euros (Nationally Determined Contribution) Local Hazard and Risk
Regional Amazon Platform of Assessments: Euroclima+ has
Indigenous Peoples and Climate a broad regional focus on
Change of OTCA (Amazon Cooperation floods and droughts, but
Treaty Organization) there may be gaps in
Support for the institutional localized hazard and risk
restructuring process of the assessments, particularly for
Meteorology and Hy-drology Institute hazards that are specific to
of Ecuador (INAMHI) Ecuador.
Support for the implementation of a Communication and
platform and geovisor Inclusivity: The project has
worked on capacity building
and information sharing but
may not fully address the
communication needs of
remote and Indigenous
communities in Ecuador. This
includes the development of
multi-language alert systems
and inclusive communication
strategies that will be
developed by this project.
Complementarity:
The proposed project will

--- Table 1 on Page 125 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
management and user
interfaces for broader
community engagement.
Complementarity:
The proposed MHEWS
project will complement
ENANDES+ by establishing a
national-level coordination
platform that integrates
various climate services,
ensuring broader hazard
coverage beyond
hydroclimatic risks. It will also
enhance the forecasting and
real-time data management
capabilities initiated under
ENANDES+, thereby
improving the overall
resilience of Ecuador’s
communities and productive
sectors.
2 | Euroclima+ Project | European Union | 144 million
euros | 2019-2022 | Energy Component of Ecuador's NDC
(Nationally Determined Contribution)
Regional Amazon Platform of
Indigenous Peoples and Climate
Change of OTCA (Amazon Cooperation
Treaty Organization)
Support for the institutional
restructuring process of the
Meteorology and Hy-drology Institute
of Ecuador (INAMHI)
Support for the implementation of a
platform and geovisor | Gaps to be Addressed:
Local Hazard and Risk
Assessments: Euroclima+ has
a broad regional focus on
floods and droughts, but
there may be gaps in
localized hazard and risk
assessments, particularly for
hazards that are specific to
Ecuador.
Communication and
Inclusivity: The project has
worked on capacity building
and information sharing but
may not fully address the
communication needs of
remote and Indigenous
communities in Ecuador. This
includes the development of
multi-language alert systems
and inclusive communication
strategies that will be
developed by this project.
Complementarity:
The proposed project will

=== PAGE 126 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123
H
build on the achievements of
Euroclima+ by implementing
hazard and risk assessment
nationwide. It will also
enhance communication
strategies to ensure that
early warnings are inclusive
and accessible. Additionally,
the development of a
National Climate Finance
Framework will ensure the
sustainability of climate
services initiated under
Euroclima+.
3 Strengthening the Multi- IADB 15,300,000 USD 2020-2022 The general objective of the project is Gaps to be Addressed:
Hazard National EWS project reducing the number of people Integration of Climate
potentially af-fected by floods Services: While the project
(including river overflows), landslides, focuses on specific hazards
tsunamis and volcanic erup-tions in like floods, landslides,
Ecuador, through the universal tsunamis, and volcanic
provision of accurate early warning eruptions, there is a gap in
infor-mation and the implementation integrating broader climate
of activities to strengthen community services, such as financial
resilience capacity frameworks, and
comprehensive data
management strategies.
Governance and
Coordination: The project
primarily concentrates on
strengthening community
resilience and improving alert
communication but lacks a
broader governance
framework that coordinates
multiple stakeholders at the
national level, including
gender and development
initiatives.
Complementarity:
The proposed MHEWS
project will complement this
by establishing a National
Framework for Climate
Services (NFCS) and creating
a comprehensive climate
data management strategy.

--- Table 1 on Page 126 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
build on the achievements of
Euroclima+ by implementing
hazard and risk assessment
nationwide. It will also
enhance communication
strategies to ensure that
early warnings are inclusive
and accessible. Additionally,
the development of a
National Climate Finance
Framework will ensure the
sustainability of climate
services initiated under
Euroclima+.
3 | Strengthening the Multi-
Hazard National EWS project | IADB | 15,300,000 USD | 2020-2022 | The general objective of the project is
reducing the number of people
potentially af-fected by floods
(including river overflows), landslides,
tsunamis and volcanic erup-tions in
Ecuador, through the universal
provision of accurate early warning
infor-mation and the implementation
of activities to strengthen community
resilience capacity | Gaps to be Addressed:
Integration of Climate
Services: While the project
focuses on specific hazards
like floods, landslides,
tsunamis, and volcanic
eruptions, there is a gap in
integrating broader climate
services, such as financial
frameworks, and
comprehensive data
management strategies.
Governance and
Coordination: The project
primarily concentrates on
strengthening community
resilience and improving alert
communication but lacks a
broader governance
framework that coordinates
multiple stakeholders at the
national level, including
gender and development
initiatives.
Complementarity:
The proposed MHEWS
project will complement this
by establishing a National
Framework for Climate
Services (NFCS) and creating
a comprehensive climate
data management strategy.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124
H
These efforts will support the
existing project by providing
a more robust institutional
framework and enhancing
the sustainability of EWSs.
4 Multi-Hazard USAID USD 25 million Sept- 2021- Gaps to be addressed:
Hydrometeorological Early 2026 The implemented FFGS was
Warning & Capacity Building undertaken with input from
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood the NHMS in Ecuador.
Guidance System (FFGS) However, there is a lack of
Phase III use of the results, and the
capacities for using the
system are limited.
Complementarity:
The existing FFGS will be used
in the implementation of the
flood forecasting system
within the NHMS in Ecuador.
While the forecasting
platform will be
complemented with other
forecasting approaches, the
outputs from this will be
used.
Chad
1 SOFF Investment Phase SOFF USD 6,945,084 2024 It is expected that 33 GBON Surface SOFF will cover a large part of
Stations and 6 GBON upper air sites Pillar 2 activities, through co-
operating and transmitting stations financing.
will be functional by the end of the
project (2029). This is expected to lead
to a substantial increase in availability
and reliability of observational data
and improvement of the quality of
global NWP models outputs including
products and forecasts at national and
regional level.
2 CREWS Chad CREWS (World USD 3,150,000 2021-2026 Supports the development of the Covers Pillar 2, and pilot work
(Chad Hydrometeorological Bank/World capacities of the ANAM and the DRE on Pillar 3 which will inform
and Early Warning Services) Meteorological to respond to early warning needs. the lessons learned and
Organisation) Piloting community-based early project design. Institutional
warning and dissemination of agro- support to civil protection
meteorological bulletins to farmers services will support Pillar 4
activities.
Install additional hydrological stations
3 CREWS Central Africa CREWS (World USD 4,900,000 2022-2026 Seamless approach to forecasting and Collaboration between

--- Table 1 on Page 127 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
These efforts will support the
existing project by providing
a more robust institutional
framework and enhancing
the sustainability of EWSs.
4 | Multi-Hazard
Hydrometeorological Early
Warning & Capacity Building
(EWS-F) & Flash Flood
Guidance System (FFGS)
Phase III | USAID | USD 25 million | Sept- 2021-
2026 |  | Gaps to be addressed:
The implemented FFGS was
undertaken with input from
the NHMS in Ecuador.
However, there is a lack of
use of the results, and the
capacities for using the
system are limited.
Complementarity:
The existing FFGS will be used
in the implementation of the
flood forecasting system
within the NHMS in Ecuador.
While the forecasting
platform will be
complemented with other
forecasting approaches, the
outputs from this will be
used.
Chad |  |  |  |  |  | 
1 | SOFF Investment Phase | SOFF | USD 6,945,084 | 2024 | It is expected that 33 GBON Surface
Stations and 6 GBON upper air sites
operating and transmitting stations
will be functional by the end of the
project (2029). This is expected to lead
to a substantial increase in availability
and reliability of observational data
and improvement of the quality of
global NWP models outputs including
products and forecasts at national and
regional level. | SOFF will cover a large part of
Pillar 2 activities, through co-
financing.
2 | CREWS Chad
(Chad Hydrometeorological
and Early Warning Services) | CREWS (World
Bank/World
Meteorological
Organisation) | USD 3,150,000 | 2021-2026 | Supports the development of the
capacities of the ANAM and the DRE
to respond to early warning needs.
Piloting community-based early
warning and dissemination of agro-
meteorological bulletins to farmers
Install additional hydrological stations | Covers Pillar 2, and pilot work
on Pillar 3 which will inform
the lessons learned and
project design. Institutional
support to civil protection
services will support Pillar 4
activities.
3 | CREWS Central Africa | CREWS (World | USD 4,900,000 | 2022-2026 | Seamless approach to forecasting and | Collaboration between

=== PAGE 128 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125
H
Bank/World warning for meteorological, regional centres and NMHSs:
Meteorological hydrological and climate extremes forecasting, capacity building
Organisation) Support risk information and
Regional support to capacity building use of common alert
of hydrometeorological institutions, protocols
provision of services
4 West Africa regional Food World Bank USD 2023-2027 Improving the production and timely Provides approximately USD
Systems Resilience Program 105,000,000 delivery of climate, 8 million in support of
(FSRP-2) / PRSA – Chad (for Chad) hydrometeorological, agromet and weather services, including
component impact-based information for use by training of engineers and
policy makers, farmers, pastoralists technicians. Runs PROPAD
and other actors in the food system. hotline.
5 The Africa Integrated GCF USD 2021-29 Strengthening climate weather Execution by WFP and
Climate Risk Management 143,300,000 (7 information services. Use of forecast- ANAM, complementarity
Programme: Building the countries) based approach combining climate with SOFF and EW4ALL.
resilience of smallholder preparedness with risk transfer.
farmers to climate change
impacts in 7 Sahelian
Countries of the Great
Green Wall (GGW)
6 Flood Crisis Support Project AFD TBC Set up a municipal flood risk Pillar 3 activities will be
(Projet d'Appui aux Crises management service. Strengthen complementary to PACIN.
d'Inondations - PACIN) devolved state institutions to prevent Pillar 4 activities will be
and respond to fluvial and pluvial designed in a way that is
flooding. consistent with lessons from
The resilience of urban and peri-urban the project in building
communities is strengthened to cope capacity and strengthening
with rain and river flooding. institutions for preparedness
and crisis management at
subnational level.
7 Community-based UNDP-GEF USD 17,750,000 2021-2024 Covers seven of the provinces most The new intervention will
management of climate risks affected by flooding in Chad. Supports build both on the
in Chad (PGCRCT) 44 communities in the two Logones achievements and lessons of
areas to to embrace community-based this project. It introduce new
climate risk management processes approaches for warning
and support resilience to climate dissemination (pillar 3) to
change risks. communities which have
already benefited from
support. It will further
strengthen sub-national
authorities for preparedness
and response (pillar 4) and
will introduce IbF to meet the
expressed needs of
communities.

--- Table 1 on Page 128 ---
 |  | Bank/World
Meteorological
Organisation) |  |  | warning for meteorological,
hydrological and climate extremes
Regional support to capacity building
of hydrometeorological institutions,
provision of services | H
regional centres and NMHSs:
forecasting, capacity building
Support risk information and
use of common alert
protocols
4 | West Africa regional Food
Systems Resilience Program
(FSRP-2) / PRSA – Chad
component | World Bank | USD
105,000,000
(for Chad) | 2023-2027 | Improving the production and timely
delivery of climate,
hydrometeorological, agromet and
impact-based information for use by
policy makers, farmers, pastoralists
and other actors in the food system. | Provides approximately USD
8 million in support of
weather services, including
training of engineers and
technicians. Runs PROPAD
hotline.
5 | The Africa Integrated
Climate Risk Management
Programme: Building the
resilience of smallholder
farmers to climate change
impacts in 7 Sahelian
Countries of the Great
Green Wall (GGW) | GCF | USD
143,300,000 (7
countries) | 2021-29 | Strengthening climate weather
information services. Use of forecast-
based approach combining climate
preparedness with risk transfer. | Execution by WFP and
ANAM, complementarity
with SOFF and EW4ALL.
6 | Flood Crisis Support Project
(Projet d'Appui aux Crises
d'Inondations - PACIN) | AFD | TBC |  | Set up a municipal flood risk
management service. Strengthen
devolved state institutions to prevent
and respond to fluvial and pluvial
flooding.
The resilience of urban and peri-urban
communities is strengthened to cope
with rain and river flooding. | Pillar 3 activities will be
complementary to PACIN.
Pillar 4 activities will be
designed in a way that is
consistent with lessons from
the project in building
capacity and strengthening
institutions for preparedness
and crisis management at
subnational level.
7 | Community-based
management of climate risks
in Chad (PGCRCT) | UNDP-GEF | USD 17,750,000 | 2021-2024 | Covers seven of the provinces most
affected by flooding in Chad. Supports
44 communities in the two Logones
areas to to embrace community-based
climate risk management processes
and support resilience to climate
change risks. | The new intervention will
build both on the
achievements and lessons of
this project. It introduce new
approaches for warning
dissemination (pillar 3) to
communities which have
already benefited from
support. It will further
strengthen sub-national
authorities for preparedness
and response (pillar 4) and
will introduce IbF to meet the
expressed needs of
communities.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126
H
8 Integrated water resources Adaptation Fund USD 10,755,000 2024-2029 Improve hydrometeorological Sustainable funding
management and EWS for observation networks, information mechanism for
climate change resilience in systems, products and services. hydrometeorological
the Lake Chad Basin (project Training and awareness raising. monitoring; interoperable
under development) Response planning and medium term database and data sharing in
adaptation measures in pilot areas. place.
9 Anticipatory Action: CERF CERF pilot funding USD10,000,000 2022-24 New CERF windows expected. Integration and
complementarity between
the players involved in early
warning and anticipatory
action
10 Anticipatory Action: Red Red Cross Climate TBC TBC TBC TBC
Cross, anticipatory action Centre / DREF
protocol
11 Anticipatory Action: WFP : Austrian USD2,000,000 2024-28 Strengthening and maintaining Integration and
2m$ Government national forecasting and complementarity between
communication capacities; the players involved in early
Reducing the impact of foreseeable warning and anticipatory
climate hazards through anticipatory action
action.
Funds for response are additional.
12 Pilot Programmatic EU/ECHO TBC TBC Community based early warning, Lessons learned,
Partnership Project disaster management component and consolidation of community
training local authorities (CPA, CLA based early warning
and CDA). approaches.
13 Project to strengthen the IFAD USD 62,900,000 2018 - 2025 integration of climate information and Covers Lac, Hadjer Lamis and
productivity and resilience observation stations in support of Kanem Nord regions.
of family-run agro-pastoral agriculture. The weather stations will Complementarity with pillar 3
farms (RePER) also support the agricultural insurance activities and IbF.
program. ANAM must collect, analyze
and disseminate data for agricultural
risk management.
14 N’Djamena Urban Resilience World Bank USD 2023-29 Reduce flood risk and strengthen Strategic vision to
Project (PILIER) 150,000,000 climate resilient urban planning and institutionalise DRR,
selected flood-related services in preparedness and DRM
N’Djamena approaches and to build
Capacity building of national and sub-national
hydrometeorological services on capacity to reduce the impact
addressing flood issues faced by the of disasters.
capital N’Djamena.
Establishing an operational center for

--- Table 1 on Page 129 ---
8 | Integrated water resources
management and EWS for
climate change resilience in
the Lake Chad Basin (project
under development) | Adaptation Fund | USD 10,755,000 | 2024-2029 | Improve hydrometeorological
observation networks, information
systems, products and services.
Training and awareness raising.
Response planning and medium term
adaptation measures in pilot areas. | H
Sustainable funding
mechanism for
hydrometeorological
monitoring; interoperable
database and data sharing in
place.
9 | Anticipatory Action: CERF | CERF pilot funding | USD10,000,000 | 2022-24 | New CERF windows expected. | Integration and
complementarity between
the players involved in early
warning and anticipatory
action
10 | Anticipatory Action: Red
Cross, anticipatory action
protocol | Red Cross Climate
Centre / DREF | TBC | TBC | TBC | TBC
11 | Anticipatory Action: WFP :
2m$ | Austrian
Government | USD2,000,000 | 2024-28 | Strengthening and maintaining
national forecasting and
communication capacities;
Reducing the impact of foreseeable
climate hazards through anticipatory
action.
Funds for response are additional. | Integration and
complementarity between
the players involved in early
warning and anticipatory
action
12 | Pilot Programmatic
Partnership Project | EU/ECHO | TBC | TBC | Community based early warning,
disaster management component and
training local authorities (CPA, CLA
and CDA). | Lessons learned,
consolidation of community
based early warning
approaches.
13 | Project to strengthen the
productivity and resilience
of family-run agro-pastoral
farms (RePER) | IFAD | USD 62,900,000 | 2018 - 2025 | integration of climate information and
observation stations in support of
agriculture. The weather stations will
also support the agricultural insurance
program. ANAM must collect, analyze
and disseminate data for agricultural
risk management. | Covers Lac, Hadjer Lamis and
Kanem Nord regions.
Complementarity with pillar 3
activities and IbF.
14 | N’Djamena Urban Resilience
Project (PILIER) | World Bank | USD
150,000,000 | 2023-29 | Reduce flood risk and strengthen
climate resilient urban planning and
selected flood-related services in
N’Djamena
Capacity building of
hydrometeorological services on
addressing flood issues faced by the
capital N’Djamena.
Establishing an operational center for | Strategic vision to
institutionalise DRR,
preparedness and DRM
approaches and to build
national and sub-national
capacity to reduce the impact
of disasters.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 127
H
disaster management in N’Djamena.
Antigua and Barbuda
1 Systematic Observations Systematic USD 182,970 2023-2024 Under this project, UK Met Office, The EW4ALL project will
Financing Facility (SOFF) Observations provided SOFF peer advisory services make use of the improved
Readiness Funding Request Financing Facility to Antigua and Barbuda to develop hydrometeorological systems
(SOFF) the outputs of the SOFF Readiness while linking these to EWS,
Phase. Outputs included: operational procedures and
National GBON Gap Analysis anticipatory actions.
GBON National Contribution Plan
CHD
2 GBON National Contribution Systematic USD 2.5million 2024 N/A – still in inception phase. The EW4ALL project aims to
Plan of Antigua & Barbuda Observations address some of the
Financing Facility recommendations not
(SOFF) targeted for investment
during this SOFF investment
phase. In particular, EW4ALL
will strengthen marine
monitoring capacity through
the installation/upgrades to
existing marine observation
infrastructure. EW4ALL will
also provide updates to the
hydrological data
management system since
SOFF is planning updates for
the CDMS but not the HDMS.
In addition to strengthening
these Pillar 2 processes,
EW4ALL will target
interventions across the
other pillars to strengthen
policies, institutions and
processes throughout the
MHEWS value chain.
3 Resilience to hurricanes in GCF USD46.2 milliion 2021-2027 Under Output 2, climate services will The ongoing GCF project
the building sector in be strengthened to facilitate early focusing on strengthening the
Antigua and Barbuda action during extreme weather events resilience of the country’s
through two activities: establish a built environment to the
centralised online server within the impact of hurricanes. This
ABMS to enhance real-time processing includes actions to
of climate data; and establish a strengthen climate
formalised communication protocol to information systems and
facilitate rapid information sharing post-disaster responses, with
and early action preceding an extreme a focus on coordination and

--- Table 1 on Page 130 ---
 |  |  |  |  | disaster management in N’Djamena. | 
H
Antigua and Barbuda |  |  |  |  |  | 
1 | Systematic Observations
Financing Facility (SOFF)
Readiness Funding Request | Systematic
Observations
Financing Facility
(SOFF) | USD 182,970 | 2023-2024 | Under this project, UK Met Office,
provided SOFF peer advisory services
to Antigua and Barbuda to develop
the outputs of the SOFF Readiness
Phase. Outputs included:
National GBON Gap Analysis
GBON National Contribution Plan
CHD | The EW4ALL project will
make use of the improved
hydrometeorological systems
while linking these to EWS,
operational procedures and
anticipatory actions.
2 | GBON National Contribution
Plan of Antigua & Barbuda | Systematic
Observations
Financing Facility
(SOFF) | USD 2.5million | 2024 | N/A – still in inception phase. | The EW4ALL project aims to
address some of the
recommendations not
targeted for investment
during this SOFF investment
phase. In particular, EW4ALL
will strengthen marine
monitoring capacity through
the installation/upgrades to
existing marine observation
infrastructure. EW4ALL will
also provide updates to the
hydrological data
management system since
SOFF is planning updates for
the CDMS but not the HDMS.
In addition to strengthening
these Pillar 2 processes,
EW4ALL will target
interventions across the
other pillars to strengthen
policies, institutions and
processes throughout the
MHEWS value chain.
3 | Resilience to hurricanes in
the building sector in
Antigua and Barbuda | GCF | USD46.2 milliion | 2021-2027 | Under Output 2, climate services will
be strengthened to facilitate early
action during extreme weather events
through two activities: establish a
centralised online server within the
ABMS to enhance real-time processing
of climate data; and establish a
formalised communication protocol to
facilitate rapid information sharing
and early action preceding an extreme | The ongoing GCF project
focusing on strengthening the
resilience of the country’s
built environment to the
impact of hurricanes. This
includes actions to
strengthen climate
information systems and
post-disaster responses, with
a focus on coordination and

=== PAGE 131 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 128
H
weather event. preparedness. The proposed
project will complement and
build on the GCF Build
projects efforts in
strengthening EWS in Antigua
and Barbuda. Coordination
activities under this project
will draw on the assessments
and tools developed under
component 3 of GCF Build.
Moreover, the proposed
project will use the guidelines
being prepared for CEWS to
scale up the approach,
drawing lessons from the
planned pilot that will be
conducted in one district.
4 CREWS Caribbean 1.0 World Bank (Lead) USD 6.5 million 2018–2023 Outcomes were achieved largely at The proposed EW4ALL
Strengthening Hydro- WMO the regional level through the project aims to implement
Meteorological and Multi- UNDRR development of a regional roadmap to several of the outputs as
Hazard Early Warning strengthen and streamline early recommended in the
Services in the Caribbean warning and hydrometeorological Situational Analysis Priority
services, beginning with a Situation Areas for Action in Antigua
Analysis to identify foundational and Barbuda. The project will
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities also draw on the cost-benefit
and emerging threats. data generated by CREWS to
Institutional strengthening and strengthen advocacy support
operational capacity building of in the country.
regional partners —CDEMA, CIMH,
and CMO HQ. The model was adapted
and endorsed by eight countries,
including Antigua and Barbuda.
Further, ten NSPs including
frameworks for weather, water and
climate services (FWWCS) and
detailed action plans for a period of
five years have been developed and
accepted in multiple countries,
including Antigua and Barbuda.
Additionally, model SOPs between
NMHS and NDRMOs were developed
and are ready to be adapted on a
national level. In May 2023, the
national adaptation of these model
SOPs were discussed with four pilot
states, including Antigua and Barbuda.

--- Table 1 on Page 131 ---
 |  |  |  |  | weather event. | H
preparedness. The proposed
project will complement and
build on the GCF Build
projects efforts in
strengthening EWS in Antigua
and Barbuda. Coordination
activities under this project
will draw on the assessments
and tools developed under
component 3 of GCF Build.
Moreover, the proposed
project will use the guidelines
being prepared for CEWS to
scale up the approach,
drawing lessons from the
planned pilot that will be
conducted in one district.
4 | CREWS Caribbean 1.0
Strengthening Hydro-
Meteorological and Multi-
Hazard Early Warning
Services in the Caribbean | World Bank (Lead)
WMO
UNDRR | USD 6.5 million | 2018–2023 | Outcomes were achieved largely at
the regional level through the
development of a regional roadmap to
strengthen and streamline early
warning and hydrometeorological
services, beginning with a Situation
Analysis to identify foundational
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities
and emerging threats.
Institutional strengthening and
operational capacity building of
regional partners —CDEMA, CIMH,
and CMO HQ. The model was adapted
and endorsed by eight countries,
including Antigua and Barbuda.
Further, ten NSPs including
frameworks for weather, water and
climate services (FWWCS) and
detailed action plans for a period of
five years have been developed and
accepted in multiple countries,
including Antigua and Barbuda.
Additionally, model SOPs between
NMHS and NDRMOs were developed
and are ready to be adapted on a
national level. In May 2023, the
national adaptation of these model
SOPs were discussed with four pilot
states, including Antigua and Barbuda. | The proposed EW4ALL
project aims to implement
several of the outputs as
recommended in the
Situational Analysis Priority
Areas for Action in Antigua
and Barbuda. The project will
also draw on the cost-benefit
data generated by CREWS to
strengthen advocacy support
in the country.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 129
H
Assessment of radar capacity in the
region resulted in the development of
an action plan for strengthening the
regional network to ensure its
sustainable operation.
Four pilot priority activities on end-to-
end EWS including IbF tested at the
regional and national levels.
5 CREWS Caribbean 2.0 CREWS USD 7 million 2024-2027 Project just initiated – no key Effective Multi-Hazard EWSs
Strengthening Multi-Hazard Implemented by achievements yet. (MHEWS) in the Caribbean
EWSs in the Caribbean WMO, UNDRR region are possible only
Region through the strong leadership
of strengthened National
Meteorological and
Hydrological Services
(NMHSs) and National DRM
Offices (NDRMOs) which
integrate co-design and
delivery approaches in their
services. This will enable
improved disaster risk
knowledge, better
monitoring and forecasting,
stronger warning and
dissemination capabilities,
and enhanced response
capabilities of individuals,
communities, business and
institutions and
organizations, with a special
focus on reaching and
involving the last mile and
the most vulnerable groups.
The main objective of the
project is to strengthen the
operational capacities of
NDRMOs and NMHSs, in the
four+one pillars of MHEWS,
through regional cooperation
and improved governance
mechanisms that are
conducive for users to
participate and be engaged in
the design and delivery of
early warnings. The project
will closely collaborate with
the CREWS initiative, drawing

--- Table 1 on Page 132 ---
 |  |  |  |  | Assessment of radar capacity in the
region resulted in the development of
an action plan for strengthening the
regional network to ensure its
sustainable operation.
Four pilot priority activities on end-to-
end EWS including IbF tested at the
regional and national levels. | H
5 | CREWS Caribbean 2.0
Strengthening Multi-Hazard
EWSs in the Caribbean
Region | CREWS
Implemented by
WMO, UNDRR | USD 7 million | 2024-2027 | Project just initiated – no key
achievements yet. | Effective Multi-Hazard EWSs
(MHEWS) in the Caribbean
region are possible only
through the strong leadership
of strengthened National
Meteorological and
Hydrological Services
(NMHSs) and National DRM
Offices (NDRMOs) which
integrate co-design and
delivery approaches in their
services. This will enable
improved disaster risk
knowledge, better
monitoring and forecasting,
stronger warning and
dissemination capabilities,
and enhanced response
capabilities of individuals,
communities, business and
institutions and
organizations, with a special
focus on reaching and
involving the last mile and
the most vulnerable groups.
The main objective of the
project is to strengthen the
operational capacities of
NDRMOs and NMHSs, in the
four+one pillars of MHEWS,
through regional cooperation
and improved governance
mechanisms that are
conducive for users to
participate and be engaged in
the design and delivery of
early warnings. The project
will closely collaborate with
the CREWS initiative, drawing

=== PAGE 133 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 130
H
on the work being conducted
regionally to strengthen
MHEWS approaches in
Antigua and Barbuda. This
will include sharing of
disaster risk knowledge, and
ensuring alignment and
complementarity of capacity
development support.
6 National Adaptation GCF USD 3,000,000 2017-2020 The NAP provided valuable The project will draw on the
Planning in Antigua and assessments of climate risk and outputs of the NAP to ensure
Barbuda (NAP) prioritisation of key hazards. that EWS meet the needs of
vulnerable communities.
7 EWSs for Floods in Central USAID USD 25 million Sept- 2021- The EW4All project will
America and the Caribbean 2026 collaborate with WMO and
(EWS-F CA&C) focusing on USAID in the development of
four priority countries, flood EWS, ensuring
namely Antigua and alignment of efforts to
Barbuda, Barbados, maximise the coverage and
Guatemala, and Haiti. Phase bridge gaps in the
III observation and modelling
network.
Ethiopia
GBON SOFF USD 9.9 million 2023 to X? GBON Gap Analysis; GBON National tbc
Contribution Plan Report CHD Report
Integrated DRM Project WB_ USD 300 million tbc
(IDRMP) Floods IDA
Management Project (FMP)
Enhancing resilience and
DRM including early
warnings for flood risks.
develop and operationalize
impact-based flood EWSs
targeting 34 million people
living in poor communities
in the Awash Basin, the Omo
Basin, and the Rift Valley
Lakes Basin. The project will
support efforts for forecast
based financing, to allow the
rapid deployment of
resources in advance of an
impending disaster.
Water at the Heart of Dutch Ministry of USD 6.8 million 2023-2027 tbc

--- Table 1 on Page 133 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
on the work being conducted
regionally to strengthen
MHEWS approaches in
Antigua and Barbuda. This
will include sharing of
disaster risk knowledge, and
ensuring alignment and
complementarity of capacity
development support.
6 | National Adaptation
Planning in Antigua and
Barbuda (NAP) | GCF | USD 3,000,000 | 2017-2020 | The NAP provided valuable
assessments of climate risk and
prioritisation of key hazards. | The project will draw on the
outputs of the NAP to ensure
that EWS meet the needs of
vulnerable communities.
7 | EWSs for Floods in Central
America and the Caribbean
(EWS-F CA&C) focusing on
four priority countries,
namely Antigua and
Barbuda, Barbados,
Guatemala, and Haiti. Phase
III | USAID | USD 25 million | Sept- 2021-
2026 |  | The EW4All project will
collaborate with WMO and
USAID in the development of
flood EWS, ensuring
alignment of efforts to
maximise the coverage and
bridge gaps in the
observation and modelling
network.
Ethiopia |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | GBON | SOFF | USD 9.9 million | 2023 to X? | GBON Gap Analysis; GBON National
Contribution Plan Report CHD Report | tbc
 | Integrated DRM Project
(IDRMP) Floods
Management Project (FMP)
Enhancing resilience and
DRM including early
warnings for flood risks.
develop and operationalize
impact-based flood EWSs
targeting 34 million people
living in poor communities
in the Awash Basin, the Omo
Basin, and the Rift Valley
Lakes Basin. The project will
support efforts for forecast
based financing, to allow the
rapid deployment of
resources in advance of an
impending disaster. | WB_
IDA | USD 300 million |  |  | tbc
 | Water at the Heart of | Dutch Ministry of | USD 6.8 million | 2023-2027 |  | tbc

=== PAGE 134 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 131
H
Climate Action (W@H) Foreign Affairs with in Ethiopia,
programme a total budget of South Sudan,
Integrated Water Uganda
Management
Improving climate and water Swedish 2023-2025 tbc
information services (project Meteorological and
name?) Hydrological
Improving early warning Institute (SMHI)
information and action
chain, linking observations,
forecasts, warnings, disaster
communication and action
Building Resilience in Oxford Policy Tbc
Ethiopia (BRE) Management.
Developing an effective,
people-centred, integrated,
coordinated, accountable,
and decentralized DRM
system.
CREWS WB USD 745,000 2022- 2026 Tbc
Strengthening Impact Based
hydro-meteorological EWSs
at community levels
ACACIA Tbc
ACREI (ended 2020?) Tbc
Somalia
Systematic Observations SOFF USD 150,000 2024- TBC
Financing Facility - Somalia
CREWS Greater Horn of Climate Risk and USD 5,240,998 2022-2026 • Enhancing capacity to CREWS in Somalia will
Africa: Strengthening early EWSs produce, disseminate and improve the capacity
warning and early action (CREWS) initiative - communicate information development for staff in
systems for meteorological, United Nations services through National priority technical areas
hydrological, and climate Office for DRR Climate Outlook Forums (observation, data
extreme (UNDRR), World (NCOFs) management and analysis,
Meteorological • Developing Climate Services meteorological and
Organization Toolkits (CSTs) tailored to hydrological forecasting),
(WMO), and the the operational needs of strengthen the development
World Bank NMHSs and delivery of services to
the priority farming and
• Enhancing regional and
pastoralist communities and
national capacities of WIGOS
support technical design of
and WIS (observations and
minimum basic observing,
data exchange)
data management,

--- Table 1 on Page 134 ---
 | Climate Action (W@H)
programme
Integrated Water
Management | Foreign Affairs with
a total budget of | in Ethiopia,
South Sudan,
Uganda |  |  | H
 | Improving climate and water
information services (project
name?)
Improving early warning
information and action
chain, linking observations,
forecasts, warnings, disaster
communication and action | Swedish
Meteorological and
Hydrological
Institute (SMHI) |  | 2023-2025 |  | tbc
 | Building Resilience in
Ethiopia (BRE)
Developing an effective,
people-centred, integrated,
coordinated, accountable,
and decentralized DRM
system. | Oxford Policy
Management. |  |  |  | Tbc
 | CREWS
Strengthening Impact Based
hydro-meteorological EWSs
at community levels | WB | USD 745,000 | 2022- 2026 |  | Tbc
 | ACACIA |  |  |  |  | Tbc
 | ACREI (ended 2020?) |  |  |  |  | Tbc
Somalia |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Systematic Observations
Financing Facility - Somalia | SOFF | USD 150,000 | 2024- |  | TBC
 | CREWS Greater Horn of
Africa: Strengthening early
warning and early action
systems for meteorological,
hydrological, and climate
extreme | Climate Risk and
EWSs
(CREWS) initiative -
United Nations
Office for DRR
(UNDRR), World
Meteorological
Organization
(WMO), and the
World Bank | USD 5,240,998 | 2022-2026 | • Enhancing capacity to
produce, disseminate and
communicate information
services through National
Climate Outlook Forums
(NCOFs)
• Developing Climate Services
Toolkits (CSTs) tailored to
the operational needs of
NMHSs
• Enhancing regional and
national capacities of WIGOS
and WIS (observations and
data exchange) | CREWS in Somalia will
improve the capacity
development for staff in
priority technical areas
(observation, data
management and analysis,
meteorological and
hydrological forecasting),
strengthen the development
and delivery of services to
the priority farming and
pastoralist communities and
support technical design of
minimum basic observing,
data management,

=== PAGE 135 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 132
H
forecasting and service
delivery systems.
Denmark's support to Early DANIDA DKK 40 million 2023-2026 Still in early stage – aims to Production, analysis,
interpretation and use of
Warning for All (EW4All)
• Improving the observational and climate and risk information
through WMO forecasting capacity of NMHSs to to strengthen MHEWS;
generate, customize and proposes the installation of 16
disseminate weather and early stations for GBON
warning services compliance and 3 upper air
• Common Alert Protocol (CAP) station;
implementation and training, and National EW4All Roadmap in
introduction to IBF Place (four pillars and
enabling environment meet
• Improving the quality and
minimum requirements of the
availability of observational data maturity index)
regionally and internationally
• Support Data Rescue at NMHSs
• Provision of ICT equipment such
as workstations and laptops etc.
for operational forecasting
• Education and training of staff
from each NMHS for better
operational and service delivery
capacity
EW4All Sweden Swedish 2024 • DRM Plans at the FMS level Expanding and strengthen
International • DRR plans target disaster- early warning and early
Development vulnerable districts response processes to enhance
Cooperation community and state actors’
• Gender Mainstreaming in
Agency (SIDA) ability to protect citizens.
the DRR efforts at the FMs
Coordinates different
level
ministries and
• The establishment of
hydrometeorological actors,
community-based EWSs and
including WMO, FAO,
a network of disaster
UNDP, UNICEF, the World
volunteers aimed at
Bank and ICPAC for mapping
enhancing the community's
capacity to prevent disasters the situational context
and respond effectively to regarding the current status of
emergencies infrastructure and services
related to
hydrometeorological and
seeks to develop a plan to
proceed to support capacity
building and improve service

--- Table 1 on Page 135 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
forecasting and service
delivery systems.
 | Denmark's support to Early
Warning for All (EW4All)
through WMO | DANIDA | DKK 40 million | 2023-2026 | Still in early stage – aims to
• Improving the observational and
forecasting capacity of NMHSs to
generate, customize and
disseminate weather and early
warning services
• Common Alert Protocol (CAP)
implementation and training, and
introduction to IBF
• Improving the quality and
availability of observational data
regionally and internationally
• Support Data Rescue at NMHSs
• Provision of ICT equipment such
as workstations and laptops etc.
for operational forecasting
• Education and training of staff
from each NMHS for better
operational and service delivery
capacity | Production, analysis,
interpretation and use of
climate and risk information
to strengthen MHEWS;
proposes the installation of 16
stations for GBON
compliance and 3 upper air
station;
National EW4All Roadmap in
Place (four pillars and
enabling environment meet
minimum requirements of the
maturity index)
 | EW4All Sweden | Swedish
International
Development
Cooperation
Agency (SIDA) |  | 2024 | • DRM Plans at the FMS level
• DRR plans target disaster-
vulnerable districts
• Gender Mainstreaming in
the DRR efforts at the FMs
level
• The establishment of
community-based EWSs and
a network of disaster
volunteers aimed at
enhancing the community's
capacity to prevent disasters
and respond effectively to
emergencies | Expanding and strengthen
early warning and early
response processes to enhance
community and state actors’
ability to protect citizens.
Coordinates different
ministries and
hydrometeorological actors,
including WMO, FAO,
UNDP, UNICEF, the World
Bank and ICPAC for mapping
the situational context
regarding the current status of
infrastructure and services
related to
hydrometeorological and
seeks to develop a plan to
proceed to support capacity
building and improve service

=== PAGE 136 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 133
H
delivery in Somalia
Organize and host a workshop
to review and endorse the
national roadmap to achieve
EW4All objectives by 2027
Technical assessment of
NMHS to enhance technical
know-how in critical matters
related to pillar 2 of the
national roadmap
Development of National
Strategic Plan (for NMHSs)
FAO SWALIM EU Phase 6 – SWALIM has continued to maintain
completed the hydro meteorological network of
(2018-2022) over 130 stations in collaboration with
USD 19 million MoAI and MoEWR.
SWALIM Continues monitoring and
issuing Drought and Flood early
warning information
Mapping of open and weak river
embankment breakages bi-annually.
The breakages are mapped using very
high-resolution images with minimum
field verification
Capacity development initiatives
targeting the government partners as
part of the SWALIM transition
SWIMS Platform
Information dissemination
UNDP – Training and GEF-LDCF. USD 8 million Completed Over 700 officials and experts trained
Community Based Services/ in Early Warning services nationwide.
Enhancing Climate 42% of trainees are women
Resilience of the Vulnerable
• EWSs established at Federal
Communities and
and Member State levels,
Ecosystems in Somalia
including Somaliland.
• Comprehensive assessment
of Somalia’s EWSs

--- Table 1 on Page 136 ---
 |  |  |  |  |  | H
delivery in Somalia
Organize and host a workshop
to review and endorse the
national roadmap to achieve
EW4All objectives by 2027
Technical assessment of
NMHS to enhance technical
know-how in critical matters
related to pillar 2 of the
national roadmap
Development of National
Strategic Plan (for NMHSs)
 | FAO SWALIM | EU | Phase 6 –
completed
(2018-2022)
USD 19 million |  | SWALIM has continued to maintain
the hydro meteorological network of
over 130 stations in collaboration with
MoAI and MoEWR.
SWALIM Continues monitoring and
issuing Drought and Flood early
warning information
Mapping of open and weak river
embankment breakages bi-annually.
The breakages are mapped using very
high-resolution images with minimum
field verification
Capacity development initiatives
targeting the government partners as
part of the SWALIM transition
SWIMS Platform
Information dissemination | 
 | UNDP – Training and
Community Based Services/
Enhancing Climate
Resilience of the Vulnerable
Communities and
Ecosystems in Somalia | GEF-LDCF. | USD 8 million | Completed | Over 700 officials and experts trained
in Early Warning services nationwide.
42% of trainees are women
• EWSs established at Federal
and Member State levels,
including Somaliland.
• Comprehensive assessment
of Somalia’s EWSs | 

=== PAGE 137 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 134
H
conducted by the Ministry of
Energy and Water
Resources.
Somalia Crisis Recovery World Bank USD 187.5 2020-2025 Immediate basic services and Support the recovery of
Project (SCRP) million livelihood support to the flood- livelihoods and infrastructure
affected states and locust-affected in flood and drought affected
areas nationally through: (a) areas and strengthen capacity
establishing a cash-for-work scheme for disaster preparedness
for vulnerable households; (b) nationwide
controlling the desert locus population and includes physical
through ground and aerial spraying investments in flood risk
operations; (c) restoring and management, and;
protecting farmers’ capacity for supporting
agricultural production; (d) revitalizing
hydrometeorological and
basic health provisions strengthening
EWSs for the generation and
response services; and (e) supporting
dissemination of
household hygiene promotion and
hydrometeorological data
treatment. Medium-term flood
flood
recovery to rehabilitate critical public
hazard mapping and the
and community infrastructure. The
establishment of a National
component will rehabilitate water and
Emergency Operations
sanitation systems, health facilities,
Center.
bridges, and small feeder roads. It will
also support local mitigation efforts
for risk reduction, such as slope
protection and environmental
rehabilitation. Longer-term disaster
risk preparedness will strengthen the
institutional capacity and
preparedness of governmental
ministries agencies and departments
to respond to flood and drought-
related emergencies. Project
Management will strengthen the
institutional capacity PIU (Project
Implementation Unit) and State
Project Teams for the implementation
of the Project. Contingency
Emergency Response Component
(CERC) will serve as a first-line
financing option for an emergency
response.
Gender, Climate, and UN Women, EU USD 3 million Government Gender, Climate and Conflict Analysis Integrating gender-sensitive
Conflict Analysis of Japan approaches
in Somalia and Assessment of

--- Table 1 on Page 137 ---
 |  |  |  |  | conducted by the Ministry of
Energy and Water
Resources. | H
 | Somalia Crisis Recovery
Project (SCRP) | World Bank | USD 187.5
million | 2020-2025 | Immediate basic services and
livelihood support to the flood-
affected states and locust-affected
areas nationally through: (a)
establishing a cash-for-work scheme
for vulnerable households; (b)
controlling the desert locus population
through ground and aerial spraying
operations; (c) restoring and
protecting farmers’ capacity for
agricultural production; (d) revitalizing
basic health provisions strengthening
response services; and (e) supporting
household hygiene promotion and
treatment. Medium-term flood
recovery to rehabilitate critical public
and community infrastructure. The
component will rehabilitate water and
sanitation systems, health facilities,
bridges, and small feeder roads. It will
also support local mitigation efforts
for risk reduction, such as slope
protection and environmental
rehabilitation. Longer-term disaster
risk preparedness will strengthen the
institutional capacity and
preparedness of governmental
ministries agencies and departments
to respond to flood and drought-
related emergencies. Project
Management will strengthen the
institutional capacity PIU (Project
Implementation Unit) and State
Project Teams for the implementation
of the Project. Contingency
Emergency Response Component
(CERC) will serve as a first-line
financing option for an emergency
response. | Support the recovery of
livelihoods and infrastructure
in flood and drought affected
areas and strengthen capacity
for disaster preparedness
nationwide
and includes physical
investments in flood risk
management, and;
supporting
hydrometeorological and
EWSs for the generation and
dissemination of
hydrometeorological data
flood
hazard mapping and the
establishment of a National
Emergency Operations
Center.
 | Gender, Climate, and
Conflict Analysis | UN Women, EU | USD 3 million | Government
of Japan | Gender, Climate and Conflict Analysis
in Somalia and Assessment of | Integrating gender-sensitive
approaches

=== PAGE 138 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 135
H
Opportunities for Climate Smart
Agriculture and Livelihood
Opportunities for Crisis-affected and
At-risk Women in Somalia
National Adaptation Plans UNDP USD 2,957,213 GCF Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan Analysis of climate change
(NAP) Framework (NAP Framework) risks and vulnerabilities, a
(2022) synthesis of state-level plans
and priority adaptation
options.

--- Table 1 on Page 138 ---
 |  |  |  |  | Opportunities for Climate Smart
Agriculture and Livelihood
Opportunities for Crisis-affected and
At-risk Women in Somalia | H
 | National Adaptation Plans | UNDP | USD 2,957,213 | GCF | Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan
(NAP) Framework (NAP Framework)
(2022) | Analysis of climate change
risks and vulnerabilities, a
synthesis of state-level plans
and priority adaptation
options.

--- Table 2 on Page 138 ---
Opportunities for Climate Smart
Agriculture and Livelihood
Opportunities for Crisis-affected and
At-risk Women in Somalia

=== PAGE 139 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 136
H
Appendix 3: Eligibility criteria for project Outputs and Activities
The proposals should meet the requirements of the EW4All initiative (Sendai framework Target G). They should have a strong rationale describing the circumstances that
justify using this programmatic approach. The proposals should also be closely aligned with national strategies and policies based on the national climate investment
priorities.
The proposals should be designed to satisfy the following criteria:
1. They should have a clearly defined governance structure for decision-making and ensuring country ownership. This structure should be compatible with the global
project structure and organization to ensure smooth coordination and collaboration at the global level and with other participating countries throughout the
duration of the programme.
2. The outputs of the proposal must be closely aligned with the activities listed under Output 2 of the global funding proposal. This will directly influence the design
of the log-frame of the proposal which must be compatible with the logical framework of the global funding proposal.
3. The proposal design process must include comprehensive engagement with government agencies and national, regional as well as global focal points of the four
EW4All pillar leads. All these partners must be facilitated to contribute to proposal design and given an opportunity to weigh in on the proposed activities. This
consultative process must ensure the respective governments retain full ownership of the design process.
4. The support of multilateral agencies and non-governmental agencies should be ensured for countries with challenges emanating from fragility and conflict.
Proposals designed for FCAS states should demonstrate appropriate governance arrangements and mechanisms to implement proposed activities.
5. The proposal should meet the reporting requirements for both physical and financial reporting.
6. The proposal needs to be fully compatible with the monitoring, evaluation and learning system and knowledge management framework provided in the global
funding project.
7. The projects should demonstrate sustained impact of investments on a continued basis and should specifically provide for the development of an Operations and
Maintenance plan in the initial period of implementation.
8. The proposal should adhere to the legal arrangements and frameworks of the global project and all contractual structures should assure continued operations of
the sub-project.
9. The proposal should demonstrate ownership of the respective country government to take onboard and absorb the investments proposed. It should also
demonstrate financial and economic sustainability and cost efficiency.
10. The proposal should be compliant with environmental and social safeguards and ensure environmental and social risks are within the GCF risk category “C” or low
risk.

=== PAGE 140 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 137
H
11. The proposal must be designed in accordance with the GCF template for funding proposals including all relevant annexes.
The criteria for eligibility of country proposals are based on the following principles. These are closely aligned with the GCF investment criteria.
1. Impact potential: Following criteria will be used to determine the project’s impact potential
a. The project must clearly set out the specific risks and vulnerabilities, under current and future conditions of climate change, that the project aims to address,
articulating a clear causal narrative between specific activities and their objective of reducing vulnerability or climate risk. Projects that include arguments that are
well evidenced and quantified using reliable data sources and information will be prioritized.
b. The project must clearly describe the adaptation benefit that is expected to be generated by the implementation of the project activities.
c. The project must align to GCF adaptation result areas.
2. Paradigm shift potential: The proposal should demonstrate its potential to catalyze impact beyond a one-off project investment by:
a. Clearly describing how the project outcome will be sustainable in the long run through securing additional public and/or private financing and building the capacity
of national institutions to implement similar activities without GCF funding.
b. Demonstrating the potential of being replicated elsewhere in the same country or other countries in region.
c. Promoting innovation such as, through the development and/or adoption of new technology or approaches which can contribute to more accurate forecasts,
improve dissemination of and access to early warning information or allow communities to set up autonomous early warning and alarm systems.
d. Promoting sharing of knowledge and learning within and with other countries and contribute to the global project knowledge sharing.
3. Sustainable development potential: The proposals should demonstrate sustainable development potential by identifying at least one positive co-benefit from the
following with associated indicators.
a. Economic co-benefits –explicitly aim at poverty reduction.
b. Social co-benefits – human health and social development through improved food and nutrition security and reduced loss of life resulting from the impact of
extreme weather events.
c. Environmental co-benefits –improved ecosystem services and biodiversity.
4. Gender: The project must meet the gender criterion independently of the environmental, social and economic co-benefits. The project must fall under the UN
Gender Equality Marker 2 or 3 .

=== PAGE 141 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 138
H
5. Needs of the Recipient: The proposal must meet the need of the recipient by :
a. Overcoming barriers related to technical, institutional and/or financial barriers to meeting the objectives of the four pillars of Multi Hazard Early Warning Systems
as described in the Early Warnings for All Executive Action Plan.
6. The project must strengthen the capacity of National Meteorological and Hydrological Services and National Disaster Management Agencies institutions to deliver
effective MHEWS, enhance coordination and improve governance.
7. Country Ownership: The project must demonstrate alignment with national priorities climate priorities as reflected in nationally determined contributions (NDCs),
national adaptation plans (NAPs) and/or national disaster risk reduction plans. It must also demonstrate stakeholder engagement in developing the project,
including consultation with relevant stakeholders among government and civil society organizations and with climate vulnerable communities across all relevant
climate related hazards. Finally, the project must demonstrate engagement with national designated authorities (NDAs) in developing the project.
8. Efficiency and Effectiveness: To demonstrate efficiency and effectiveness the project should demonstrate that grants from GCF are being used to offset the
incremental cost of climate resilient investments, provide targeted climate resilient technical assistance, or for non-revenue generating outputs and non-market
elements. By blending grants from GCF with additional grants and/or loans in order to augment the volume of financing available for strengthening MHEWS,
disaster response and adaptation and better tailor concessionally to achieve transformative investments which would otherwise not proceed.
In addition to these criteria, the project must have a framework to manage environmental and social risks and impacts of the activities through the design of and
implementation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF must adhere to compliance benchmarks UNDP as its AE, as per the terms set
forth in the AMA.

=== PAGE 142 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 146 ===
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”)
Addis Ababa, November 28, 2024
Re: : Funding Proposal for the GCF by the United Nations Development Programme regarding the
Early Warnings for All (EW4ALL) Project
We refer to the Project titled Early Warning for all (EW4ALL) as included in the funding proposal
submitted by the United Nations Development Programme to us on 01 November 2024.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Planning and Development,
Abas Mohammed Ali, the National Designated Authority/focal point of Ethiopia.
Pursuant to GCF decisions B.08/10 and B.13/21, the content of which we acknowledge to have
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the Project as included in the funding
Proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Ethiopia has no-objection to the Project Preparation Facility request as
included in the PPF Proposal.
(b) The PPF Proposal is in conformity with Ethiopia’s national priorities, strategies and plans;
and
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the PPF activities as
included in the PPF Proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the PPF Proposal has
been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Kind regards,
_____________________________
Abas Mohammed Ali, CEO Climate change Policy and Actions
NDA for GCF projects in Ethiopia
UNFCCC National focal point
Ministry of Planning and Development
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Cell: +251 91 154 45 26
P. O. Box 4472 (Office)

=== PAGE 147 ===
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Levels 1 & 2, Bali Tower, 318 Toorak Road
P. O. Box 2109
Government Buildings, Suva, Fiji
TELEPHONE NO: (679) 8921476 Email: info6@govnet.gov.fj
28 November 2024
By E-mail: countries@gcfund.org
Mafalda Duarte
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175 Art Center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840
South Korea
Dear Sir/Madam
Re: GCF Funding Proposal by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) on Early Warnings for All (EW4ALL)
We refer to the programme Early Warnings for All (EW4ALL) in Fiji as included in the
funding proposal submitted by United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to us on 5
November 2024.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change, the National Designated Authority of Fiji.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the Early Warnings for All (EW4ALL)
programme as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Fiji has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Fiji; and

=== PAGE 148 ===
(c) In accordance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the Early Warnings
for All (EW4ALL) programme, as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Thank you.
____________________________
Dr. Sivendra Michael
Permanent Secretary / NDA Focal Point
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 150
Secretariat’s assessment of FP258
Proposal name: Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All
(EW4All)
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country/(ies): Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Somalia
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
Strengths Points of caution
remarks:
The programme, Multi-country Project As three of the seven target countries, namely
Advancing Early Warnings for All (EW4All), Chad, Ethiopia and Somalia are faced with
presents innovative solutions for improving, conflict and social and institutional fragility
at scale, the adaptive capacity of communities status, there are additional risks for a timely
in the target countries through improved and synchronized implementation of the
production, dissemination and use of climate programme. A range of mitigation measures
information and multi-hazard early warning have been built into the programme’s design,
systems (MHEWS) among the most including disaggregated disbursement per
vulnerable communities. This will contribute country and reallocation clauses and
towards ensuring that vulnerable provision of a global platform to enable the
communities receive early warnings in a participating countries to share experiences
timely fashion and develop the capacity to and learn from each other.
undertake anticipatory action to mitigate,
prepare for and respond to the climate
t
hazards and impacts that they face.
I focuses on promoting the design of
pragmatic climate information and early
warning actions and activities that build on
implementation strategies and approaches
based on lessons learned from earlier work.
This will help the participating countries to
establish, operate, and maintain and expand
the coverage of end-to-end MHEWS that are
tested, sustainable and effective in reducing
the exposure of the vulnerable communities
to climate hazards and impacts.

--- Table 1 on Page 150 ---
r | Strengths
emarks: |  |  |  |  | Points of caution | 
 |  |  |  |  | As three of the seven target countries, namely
Chad, Ethiopia and Somalia are faced with
conflict and social and institutional fragility
status, there are additional risks for a timely
and synchronized implementation of the
programme. A range of mitigation measures
have been built into the programme’s design,
including disaggregated disbursement per
country and reallocation clauses and
provision of a global platform to enable the
participating countries to share experiences
and learn from each other. |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | The programme, Multi-country Project |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Advancing Early Warnings for All (EW4All), |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | presents innovative solutions for improvin |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | at scale, the adaptive capacity of communit |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | in the target countries through improved |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | production, dissemination and use |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | information and multi-hazard early warnin |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | systems (MHEWS) among the mo |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | timely fashion and develop the capacit |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | undertake anticipatory action to mi |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | p | t | repare for and respond to the clima |  |  |  | 
 | I focuses on promoting the design of |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | pragmatic climate information and early |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | warning actions and activities that build on |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | implementation strategies and approaches |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | based on lessons learned from earlier work |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | This will help the participating countries to |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | establish, operate, and maintain and expan |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | the coverage of end-to-end MHEWS that ar |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | tested, sustainable and effective |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 151
The Multi-country Project Advancing EW4All
focuses specifically on addressing barriers
and challenges that prevent National Disaster
Management Agencies and National
Meteorological and Hydrological Services in
the least developed countries and small
island developing States, including those in
fragile and conflict-affected states, from
operating.
In addition, the programme’s implementation
through both national and global institutions
is commendable, because it will facilitate the
improvement of the existing capacities,
structures and governance mechanisms
across the global early warning support
system and mechanism, while continuing to
build the capacity of the participating
c ountries at all levels.
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the
terms listed in the term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity (AE),
and, if considered appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II to document
GCF/B.41/02.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2 .1 Programme background
3.
The Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All is an intervention aimed at
promoting climate-resilience among vulnerable communities in Antigua and Barbuda,
Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, and Somalia, by helping to institute relevant policies
and governance mechanisms for end-to-end MHEWS, establishing early warning system (EWS)
infrastructure and setting up systems for its long-term operation, and supporting local
capacities in the generation and dissemination of early-warning products. The objective of the
project is to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable communities in the participating countries
through enhancing production of actionable multi-hazard early warnings and impact-based
forecasts, strengthening of communication and last-mile dissemination channels, and building
capacity for the effective use of early warnings and advisories for early and anticipatory action,
with a view to reaching 80 per cent of the most vulnerable communities in the targeted seven
co untries.
4.
The project’s seven target countries face growing disaster risk resulting from increasing
prevalence and severity of different types of hazardous events, which pose adverse impacts for
both the social and natural systems in the countries, including exacerbated food, water, health
and livelihood insecurity, and infrastructure and economic losses. The countries are faced with
extremely high levels of vulnerability to climate change, with limited readiness to access
knowledge, or technical and financial capacity to build the resilience of communities and
climate-proof their social and economic infrastructure.

--- Table 1 on Page 151 ---
 | 
 | 
 | The Multi-country Project Advancing EW4All
 | focuses specifically on addressing b
 | and challenges that prevent National Disast
 | Management Agencies and National
 | Meteorological and Hydrological Services i
 | the least developed countries and small
 | island deve
 | fragile and conflict-affected states, from
 | operating.
 | In addition, the programme’s implementation
 | through both national and global institu
 | is commendable, because it will facilitat
 | improvement of the existing capacities,
 | structures and governance mechanisms
 | across the global early warning suppo
 | system and mechanis

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 152
5.
The project will overcome these challenges by accelerating the development of EW4All
projects in the participating countries, enhancing the enabling conditions for the
implementation of EW4All actions that meet each participating country’s needs, and rolling out
EW4All investment activities in the seven countries based on the Climate Information and Early
Warning System (CIEWS) paradigm shift and EW4All target G (Sendai Target G) as selection
criteria. It will support the countries to establish and sustain EWS infrastructure, set up systems
for its long-term operation, expand the coverage of end-to-end MHEWS and support local
capacities in the generation and dissemination of early-warning products, and help institute
re levant policies and governance mechanisms for end-to-end MHEWS.
6.
The project is requesting USD 103.25 million of GCF financing. The total cost of the
project, including co-financing, is USD 114.59 million, with co-financing primarily in the form of
cash and in-kind grants from the governments of the participating countries, EW4All pillar
leads, and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The programme will also
receive parallel financing of USD 40.10 million from the Systematic Observations Financing
Fa cility (SOFF).
7.
In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), this proposal has been
categorized as environmental and social (E&S) risk category C. The review by the Secretariat
confirms the E&S risk category assigned by the AE.
Component 1: Enhancing enabling conditions globally and regionally to promote country-level
2.2 Component-by-component analysis
actions towards the EW4All goals (total cost: USD 13.50 million; GCF cost: USD 6.68 million)
8.
Component 1 will accelerate and scale up national access to global and regional
technical and operational support for the countries to develop comprehensive MHEWS and
respective capabilities. This component will focus on enhancing enabling conditions for the
countries to access the global coordination and support architecture for EW4All and for them to
undertake country-level EW4All actions in a way that will be sustained beyond the project
implementation period. This will entail establishing enhanced coordination and technical
support for EW4All implementation, strengthening monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and
systems to support EW4All implementation, and strengthening knowledge management and
Component 2: Accelerating actions in select countries towards EW4All (total cost: USD 92.50
learning.
million; GCF cost: USD 88.93 million)
9.
Component 2 will focus on addressing gaps in policies, inter-agency coordination and
strategies; building technical and scientific capacities; improving capacity for observation; and
promoting effective local actions. The activities will be based on the four pillars of the EW4All
executive action plan and will be implemented through the country’s national governments with
support from UNDP, the EW4All pillar leads (World Meteorological Organization, United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), International Telecommunication Union
and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies) and their in-country
national offices and other relevant partner agencies. The component will entail strengthening
governance and coordination mechanisms and capacities; bolstering disaster risk knowledge
and observation and forecasting systems, network and capacities; and fortifying warning
Project management and coordination and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (total cost: USD 8.58
dissemination, preparedness and response.
million; GCF cost: USD 7.63 million)
10.
Project implementation and M&E costs have been adequately provided for, and specific
activities have been planned and integrated within the design of the project to ensure that

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 153
project implementation and monitoring and evaluation processes will be effectively
Gender and environmental and social management framework aspects
coordinated.
11.
A costed environmental and social management framework (ESMF) was developed for
the project, outlining specific activities that will sufficiently ensure that ESS safeguards are put
in place and observed throughout the project’s lifespan. A well-designed gender action plan was
also developed, laying out costed plans of actions that will be undertaken in the seven project
countries to ensure that gender equality, equity and safeguards will be upheld throughout the
lifespan of the project.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
Scale: High
3. 1 Impact potential
12.
Currently, one-third of the world’s population, communities in Africa, least developed
countries and small island developing states being particularly affected, lacks comprehensive
coverage by early warning systems. At the launch of the EW4All Initiative in March 2022, United
Nations Secretary General Antonio Guterres called on all governments, financial institutions,
and civil society to support this crucial effort to ensure that every person on Earth is protected
by early warning systems by 2027.
13.
The proposal presents a robust climate change context and demonstrates how the
ambitious EW4All targets can be achieved through an integrated and comprehensive global
project that supports the establishment of bespoke country-led enhancements to MHEW) in the
target countries. All seven countries that are targeted by the project are faced with significant
climate variability and change, affecting livelihoods, food security, and economic stability. Since
the 1970s, extreme weather events have led to agricultural losses, food crises, water scarcity,
flooding, and environmental degradation. The countries face a wide range of climate risks and
ha zards, including:
(a)
Hurricanes, extreme rainfall, droughts, and rising sea levels in Antigua and Barbuda;
(b)
Floods, extreme heat and longer droughts in Chad;
(c)
Increased intensity and frequency of extreme and slow-onset climatic events such as
melting of glacier cover, increased variations in sea-surface temperature, increased
floods and intensified droughts in Ecuador;
(d)
More frequent intense temperatures and droughts, increased frequency and intensity of
extreme rainfall events, more severe cyclones and increased floods, flash floods and
landslides, sea level rise, and increased storm surges and coastal erosion in Fiji;
(e)
More erratic rainfall, prolonged dry spells and worsening drought conditions, wild land
and forest fires, and intensified rainfall events leading to severe flooding, land and
mudslides in Ethiopia;
(f)
Exacerbated flooding and drought risks resulting from more intense rains, a delayed
rainy season and longer dry seasons, unexpected dry periods during the rainy season,
and untimely rains in Cambodia; and
(g)
Drought, floods, cyclones and extensive coastal flooding in Somalia.
14.
The project seeks to support the countries to address these climate challenges by
harnessing the crucial role that climate information and early warning play in enabling
individuals, communities, and organizations to take appropriate measures to minimize the

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 154
potential impact of the disasters that the climate hazards would create. The project aims to
achieve this by supporting concrete investment in infrastructure and systems needed to
observe weather events, forecast climate hazards and provide vulnerable communities and
public and private sector decision makers with advance notice of the potential hazards in a way
that would be timely enough to enable them to prepare and respond before the hazards occur,
an d thereby save lives and livelihoods and reduce damage and losses.
15.
The project will support at least 26.34 million direct beneficiaries and 51.66 million
indirect beneficiaries. It would effectively increase climate-change resilience among this large
number of people (at least 80 per cent of the population) across the seven countries by
providing technical assistance, implementation support for installation and operation of early
warning infrastructure and systems (component 1), and support for strengthening of climate
information and early warning governance and coordination frameworks and processes in the
countries (component 2). These interventions are all vital in ensuring that the countries attain
the kind of climate information and early warning systems that will be effective and sustainable
in supporting communities and businesses to undertake adequate anticipatory action in
response to the threats that climate hazards pose to their lives, livelihoods and social and
eco nomic systems and infrastructure.
16.
The project will specifically support adaptation and resilience-building across seven
core areas for local climate resilience-building in the seven countries: climate change-adapted
agriculture, forestry, agroforestry, water and health, energy efficiency, renewable energies, and
climate-resilient infrastructure and coastal areas (Antigua and Barbuda, Fiji and Somalia). The
gra nt finance will cover additional costs of public early warning investments.
17.
Within the context of majority of these countries, where a significant percentage of the
population (over 80 percent in Ethiopia, Chad and Somalia) derive their livelihoods from
climate-sensitive sectors such as rain-fed, subsistence agriculture, access to climate information
an d early warnings remains a major challenge.
18.
The universal access target of the EW4All programme aims to ensure that it will
ultimately benefit 100 per cent of the target countries’ population, as everyone can use climate
information for dynamic decision-making, planning, and reducing the risks associated with
climate variability and change over a range of decision timelines. The proposal is designed to
ali gn with this target.
19.
The benefits and impact potential of this intervention is therefore assessed to be very
significant.
Scale: High
3. 2 Paradigm shift potential
20.
The updated Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024–2027 (USP 2) notes that GCF can
substantially contribute to the EW4All Initiative. This is evidenced by strong support from the
Board with an MHEWS target of supporting up to 60 countries. Realizing this target requires
aligning the GCF pipeline to the EW4All priorities with the aims of prioritizing support for the
most vulnerable, optimizing the impact of investments, coordinating various investments
so urces and improving innovation to deliver quality at scale in a timely manner.
21.
GCF has a range of tools and approaches that could be harnessed to deliver the USP 2
and EW4All targets. These include the projects and programmatic approaches and ongoing
work under the simplified approval process through the Climate Risk and Early Warning
Systems Initiative (CREWS)–simplified approval process scaling up framework and fast-
tracking approaches. The proposal has been co-designed by the EW4All pillar leads (World
Meteorological Organization, UNDRR, International Telecommunication Union and
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, International

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 155
Telecommunication Union) and a broad range of public- and private-sector partners. The
ambitious targets required a coordinated approach by all the pillar leads and partners. A
meeting with all pillars leads, SOFF and CREWS was held in Bangkok, 3–5 May 2023 to develop
a conceptual framework (EW4All Global support programme) for the timely delivery of the
EW 4All targets.
22.
The key issues identifie
fi
d
n
t
a
o
n
b
c
e
in
a
g
d
p
d
l
r
a
e
n
ssed to deliver the targets include:
(a)
The need to develop a to accompany the EW4All implementation
strategy. (What is the role of GCF in the financing plan? How does it crowd in other
investors?)
pipeline generation
(b)
The need to support , and proposal maturation, in particular, via
direct access entities;
coordination
(c)
The need to provide funding for , fit-for-purpose prioritization,
monitoring, l
i
e
n
s
v
s
e
o
s
n
t
l
i
e
n
a
/
r
p
n
i
i
l
n
o
g
t
,
e
k
a
n
r
o
l
w
y
l
m
ed
o
g
v
e
e
m
rs
a
a
n
n
ag
d
e
e
m
x
e
a
n
m
t,
p
a
l
n
e
d
s
regular meetings; and
(d)
The need to to serve as inspiration.
“incubator”
23.
The conceptual framework arising from this exercise has led to the development of a
GCF project proposal as an with a project preparation grant to create the financing
pla n and
P i
p
p
r
e
e
l
p
i
a
n
r
e
e
g
t
e
h
n
e
e
p
r
r
a
o
t
j
i
e
o
c
n
t with the following elements:
(a)
– Prioritize support for pipeline development particularly by
d
C
i
o
r
o
e
r
c
d
t a
in
cc
a
e
t
s
io
s
n
e ntities, leveraging from frameworks like CREWS and SOFF;
(b)
– Use existing mechanisms via the EW4All pillars to promote a
coordinated approach nationally, regionally and globally. Finance regular meetings to
discuss opportunities, pipeline development, and share good practices and lessons
learned. Attract co-investors, including the private sector, and develop standards,
P
te
i
m
lo
p
t
l
p
at
r
e
o
s
j
,
e
a
c
n
ts
d indicators; and
(c)
– Invest in pilot projects to serve as inspiration of what can be achieved.
24.
The EW4All Facility will be established that supports the preparation of four to five
projects (including multi-country programmes) for GCF Board approval annually. This should
result in systematic and technically sound, predictable project maturation, increased quality of
projects, local partner-owned and implemented, co-invested by donors. Other projects will be
developed following this initial project. The approach has the potential to meet the USP 2 target
of covering 60 countries by 2027. This proposal is the first attempt to operationalize the EW4All
co nceptual framework at scale through a programmatic approach.
25.
The project demonstrates a high paradigm-shift potential in that it seeks to deliver a
shift of disaster risk management processes in the target countries from reactive approaches
that are focused on response to impacts of climate hazards and disasters, towards an approach
that also prioritizes preparedness and anticipatory action, where vulnerable communities and
decision makers in climate-sensitive sectors have easy access to widely available reliable
sci ence-based climate information and early warnings.
26.
The project promotes an approach that fosters the development of an integrated and
comprehensive MHEWS value chain, which integrates long-term financing strategies to enable
the sustainability of the operation and maintenance of the MHEWS infrastructure and systems.
The project uses lessons learned from previous work, such as the Afghanistan Community
Resilience Programme, to inform the design of climate information and early warning systems
and processes in a way that has the potential for scaling up and replication across the globe,
pa rticularly in fragile and conflicted affected situations.
27.
The project demonstrates a paradigm-shift potential across all the components of the
project and ensures the strategic focus is maintained over the long term.

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 156
28.
The project presents an innovative and strategic approach to promoting and increasing
the participation of the national and local governments, communities and local-level private-
sector actors in the development and implementation of CIEWS.
Scale: High
3. 3 Sustainable development potential
29.
According to UNDRR, advances in early warning systems and preparedness have saved
many lives and significant financial resources. People-centred, MHEWS can effectively minimize
harm by triggering timely and well-prepared actions. These systems are among the most proven
and cost-effective methods for reducing disaster deaths and losses. However, as at 2022, only
half of the world’s countries have such systems, with even lower coverage in developing
countries, where less than half of the least developed countries, and only one-third of the small
isl and developing States are protected.
30.
The project will significantly reduce the exposure of poor and vulnerable communities
to natural hazards and will thereby be instrumental in helping these communities to safeguard
their lives, assets and economic resources from potential damage from such hazards. These
avoided human and economic losses and the resultant development of climate risk-resilient
local and national economies will in the long term yield vast social, economic and environmental
benefits for the vulnerable communities and for the sustainable development aspirations and
go als that the global community seeks to achieve.
31.
The project contributes directly towards efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 1 (No poverty); SDG2 (Zero hunger); SDG 9 (Industry, innovation
and infrastructure); SDG 11 (Sustainable cities and communities); SDG 13 (Climate action); and
SD G 15 (Life on land).
32.
The project also significantly aligns/contributes to the GCF targeted results for 2024–
20 27 (USP 2), specifically:
(a)
Target 1. Developing countries directly supported to advance nationally determined
contribution/national adaptation plan/long-term strategy implementation (four
developing coun tries);
(b)
Target 3. CIEWS(project areas in the four countries would be protected by robust early
warning system s);
(c)
Target 4. Food(prom ote investm ent in transformative agricultural practices);
(d)
Target 5. Ecosystems(promoteinvestment in ecosystem-based adaptation measures);
(e)
Target 6. Infrastructure (social and community infrastructure made resilient through
investmentinclimate-proofing);
(f)
Target 7. Clean energy (renewable energy s ources to drive the interventions); and
(g)
Target 9. Adaptation and locally-led action(the proposal is an adaptation proposal).
33.
The economic, social and environmental co-benefits that the project offers would be
achieved and sustained through capacity-strengthening that the project will provide to the
participating countries to enhance their ability to develop, operate, maintain and sustainably
manage climate information and early warning systems and dissemination channels. This will
contribute directly to building awareness of climate hazards, and capacity to mitigate the risks
tha t they pose and adequately respond to their impacts.
34.
The sustainable development potential of this investment is therefore estimated to be
high.

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 157
Scale: High
3. 4 Needs of the recipient
35.
The project targets some of the world’s most vulnerable countries, where water, food
and livelihood insecurity conditions arise from the various hazards posed by extreme climate
va riability, which are compounded by the political fragility in some of the target countries.
36.
The target communities are facing severe challenges from climate change threatening
their current livelihood strategies, and yet, they lack reliable access to usable climate
information and early warning systems to support their need, and effort to secure their
livelihoods and natural capital from the impacts of the climate hazards that afflict their
localities. The current local livelihood, food, water and health systems in the participating
countries are not able to withstand the pressure from climate hazards. Through the
development of MHEWS, the proposed interventions will help communities to use advance
information to develop strategies for safeguarding and transforming their livelihood options,
local food, water and health systems as well as ecosystems to become resilient to climate
ha zards, thereby building the resilience and adaptive capacity of the vulnerable communities.
37.
The target countries are heavily indebted and do not have sufficient resources to invest
in the actions to safeguard their populations from climate-induced hazards and the associated
livelihoods, water and food insecurity. The countries and beneficiaries are currently struggling
to access usable climate information and early warnings that they need to prepare and secure
their well-being, livelihood and food, water and health systems. Without access to climate
information and early warning, the local communities and economies in the target countries will
not be able to prepare and develop, in a timely fashion, the relevant the safeguards and safety
nets that they need. The project will fill an important gap through working with key global,
national and local institutions in both the public and private sectors to foster long-term
solutions for enhanced access and use of climate information and early warnings for building
resilient infrastructure and health, water, food and livelihood systems.
Scale: High
3. 5 Country ownership
38.
Country ownership is well embedded in the project, which is fully aligned with the
climate change and broader development aspirations, strategies and policies of all seven target
countries. The project will promote the development of capacity among local governmental and
non-governmental actors in the target countries to disseminate and use climate information and
early warnings to identify their own solutions and to prepare for and undertake anticipatory
action. The project also places an important focus on ensuring better synergy with ongoing
reg ional and national strategies and actions being implemented in the target countries.
39.
The project is aligned with the nationally determined contributions, national adaptation
plans, climate change policies and programmes, as well as the GCF country programmes of the
target countries. Furthermore, the project has been developed with the strong participation and
commitment of the governments concerned, as well as the participation and commitment of
other national and local-level stakeholders, involving all levels of stakeholder groups, including
gra ss roots, women and youth.
40.
The AE is the UNDP, which, along with the four early warning pillar leads that are
participating in the project as implementing partners, has a long-standing presence in all the
target countries, and a wealth of experience working with stakeholders and dealing with the
development and environmental challenges in the countries. UNDP offers a unique structure as
well as experience and partnerships that will facilitate meaningful engagement and involvement
of all relevant stakeholders in the target countries in the successful implementation and scaling
up of the programme activities and outputs.

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 158
41.
The architecture of the project consists of a Project Board and Project Management Unit
at the country level where the country governments, acting through relevant national
institutions, will participate directly in the governance and management of the project and its
activities. This will bolster the integration of local contexts and ownership in the project’s
act ivities and outputs.
42.
The project is built on well-designed stakeholder consultations that were conducted
throughout the project development process, ensuring local knowledge, innovation and
sustainability, and participation is fully embedded in the design of the project.
Scale: Medium to high
3. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
43.
The overall EW4All action plan proposes an investment of USD 3.1 billion over five
years, which equates to just USD 0.50 per person per year. This funding aims to enhance
disaster risk knowledge and management, improve observation and forecasting, and strengthen
the dissemination and communication of warnings, as well as preparedness and response
capabilities. To achieve these goals, this proposal plans to leverage existing pooled funding
mechanisms like CREWS and SOFF as well as global multilateral funds, including development
ba nks.
44.
This programme will directly support poor and vulnerable communities in the
participating countries to strengthen their ability to secure, diversify and transform their own
adaptive capacity and livelihood systems. It will target 26.84 million direct beneficiaries and
51.26 million indirect beneficiaries and will drive innovation and transformation by providing
access to climate information and early warning for communities and businesses to use in
undertaking anticipatory action to protect themselves from potential climate hazards and
dis asters.
45.
The funding amount is well justified to provide the support needed to safeguard lives,
livelihoods and local health, water and food systems and to provide innovative approaches and
lessons for transforming climate governance in the participating countries and around the globe
in general. The project is fostering an enabling environment for private- and public-sector
investments in climate information and early warning systems. It aims to achieve this through
the structuring and deployment of a global support mechanism for EW4All and of a value-chain
approach to addressing the barriers to EW4All; and through developing robust and sustainable
CIEWS and thereby foster an innovative approach to helping countries to access long-term
fin ancial innovation for EWS and maintain their sustainability.
46.
The project also has an innovative exit strategy that will enable scaling up its approach
across the globe and will build access and partnership between global actors and governments,
communities and businesses to tackle local climate-change challenges with innovative and
locally appropriate and developed solutions based on reliable and science-based climate
information.
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies
4. 1 Environmental and social safeguards
47.
The programme is categorized as C for environmental and social impacts and risks in
accordance with the GCF Revised Environmental and Social Policy and the accreditation level of
the AE. While most of the activities are focused on enhancing risk knowledge, upgrading
information and forecasting systems, capacity-building, technical assistance, disaster
preparedness and planning and information dissemination in seven countries, small

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 159
infrastructure works will be undertaken under output 2. Output 2 will involve the procurement
of goods and equipment to upgrade and/or strengthen forecasting services in the seven selected
countries, which includes installation or upgrading of hydrometeorological stations, installation
of water storage tanks, installation of toilets and minor improvements to existing access paths.
The upgrading and installation works will have minimal physical footprints. An ESMF has been
prepared to include an assessment of all the associated E&S risks and impacts, proposed
mitigation measures, including through an environment and social code of practice, which
would guide the implementation of minor works. There will be no displacement of people or
their livelihoods as a result of programme interventions. No work will be undertaken on sites of
cultural, historical or environmental importance. New installations will be sited on government
property or public areas free of encumbrances, with existing access so that operation and
maintenance (O&M) tasks will not require the crossing of private lands, biodiversity areas or
other zones that would pose any impact to the environment, workers or communities (including
zones where there are ongoing conflicts). The ESMF will guide safeguard implementation as the
specific activities and locations are not fully known at project preparation stage. The ESMF will
be the basis for the screening of subprojects during implementation, and includes exclusion
criteria where activities considere d as category A or B will not be considered for programme
financing. Nevertheless, all activities will be required to apply any national regulatory permits
tha t would apply to minor works.
48.
The project is multi-country in nature and will be implemented in countries that have
been classified by the World Bank as fragile and conflict-affected states (i.e. Chad, Ethiopia and
Somalia). Any subproject located in these countries will develop a corresponding conflict
sensitivity analysis informed by consultations to assess institutional needs and capacities so
that interventions will be designed in a way that ensures they will not create or exacerbate
conflicts and ideally will contribute to peace. In such countries, no minor works will take place
in areas where there is ongoing conflict or where works could exacerbate existing tensions.
49.
At the programme level, a global Project Management Unit will be established within
UNDP which will include a Project Manager), Technical Advisor, Monitoring and Evaluation and
Learning Officer, Communications Expert, and a Safeguards, Gender and Inclusivity Expert
(SGIE). The Project Manager will work together with the SGIE to oversee overall compliance
with the ESMF. At the country level, a national Project Management Unit will be established as
well. It will include a national Project Manager who will work with the national SGIE to ensuring
compliance with E&S measures laid out in the ESMF. The national SGIE will provide capacity-
building for central and field staff, contractors, and community members who will be involved
in ESMF and environmental and social code of practice implementation. Periodic monitoring of
ESMF implementation will be undertaken by the national SGIEs with oversight from the global
SG IE.
50.
A global stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) has been developed through extensive
stakeholder consultations at the national and local levels, including some vulnerable groups in
the seven countries from 2023 to 2024. The global SEP provides a framework for the overall
programme, outlining the stakeholders, methodologies, grievance redress mechanism (GRM),
and timelines for engagement during the programme duration. Country-specific SEPs have been
prepared to more accurately capture country and local contexts and will be updated as needed
during programme implementation once the specific locations are known. During project design
and implementation, special considerations for vulnerable groups will be taken into account.
The programme will ensure that they are meaningfully consulted and that their needs and
constraints are considered. The global Project Manager, global SGIE, national Project Manager,
and national SGIE will be working together to implement the SEPs. A programme-level GRM and
a country-level GRM will be established and communicated through stakeholder engagement
sessions. The GRMs will facilitate complaints related to the E&S performance of the programme.
The UNDP Accountability Mechanism and GCF Independent Redress Mechanism will also be

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 160
made available as additional channels for stakeholders’ reporting of complaints related to E&S
pe rform
G
a
C
n
F
ce
I n
o
d
f t
i
h
ge
e
n
p
o
ro
u
g
s
r
P
a
e
m
o
m
p
e
le
.
s Policy & ESS 7 (Indigenous Peoples).
51.
Indigenous Peoples
are potentially present in most of the countries covered by the funding proposal. The
overarching initiative has an Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework that will be systematically
applied to any activity implemented by the national-level projects involving Indigenous Peoples.
Project exclusions ensure that no activity goes beyond minimal adverse impacts on Indigenous
Peoples, including those that would result in impacts on lands, natural resources subject to
traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation; that no relocation happens of
Indigenous Peoples from their lands and natural resources; and that no activity impacts the
cultural heritage – tangibly or intangibly – of Indigenous Peoples, or results in the commercial
use of such heritage. No activity requiring that free, prior and informed consent be secured will
be undertaken, and no impact will be made on Indigenous Peoples in isolation or through initial
contact. The Secretariat’s Office of Sustainability and Inclusion (OSI) can support the AE with
recommendations on building in Indigenous knowledge to ensure co-benefits and also that it
will be in line with USP 2 commitments and guidance from the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on this matter. The AE is
recommended to have a sound participative approach at the national and local levels, and to
engage with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group on relevant Indigenous Peoples’ issues
tha t may
S e
b
x
e
u
e
a
n
l
c
e
o
x
u
p
n
l
t
o
e
i
r
t
e
a
d
ti
.
on, abuse and harassment (SEAH) safeguarding.
52.
SEAH risks are
included in the social and environmental screening report and have been assessed as low risk.
Potential SEAH issues may arise from interaction of project workers with communities during
outreach activities and small works such as hydrometeorological equipment installations and
repairs. Some project workers are expected to work in various locations where communities are
located when implementing the programme in the beneficiary countries, however this is
expected to be temporary. A SEAH action plan is included in the programme-level ESMF with
activities to address SEAH risks that include training on SEAH and the code of conduct as part of
capacity building for various programme actors, such as local contractors; timelines;
responsibilities for implementation and monitoring. The grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is
described in the ESMF and includes information disclosure and stakeholder engagement.
Specific procedures for SEAH cases are outlined to make the GRM accessible, inclusive, survivor-
centred, and gender-responsive, including facilitating confidential reporting and ensuring safe
and ethical documentation of incidents, and protocols for reporting incidents and the follow-up
actions that will be taken. The Fund’s independent redress mechanism will also be available to
stakeholders.
4. 2 Gender policy
53.
The AE has provided a gender analysis and action plan and therefore complies with the
GCF Gender Policy. The gender assessment identifies barriers to equitable participation and
benefit-sharing in MHEWS. Women face restricted access to early warning information and
communication technologies, particularly in rural and marginalized areas, due to lower digital
literacy, socioeconomic disadvantages, and cultural norms. Gender roles often limit women’s
involvement in decision-making and disaster preparedness, as their primary responsibilities for
unpaid care work reduce opportunities for active participation. Additionally, systemic issues
such as the underrepresentation of women in leadership positions, lack of gender-disaggregated
data, and minimal integration of gender-sensitive policies in disaster risk management
exacerbate these disparities. Vulnerable groups, including women with disabilities, Indigenous
women, and those in rural areas, face compounded challenges in accessing resources, safe
evacuation facilities, and targeted interventions during emergencies.

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 161
54.
The gender action plan proposes a comprehensive set of actions to address these
challenges by mainstreaming gender considerations across MHEWS. The gender action plan
defines activities, indicators, and targets for women’s participation and benefit with
corresponding timelines, budget and gender expertise. Key actions include increasing women’s
representation in decision-making and leadership roles, enhancing gender-responsive data
collection and analysis, and promoting community-based training programmes tailored to
women’s needs. It intends to develop accessible, multichannel early warning dissemination
systems, prioritizing formats that reach women and marginalized groups effectively. The plan
emphasizes capacity-building initiatives to empower women as agents of change in disaster
preparedness and response. Furthermore, it underscores the need for gender-sensitive
infrastructure in evacuation sites, integrating separate facilities and addressing safety concerns.
Institutional capacity will be strengthened to ensure gender equity in disaster risk governance,
with mechanisms to monitor progress through gender-focused indicators. Each country will
have its own GAP that its gender staff will report on to the global PMU which will in turn
consolidate inputs for annual reporting to the Fund.
44.3.3.1. ROvisekrasl l programme assessment (medium risk)
55.
The programme aims to implement EWS in seven countries, including small island
developing States, least developed countries and fragile and conflict-affected states. The GCF is
requested to provide a full grant of USD 103.25 million. Governments, Pillar Leads and AE are
c 4. o 3 n .2 t . ribuAtcincgre cdoi-tfeinda nencitnitgy o/fe UxSeDcu1t1i.n3g4 emnitlilitoyn c ianp tahbei lfiotrym to o ef xgreacnuttse a tnhde icnu-krirnedn tc opnrtorgibruatmiomnse.
(low-medium risk)
56.
UNDP will serve as both AE and executing entity (EE) for the project. The AE has an
extensive track record and global experience in implementing climate adaptation and climate
information projects. This funding proposal represents the first multi-country project submitted
b 4. y 3. 3 U . NDPP raongdr tahme mlaerg-sepste UciNfiDc Pe xperocujetcito tno r diasktes i(nm theed iGuCmF priosrktf)o lio.
Political risks and coordination challenges
57.
: The programme spans multiple countries
with diverse political and social dynamics, different coordination capacities and governance
structures, which can pose risks to the implementation of EWS. The AE identifies these
challenges and expects to address them by focusing on strengthening governance structures in
collaboration with national and local entities, non-governmental organizations and other
multilateral entities. Also, the AE will centralise the disbursement plans to maintain the overall
pace of the project implementation ensuring progress continues even if delays occur in a single
co untry
O
.
&M plan
58.
: The government commitment for O&M beyond the project implementation
is critical for the project’s success. However, the O&M expenses for each participating country
are going to be submitted at the later stage. This uncertainty poses an implementation risk that
rem ains unaddressed at the time of drafting this assessment.
59.
The economic analysis was submitted only for Ecuador at the time of drafting the
assessment. For the other countries, the economic and financial analysis expected to be
s 4 u .3 b .4 m . ittCedo mbyp tlhiaen ecned r oisf kJa (nlouwar yr i2s0k2) 5.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 162
60.
As a multi-country programme that is part of the global EW4All Initiative, which will
improve MHEWS use in the seven targeted countries, the programme’s proposed interventions
include the scaling up of global and regional support for country-level MHEWS initiatives and
national-level investment activities in the seven target countries to foster the achievement of
the EW4All targets. Programme activities are generally lower risk from a money-laundering/the
fin ancing of terrorism (ML/TF) perspective.
61.
UNDP will serve as both AE and EE through its Direct Implementation Modality, wherein
it will be responsible for the entire programme execution. All programme implementation
counterparties will undergo the UNDP Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers
microassessment, which takes a risk-based approach to assessing partners’ financial
management capacity. In addition to partner capacity assessments, the UNDP due diligence
process to be applied to the programme also includes anti-money laundering/countering the
financing of terrorism screening of any proposed partners or vendors. As such, UNDP has
ass essed the ML/TF risk as low.
62.
Based on the proposed activities, the direct implementation and oversight of the AE, as
well as the ML/TF controls to be applied during programme implementation, the overall ML/TF
r 4 i .3 s . k 5. is dGetCeFr mcoinnecde ntotr baet iloonw .r isk (medium risk)
63.
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF concentration risk remains
within the monitoring thresholds of the Risk Appetite Statement in terms of result areas, single
p
4.
r
3
o
.6
p
.
osaRl eocro AmE mcoenncdeanttiroanti on.
64. It is recommended that the BSuomarmd acroyn rsiisdke ra stshees asmboevnet factors in its decision.
Overall programme Medium
Accredited entity/executing entity capability Low-Medium
Project-specific execution Medium
GCF portfolio concentration Medium
Compliance Low
4. 4 Fiduciary
65.
UNDP will be the AE as well as the EE for this project.
66.
The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP
financial rules and regulations. National projects will be implemented following the modality
applicable to each country based on the national capacities of the implementing partner by
undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to
Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers). All projects will
be audited in accordance with the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and
applicable audit guidelines and policies. Assurance activities include planning, periodic on-site
rev iews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and special audits.
67.
During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in
accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the accreditation
master agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with GCF. This may include, but

--- Table 1 on Page 162 ---
4. | It is recommended that the BSuomarmd acroyn rsiisdke ra stshees asmboevnet factors in its decision. |  | 
 |  |  | 
 |  |  | 
Overall programme
Accredited entity/executing entity capability |  | Medium
Low-Medium | 
Project-specific execution |  | Medium | 
GCF portfolio concentration |  | Medium | 

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 163
is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in project board
meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level or
at implementing partner level on the resources received from UNDP.
68.
According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. Scheduled
audits will be performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans,
based on the implementing partner’s risk rating and UNDP guidelines. A scheduled audit is used
to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the
appropriate purpose and in accordance with the workplan. A scheduled audit can consist of a
financial audit or an internal control audit.
4. 5 Results monitoring and reporting
69.
The funding proposal contains a programme-level theory of change demonstrating three
outcomes that will focus on distinct dimensions of the global EW4All initiative. The
programme's overall goal is to contribute to enhanced avoidance of the adverse effects of
climate change and adaptation of lives, livelihoods, and assets to climate hazards through
effective early warning systems. While the implementation of EWS in each country needs to
consider the respective country’s context and specificities, the AE is planning to submit
ind ividual theories of change for each country investment.
70.
The adaptation impact of the programme stems from increasing resilience to climate-
change hazards in the population of the seven targeted countries. The approach to estimating
direct and indirect beneficiaries of these country-level investments is provided under the
impact potential investment criteria. The AE will submit further information on applying this
approach in the country context and outputs within the individual country-level document. The
impact estimates will be reviewed and finalized once this information is available, and hence,
the Secretariat expects a revision in the present beneficiary figures.
71.
The programme’s logical framework is predominantly in line with the requirements of
the Integrated Results Management Framework, with a few identified areas for improvement.
The potential for a paradigm shift and the selection of enabling environment indicators are
appropriately addressed. Given the programme’s focus on adaptation, the logical framework has
applied the core 2 indicator and related supplementary indicators. While country and sex-
disaggregated targets have been provided for the indicators, targets for supplementary
indicators are only partially consistent with the indicator definitions. The AE has proposed
conducting baseline assessments in the first year of project implementation to inform the
targets and baseline for the indicators. The programme-specific logical framework is high-level
and requires the inclusion of indicators specifically on reporting results from output 3 on the
implementation of activities related to the four pillars of EW4All in the targeted countries. To
ensure the required granularity and robustness for measuring GCF and programme-specific
indicators, the AE will be submitting country-level logical frameworks that will be mapped to
pr ogramme logical frameworks before project approval by the Board.
72.
The programme proposal contains an M&E plan, laying out the role and responsibilities
of AE for various M&E activities and reporting to GCF as per various policy requirements. The
programme will conduct an interim and final independent evaluation as per the GCF Evaluation
Policy.
4. 6 Legal assessment
73.
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 5 August
2016, and became effective on 23 November 2016, which was amended and restated pursuant

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 164
to a first amendment and restatement agreement dated 16 March 2023, and which became
eff ective on 3 May 2023 (the “AMA”).
74.
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has
ob tained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.
75.
The proposed multi-country Programme will be implemented in Antigua and Barbuda,
Chad, Cambodia, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, and Somalia. The GCF has signed bilateral agreements
on privileges and immunities with one of these seven host countries, namely Antigua and
Barbuda. In the remaining six countries, namely Chad, Cambodia, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji, and
Somalia, GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks
need to be further assessed. Moreover, the ability of GCF to undertake redress activities and/or
investigations in such countries may be hindered due to the absence of privileges and
im munities for relevant GCF personnel.
76.
Therefore, it is recommended that the Board considers whether disbursements of GCF
proceeds should only be made after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against
litigation and expropriation in the countries, or has been provided with appropriate privileges
an d immunities for GCF and its personnel.
77.
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:
(a)
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and
(b)
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 165
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of
FP258
Proposal name: Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All
(EW4All)
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country/(ies): Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Somalia
Project/programme size: Medium
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 Overview
1.
This is the first submission of the proposal for the Multi-country Project Advancing
Early Wa 1 rnings for All (EW4All) programme under the GCF standard proposal approval Early
pWraorcneisnsg.s Tfohre A fulln Edxiencgu ptirvoep Aocstaiol nis P plaarnt of a global initiative to advan ce EW4All by 2027, as
announced by the United Nations Secretary General in March 2022and articulated in the
2
. Presented as an umbrella programme, the funding
proposal includes a global component as well as prioritized support to seven participating
countries across four geographies: Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Fiji, and Somalia.
2.
The objective of the programme is to accelerate the design and implementation of
EW4All through coordinated global support involving all the key actors across the early
warnings value chain. Additionally, the project will directly support the financial and technical
needs of seven participating countries to enhance the production of actionable multi-hazard
early warning systems (MHEWS) and impact-based forecasts. This information will be
disseminated to effectively reach the most vulnerable communities in each of the seven
countries and to trigger preparedness, early and anticipatory actions. To illustrate how this will
work in practice, one country funding proposal for Ecuador has been submitted alongside this
funding proposal. The accredited entity has clarified to the independent Technical Advisory
Panel (iTAP) that the remaining six country proposals are expected to become available by the
end of January 2025.
3.
The funding proposal responds to several challenges related to MHEWS: (i) insufficient
financial resources and limited capacities to access financing at country and community levels;
(ii)inadequate policies and strategies for inter-agency coordination, data-sharing and
governance for preparedness and response; (iii) limited technical, scientific and institutional
capacities for a comprehensive MHEWS; (iv) ineffective dissemination of early warning
information to climate-vulnerable communities; (v) insufficient national- and local-level
disaster preparedness and anticipatory action planning; and (vi) limited opportunities for
women and other marginalized groups to engage with and benefit from early warning systems.
1
The assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) is based on the version of the funding proposal
received by the iTAP on 12 December 2024 and is informed by a set of written questions and answers further
discussed in an online meeting between the iTAP and the accredited entity on 6 January 2025.
2
Available at https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/4001006?v=pdf

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 166
4.
The Multi-country Project Advancing EW4All is a medium-sized public-sector
adaptation programme in environmental and social safeguards risk category C. The total budget
of USD 175.49 million comprises a request for GCF grant funds of USD 107.49 million, with
expected co-contributions of USD 68 million from the Systematic Observations Financing
3
Facility (SOFF), the seven participating governments, and country offices of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). The implementation period is 5 years with an overall benefit
st ream of 30 years.
5.
The project will be delivered through two outputs:
(a)
Output 1: Enhancing enabling conditions, both globally and regionally, to promote
country-level actions towards the EW4All goals; and
(b)
Output 2: Accelerating actions in the seven participating countries towards EW4All
goals, through context-specific activities that address the four key pillars of MHEWS
namely: (i) disaster risk knowledge and management; (ii) detection, observations,
monitoring, analysis and forecasting; (iii) warning dissemination and communication;
4
and (iv) preparedness and response capabilities.
6.
The UNDP Bureau for Policy Programme Support is the accredited entity (AE). UNDP
has been accredited to GCF since March 2015, with a cumulative GCF funding of approximately
5
U SD 1.2 billion.
7.
There are two distinct governance and management structures for the global- and
na tional-level components respectively.
(a)
Output 1 will be executed by UNDP, supported by four pillar leads – World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
International Telecommunication Union, and International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) – in collaboration with global and regional organizations;
and
(b)
For output 2, UNDP country offices will implement the project as executing entities
under a Direct Implementation Modality, in collaboration with the relevant ministries
housing the national disaster management authorities or the national meteorological
and hydrological services (NMHS), and with other key partners in each country. UNDP
will also play the role of senior supplier.
Scale: Medium
1 .2 Impact potential
6
8.
Of the 30 focal countries identified under the global EW4All Initiative, seven countries
from across four geographies were selected for participation in this project. All seven countries
are highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, including increases in temperature
(leading to heatwaves, damages to agriculture and human health), increases in intensity of
rainfall, typhoons, storms and cyclones (causing floods, landslides and coastal inundation) and
in some cases decreases in rainfall (leading to agricultural and hydrological droughts), and
in creased disaster risks from hazardous climate events.
9.
In response to questions raised by the iTAP, the AE has clarified that country selection
was based on exposure to climate variability and change, including from multiple
3
SOFF is a United Nations multi-partner Trust Fund (created in 2021) which provides grant funding to support
countries in collecting basic weather and climate observation data. It acts as a delivery mechanism for the United
Nations Secretary General’s EW4All Initiative.
4
5 From action plaGnlo rbeafel rSrteadtu tso o ifn M fouolttin-Hotaez a2r adb Eoavrel.y Warning Systems2023
See www.greenclimate.fund/ae/undp
6
UNDRR. 2023. . Available at
https://doi.org/10.18356/9789213587058

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 167
hydrometeorological climate-related impacts. Other factors that informed country selection
include varying levels of economic development, diversity of livelihoods, and varying levels of
fragility and insecurity. The selection process also considered partner priorities, regional
representation, and countries with prior or planned investments from Climate Risk and Early
7
Wa rning Systems Initiative (CREWS) and SOFF programmes.
10.
The climate hazards and associated risks vary across countries and are clearly explained
Table 1: Country climate hazards
in the funding proposal (appendices 1 and 2) and summarized in table 1 below.
No Country Geographical region Predominant climate hazards
1 Antigua and Latin America and the Hurricanes, drought, extreme rainfall and
Barbuda Caribbean floods, rising sea levels, and other threats such
as heat and cold waves, hailstorms, downbursts,
and tornadoes
2 Cambodia South-West Pacific Intense precipitation events, dry seasons,
extreme heat events
Chad Sahel/Central Africa Flash floods, river flooding, droughts, dry spells
3 Ecuador Latin America and the Droughts and reduced precipitation, floods
Caribbean
4 Ethiopia Horn of Africa/East Droughts, riverine and flash floods
Africa
5 Fiji South-West Pacific Droughts, tropical cyclones, high intensity
rainfall and winds, flooding, sea-level rise
7 Somalia Horn of Africa/East Water scarcity, droughts, flash flooding, floods,
Source Africa inundation
: Adapted from the multi-country funding proposal and appendices.
11.
The proposal outlines how the impacts of climate and climate-related hazards can wreak
havoc on the lives and livelihoods of millions of people; impact human health, food and water
security; disrupt ecosystems and ecosystem services; and cause losses and damages to
communities. Within communities, the poor and vulnerable, including women, children, the
elderly, and persons with disabilities, often lack the means to anticipate and adapt to climate-
rel ated disasters.
12.
The funding proposal clearly sets out the rationale for how well-functioning early
warning systems can help countries to prepare for and respond to climate risks and climate-
8
induced hazards. The Multi-country Project Advancing EW4All programme therefore proposes
to strengthen the role of MHEWS in informing timely decisions by governmental and non-
go vernmental users across sectors, as a foundation for risk-informed development processes.
13.
The project presents two outcome areas of: sustained support for global coordination
and support architecture for EW4All (outcome 1); and end-to-end early warning systems that
are inclusive and build community resilience to climate hazards (outcome 2). The two
associated outputs could potentially bring impacts at different levels and scales. By catalysing
global resources and collaboration, and by enhancing the enabling environment, output 1 could
help to accelerate efforts towards universal coverage of early warning systems by 2027. By
helping to improve the effective ness and reach of end-to-end MHEWS in seven participating
7
CREWS funds projects in the least developed countries and small island developing States to establish risk-informed
early warning services, supported by three implementing partners: UNDRR, the World Bank Global Facility for
Disaster Reduction and Recovery and the World Meteorological Organization.
8
As set out in table 2 of the funding proposal (p. 18).

--- Table 1 on Page 167 ---
No | Country | Geographical region | Predominant climate hazards
1 | Antigua and
Barbuda | Latin America and the
Caribbean | Hurricanes, drought, extreme rainfall and
floods, rising sea levels, and other threats such
 |  |  | as heat and cold waves, hailstorms, downbursts,
and tornadoes
2 | Cambodia | South-West Pacific | Intense precipitation events, dry seasons,
extreme heat events
 | Chad | Sahel/Central Africa | Flash floods, river flooding, droughts, dry spells
3 | Ecuador | Latin America and the
Caribbean | Droughts and reduced precipitation, floods
4 | Ethiopia | Horn of Africa/East
Africa | Droughts, riverine and flash floods
5 | Fiji | South-West Pacific | Droughts, tropical cyclones, high intensity
rainfall and winds, flooding, sea-level rise

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 168
countries, output 2 could help benefit vulnerable communities in being better prepared for
mu ltiple hazards.
14.
Programme impacts are listed under the four GCF adaptation results areas, as follows:
(a)
Livelihoods of people and communities (85 per cent of GCF contribution);
(b)
Health, food and water security (5 per cent of GCF contribution);
(c)
Infrastructure and built environment (5 per cent of GCF contribution); and
(d)
Ecosystems and ecosystem services (5 per cent of GCF contribution).
15.
The project anticipates reaching 26.84 million direct beneficiaries and 51.26 million
indirect beneficiaries (see table 2 below for details), delivered through output 2. The target
beneficiary numbers are provisional figures, and the funding proposal notes that details on the
approach are included in individual country proposals and stakeholder plans (not available to
Table 2: Expected beneficiaries of the Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All by
the iTAP as part of this funding proposal package).
country
Estimated Estimated
number of % of total number of % of total
Country
direct population(direct) indirect population(indirect)
beneficiaries beneficiaries
9
Antigua and 91,500 100 114,000 NA
Barbuda
Cambodia 514,098 2.91 2,153,028 12.21
Chad 1,700,000 10 5,100,000 30
Ecuador 513,900 2.6 14,000,000 72
Ethiopia 16,000,000 12.12 21,600,000 15.9
FTiojit al 26,843156,,728802 46 51,245858,,333068 54
Somalia 7,600,000 40.9 7,800,000 42
Source
: multi-country funding proposal
16.
Direct beneficiaries are considered to include vulnerable populations that are direct
recipients of project activities notably early warning dissemination systems, capacity-building
in the use of MHEWS, and disaster preparedness and response; whereas indirect beneficiaries
are wider populations located in areas covered by the project and likely to receive measurable
benefits from the enhanced MHEWS through improved risk information, forecasting and
dis semination.
17.
In the view of the iTAP, the scope of both outputs is ambitious, and the extent of impact
to be realized is dependent on the ability of multiple stakeholders at global, regional, national
an d local levels to deliver a coherent project.
18.
The iTAP also notes that country-based activities (under output 2) are likely to vary
depending on country contexts, prioritization of sectors based on national climate strategies
and plans, selection of locations for strengthening monitoring networks, and criteria applied for
selecting country-specific investments. The country proposal for Ecuador articulates the
country-specific approach. While the overall funding proposal summarizes the proposed
interventions for each of the countries, the iTAP notes that the remaining six country proposals
are yet to be finalized. Therefore, in the view of the iTAP, it will be important for the AE to
ensure that the full country proposals are targeted at the most vulnerable sectors, remain
consistent with the overall funding proposal, and are able to implement actions at pace and
9
The funding proposal states that indirect beneficiaries for Antigua and Barbuda are considered the significant
number of tourists that visit the country during the hurricane season.

--- Table 1 on Page 168 ---
Country | Estimated
number of
direct
beneficiaries |  | % of total
population(direct) |  | Estimated |  | % of total
population(indirect)
 |  |  |  |  | number of |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | indirect |  | 
 |  |  |  |  | beneficiaries |  | 
 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 9
Antigua and | 91,500 |  | 100 | 114,000 |  |  | NA
Barbuda |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
Cambodia | 514,098 |  | 2.91 | 2,153,028 |  |  | 12.21
Chad | 1,700,000 |  | 10 | 5,100,000 |  |  | 30
Ecuador | 513,900 |  | 2.6 | 14,000,000 |  |  | 72
Ethiopia | 16,000,000 |  | 12.12 | 21,600,000 |  |  | 15.9
FTiojit al | 26,843156,,728802 |  | 46 | 51,245858,,333068 |  |  | 54

--- Table 2 on Page 168 ---
% of total
population(direct)

--- Table 3 on Page 168 ---
% of total
population(indirect)

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 169
scale to achieve the intended reach to project beneficiaries and to meet overall intended project
tar gets.
19.
The feasibility study for Ecuador prioritizes six focal areas and sectors, and the iTAP
recommends that the approach of prioritizing sectors vulnerable to climate impacts is also
applied to all country proposals. The iTAP underscores the importance of the sector focus that
could allow for more accurate historical baselines on losses and damages, enabling robust
analysis and targeted interventions to address unique vulnerabilities. Success in one sector
could also serve as a model for replication in others; whereas a broader national-based
approach could enable broader coverage of early-warning information and coordinated action
acr oss government.
20.
Overall, the iTAP assesses the impact potential as medium.
Scale: Medium
1. 3 Paradigm shift potential
21.
The framing of the theory of change for the overall funding proposal is aligned with the
EW4All Initiative. The two outputs are focused on tackling the barriers to the effective
generation, dissemination, communication and use of early warnings for climate change
ad aptation at two levels as follows:
(a)
At the global level, output 1 seeks to achieve a paradigm shift by establishing a
sustainable architecture, enhancing global and regional coordination, developing a long-
term financing strategy for an end-to-end MHEWS, strengthening the global monitoring
and evaluation framework across all four pillars, augmenting knowledge management,
aligning guidance with international standards, and providing operational and technical
assistance to countries and for early warning actions. This could help to build
momentum and support for more country-level actions towards EW4All; and
(b)
By extending technical and operational support to the seven countries, output 2 will
address barriers related to policy coherence and coordination, technical and scientific
capacity gaps; missing observations particularly in small island developing States and
the least developed countries; lack of forecast-based planning and observation at
national and grass-roots levels; ineffective dissemination to the last mile; and lack of
preparedness and response. The activities under output 2 are closely aligned to the four
pillars of EW4All, and support will be tailored to the unique needs, capacities, and
contexts of countries as presented in their respective feasibility studies that are yet to be
finalized. Activities will support concrete investments in EWS hardware and software;
improve inter-agency coordination at national and local levels; bolster risk knowledge;
and strengthen systems to disseminate and communicate early warnings and
preparedness so that communities can take early action. The use of innovative digital
technologies can also support a paradigm shift in countries by employing a more
efficient means of generating observational data, transmitting early warnings using
mobile networks, and ensuring that this information reaches communities in a timely
manner.
22.
The potential for creating an enabling environment is high as the project could achieve
synergies across global partners supporting the EW4All target. The project’s intent to
strengthen coordination across partners providing similar support towards the EW4All target is
sound. The funding proposal includes a useful appendix that illustrates synergies with the
CR EWS and SOFF initiatives respectively.
23.
The planned development of a longer-term financing strategy will be essential to help
unlock much needed finance for sustaining the EW4All architecture to 2027 and beyond. This is
a critical element of the project’s sustainability and the iTAP recommends that this activity is

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 170
undertaken in consultation with a wide range of partners, including government, non-
go vernmental organizations, the private sector, and donor partners.
24.
The potential for knowledge-sharing and learning is high, and the funding proposal
broadly indicates how the project will develop, disseminate and support the application of
detailed guidelines and other artificial intelligence-based tools to strengthen national EWS
capabilities. There is also provision for knowledge exchange between countries, including
through the establishment of global technical expert groups and committees, a cell broadcast
expert group, and building shared knowledge and awareness through international events and
wo rkshops, although the details have yet to be fully developed.
25.
The project could also offer critical learning and insights to scale up or replicate this
approach more widely across other countries. In the view of the iTAP, the project also has the
potential to facilitate cross-learning between countries through the governance structure.
Output 1 could set a solid foundation for replication and scaling up of EW4All across other
countries. National-level activities delivered through output 2 could also help to set the basis for
the approach to be replicated and scaled up more widely, subject to existing barriers being
overcome, but this is unlikely to emerge in the short term. The proportion of direct beneficiaries
varies significantly by country and represents a small proportion of the total population.
Without having seen the country packages, this raises some questions about the scale of impact
to be achieved through this programme alone.
26.
The programme has the potential to bring about a paradigm shift in each of the seven
countries. The iTAP finds that the programme is ambitious in scope as it spans a global
component plus in-depth activities in seven countries. While the funding proposal sets out the
broad framework, there are likely to be differences in approaches and investments envisaged at
the country level as encapsulated in individual country proposals. In particular, the readiness,
capacities and varying country contexts will determine the project activities, the pace of
implementation, and the extent to which these are effective and sustainable. The assumptions in
the theory of change are significant and, if not managed well, could bring risks for the project
(e.g. operation and maintenance (O&M) of hydromet infrastructure, retaining trained staff,
ab ility to attract investments).
27.
The funding proposal highlights three (of seven) countries as fragile and conflict
affected states (FCAS) which could affect the extent to which project interventions could achieve
a p aradigm shift particularly if occurrences of instability or conflict derail project progress.
28.
The results framework for the overall programme is presented at a high level, and the
detailed indicators for the outputs are yet to be developed. The specificity of how each of the
seven countries will take forward activities under output 2 are not yet presented and the iTAP
un derstands that these are currently under finalization in the respective country proposals.
29.
Overall, the iTAP assesses the paradigm shift potential as medium.
Scale: Medium to high
1. 3 Sustainable development potential
30.
The funding proposal is designed to support strategic frameworks and actions at
national and global levels to reduce disaster risk and the impacts of climate shocks and hazards.
In particular, the project will contribute specifically to target G of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 to “substantially increase the availability of and access to
multi-hazard early warning systems and disaster risk information and assessments to the

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 171
”
10 11
people by 2030 , the four priorities of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,
an d the priorities identified in Article 8 of the Paris Agreement.
31.
The programme could also contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
specifically SDG 13 (Climate action) and SDG 1 (No poverty), SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 9
(Industry, innovation and infrastructure), SDG 11 (Sustainable cities and communities), SDG 12
(Su stain
E
a
c
b
o
le
n o
p
m
ro
i
d
c
u
c
c
o
ti
-
o
b
n
e n
an
e
d
fi t
c
s
onsumption), and SDG 15 (Life on land).
32.
: Improved coordination and use of effective end-to-end MHEWS
and impact-based forecasts in design, planning and management of private and public
infrastructure could enable early and anticipatory action. This enhanced use of MHEWS could
help to reduce losses and damages across multiple sectors, including agriculture, transport and
energy. The project could also benefit communities whose livelihoods depend on climate-
sensitive sectors and reduce the negative impacts of climate change on morbidity and mortality
of vulnerable populations. In the longer term, the involvement of the private sector will be
crucial in sustaining the overall support architecture for MHEWS – for instance in the use of
pr ivate
E
co
n
m
vi
m
ro
u
n
n
m
ica
e
t
n
io
ta
n
l
s
c
i
o
nf
-
r
b
a
e
s
n
tr
e
u
fi
c
t
t
s
u
:
r e for disseminating early warnings and advisories.
33.
Activities undertaken through country-specific actions, as
encapsulated in the country funding proposals, could bring positive environmental co-benefits.
The timely uptake and use of climate and disaster information could inform the management of
natural resources, and the impact on the environment from climate events such as floods and
droughts. It could also inform how regions are managed, particularly those that are more
exposed to climate risks, including small islands, coastlines and in flood and landslide prone
regions. Timely and accurate climate information and impact-based forecasting could also be
used to guide sectoral policies, planning and implementation – for instance, in supporting the
adoption of climate-resilient agricultural practices, managing ecosystems, and improving water
resource management. Capacity-building and awareness-raising will also help to sensitize
co mmunities and local stakeholders to the impacts of climate change.
34.
The funding proposal (annex 6B) provides a global-level environmental and social
management framework, with overarching guidelines and principles applicable to all
participating countries. Additionally, each country-level funding proposal will contain
environmental and social management frameworks to meet the unique needs of the
participating country. The UNDP social and environmental screening template is also part of the
package (annex 6a). The funding proposal confirms that only low risk (category C) activities will
be supp
S
o
o
rt
c
e
i
d
al
b
a
y
n
t
d
h e
g e
p
n
ro
d
j
e
e
r
c t
c
.
o -benefits
35.
: The funding proposal adopts a people-centred
approach to MHEWS. As such it recognizes the value of participatory stakeholder engagement in
project design and implementation to ensure that the specific needs of vulnerable groups are
addressed. Through country-level actions, the project could contribute to enhancing the
resilience of vulnerable populations by ensuring that EWS are timely, accessible and responsive
to the needs of women, persons with disabilities, and Indigenous Peoples. Much will depend on
the country context and the specifics are to be included in the country-level proposals. The
funding proposal also integrates fragility and conflict in its approach, primarily focused on
anticipating and preparing relevant agencies and communities for possible conflicts over
resources due to climate-related hazards. It also anticipates benefits to the health sector from
disaster preparedness and anticipatory action to prevent the spread of diseases. Output 1 also
lays the foundation for expanding end-to-end MHEWS to other countries that are not covered by
this project.
10
See www.undrr.org/quick/74257
11
https://www.undrr.org/publication/sendai-framework-disaster-risk-reduction-2015-2030

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 172
36.
A global-level gender analysis and action plan (GAAP) sets the overarching framework
and guiding actions that recognizes the constructive and productive role that women can play in
early warning and disaster risk management (annex 8 to the funding proposal). The funding
proposal highlights that EWS should consider the unique needs and capacities of different
groups, including those who are marginalised or living in vulnerable situations, and aims to
tac kle gender gaps in access to and use of MHEWS technology, communications, and services.
37.
Overall, in the view of the iTAP, while the sustainable development potential is strong,
the impacts can vary substantially across countries based on several factors, including the
country and local contexts. Each country has unique opportunities and barriers to implementing
effective EWS, and much will depend on the activities and sub activities that are taken forward
in the forthcoming country project proposals. On this basis, the sustainable development
potential of the project is assessed as medium to high.
Scale: High
1. 4 Needs of the recipient
38.
The funding proposal estimates that, globally, between 3.3 billion and 3.6 billion people
live in conditions that are highly sensitive to climate change, with the majority living in
countries that have gaps in early warning systems. Most of these countries are among the least
de veloped countries, small island developing States and African countries.
39.
The funding proposal has summarized the vulnerability of all seven participating
countries. The iTAP notes that all seven countries, spanning a range of geographies, are highly
vulnerable to climate change and climate-related hazards, which affect people, livelihoods,
ass ets and economy.
40.
The seven participating countries have limited ability to access financing, face
institutional and capacity gaps in tackling climate risks, and have varying degrees of
socioeconomic vulnerabilities and systemic inequalities. Some countries also face compounded
12
risks from fragility and conflict. Vulnerable populations, including Indigenous People, ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, women and children, rural communities, and low-income
households are disproportionately affected by the climate crises as they lack the means to
rec eive the timely information needed to respond to climate-related risks and hazards.
41.
The programme is designed to be inclusive, so that early warning systems can reach
vulnerable communities, especially those whose livelihoods depend on climate-sensitive
sectors; and those with greater physical exposure to climate hazards, including women and
other marginalized groups within these communities. The programme aims to use information
dissemination channels that are context-specific to each country and can reach citizens
regardless of their gender, status, ethnicity or location. Annex 8 to the funding proposal
presents the GAAP for the overall multi-country proposal, while noting the availability of
country-specific GAAPs that analyse gender, including in the context of early warnings and
dis asters, with specific actions, targets and budget for the gender action plan.
42.
Overall the iTAP assess the needs of the recipient as high.
Scale:Medium
1. 5 Country ownership
43.
All seven no-objection letters have been received from national designated authorities
of participating countries (annex 1 to the funding proposal). Of the total of USD 68 million
expected as co-finance, approximately USD 35 million is envisaged as co-finance contributions
from countries, but specifics on individual country contributions are not yet available.
12
The funding proposal classifies Chad, Ethiopia and Somalia as either “in conflict” or “fragile” (annex 6b, p. 16),

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 173
44.
The iTAP recognizes that the funding proposal is aligned with national priorities, as
expressed through national adaptation plans, nationally determined contributions,
communications to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat
and the Sendai Framework. The AE has also clarified to the iTAP that the project seeks to align
with work across updated country nationally determined contributions, particularly as the lack
of climate information and EWS have been cited in each of these countries as necessary
investments for enhanced action and delivery for adaptation. However, the extent of national-
and local-level stakeholder buy-in to the project is unclear as the detail will become available in
country-level project proposals. The iTAP has extracted available data from the main funding
Table 3: Alignment with country climate change priorities
proposal and summarized it in table 3 below.
Country Country climate change plans and national policies
•
•
Antigua and • Nationally determined contributions (NDCs) (2021)
Barbuda National adaptation plan (NAP)
•
Cambodia • NDCs (updated 2020)
Chad NDCs (updated October 2021)
• Priority No. 10 (Climate risk management) under the First national
• adaptation plan of action
National development plan (2024–2028)
• 2030 vision, specifically under Pillar 4: Improving the quality of life of the
• Chadian population
• National policy on gender (2011–2020)
Ecuador • National climate strategy
• NDCs
• Nationally appropriate mitigation actions
• NAP
Ethiopia • NDCs (updated July 2021)
• National disaster risk management policy (2013)
Climate resilient green economy strategy (2011)
• Roadmap for multi-hazard, impact-based early warning and early action
• system (2023–2030)
National framework for climate services (2021–2030)
The strategic programme and investment framework outlining priority
• actions and investments to enhance Ethiopia’s disaster risk management
system
•
Fiji National climate change policy (2018–2030)
Somalia • Roadmap for implementation of the Early Warnings for All Initiative 2024–
• 2027
• NAP framework (2022)
• NDCs (updated July 2021)
National climate change policy (draft 2021)
• Initial national communication (2018) to the United Nations Framework
• Convention on Climate Change
National disaster risk management policy (December 2020)
• First biennial update report under the United Nations Framework
Source Convention on Climate Change
National adaptation programme of action (2013)
: Summarized from the multi-country funding proposal, with years reflected in brackets where information has
bee n made available in the funding proposal.
45.
The iTAP has observed from the funding proposal (table on p. 44) that some countries
have governmental agencies/ministries as counterparts for activity 1 (e.g. Antigua and
Barbuda), whereas others lack a national government partner agency (e.g. Chad). In its response
to the iTAP, the AE has clarified that governance arrangements vary across countries. The AE

--- Table 1 on Page 173 ---
Country | Country climate change plans and national policies
 | •
•
Antigua and | • Nationally determined contributions (NDCs) (2021)
Barbuda
Cambodia
Chad | National adaptation plan (NAP)
•
• NDCs (updated 2020)
NDCs (updated October 2021)
• Priority No. 10 (Climate risk management) under the First national
• adaptation plan of action
National development plan (2024–2028)
• 2030 vision, specifically under Pillar 4: Improving the quality of life of the
Ecuador | • Chadian population
• National policy on gender (2011–2020)
• National climate strategy
• NDCs
Ethiopia | • Nationally appropriate mitigation actions
• NAP
• NDCs (updated July 2021)
• National disaster risk management policy (2013)
Climate resilient green economy strategy (2011)
• Roadmap for multi-hazard, impact-based early warning and early action
• system (2023–2030)
National framework for climate services (2021–2030)
The strategic programme and investment framework outlining priority
 | • actions and investments to enhance Ethiopia’s disaster risk management
Fiji
Somalia | system
•
National climate change policy (2018–2030)
• Roadmap for implementation of the Early Warnings for All Initiative 2024–
• 2027
• NAP framework (2022)
• NDCs (updated July 2021)
National climate change policy (draft 2021)
• Initial national communication (2018) to the United Nations Framework
• Convention on Climate Change
National disaster risk management policy (December 2020)
• First biennial update report under the United Nations Framework

=== PAGE 174 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 174
has noted that FCAS often lack government mandated agencies, or that existing agencies lack
the capacity to implement specific project activities. Consequently, country projects are
designed to be implemented by in-country agencies, including non-governmental and
multilateral agencies, with the best comparative advantage in terms of capacities. The AE
response to the iTAP also notes that in some cases, “a great deal of the actual implementation
13
wi ll be managed by UNDP or government approved Responsible Parties”.
46.
Annex 7 to the funding proposal summarizes the overall approach to the stakeholder
engagement plan. The document spells out that preliminary stakeholder consultations were
undertaken during project preparation in 2023 and 2024. The consultations for outputs 1 and 2
see m to be conducted separately.
47.
The consultations for global and regional activities (output 1) appear as comprehensive
and include representatives from across all four pillar leads as well as from SOFF, IFRC,
Microsoft Artificial Intelligence, GCF, and UNDP. Regional agencies were also consulted,
including the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre, Southern African Development
Community, Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme, Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Climate Prediction and Applications Centre, Pacific Community,
Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre, and the Regional Integrated Multi-hazard Early Warning
Sy stem for Africa and Asia.
48.
For output 2, national-level consultations were conducted in all seven countries and are
summarized in appendix 4 to annex 7 to the funding proposal, with full details to be made
available in the country-level proposals. The consultations covered topics such as country-
specific stakeholder needs, gaps and vulnerabilities, potential roles for various stakeholders,
ways to maximize different technologies, including artificial intelligence, partnerships, potential
environmental and social impacts from project activities, and management plans developed, as
well as the grievance redress mechanism, and identification of critical actors and implementing
pa rtners.
49.
The consultations mainly with national-level stakeholders, appear to be one-off, with
some limited engagement of local-level stakeholders. The funding proposal clarifies that
detailed consultation with local-level stakeholders will follow during project implementation.
This will be important in identifying project sites and in informing the implementation of
specific activities. However, in the view of the iTAP, later consultations could also bring some
risks of limited stakeholder engagement or responsiveness to project activities which could stall
im plementation processes.
50.
The stakeholder engagement plan also makes provision for consultations with local-
level authorities and community people, including men, women, people with disabilities, the
elderly, youth and Indigenous Peoples’ groups as relevant. In some countries, key groups may
also include refugees and internally displaced persons. However, the details of how the
programme will go about undertaking these consultations is not as well articulated in the
overall funding proposal. The extent to which the private sector was involved in consultations is
les s clear.
51.
Overall, country ownership of the project is assessed as medium.
Scale: Medium
1. 6 Efficiency and effectiveness
52.
The estimated benefit–cost ratio and socioeconomic benefits in the funding proposal
make a compelling case for investing in weather and climate information and disaster risk
reduction. For example, the fun ding proposal notes that 24 hours warning of a coming storm or
13
The AE’s written answers in response to iTAP’s questions (Q10 (iii)] on 18 December 2024.

=== PAGE 175 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 175
heatwave can cut the ensuing damage by 30 per cent, while spending USD 800 million on such
14
sys tems in developing countries could avoid losses of USD 3–16 billion per year.
53.
The programme will be implemented over a period of 5 years, with a project lifespan of
30 years. The funding proposal notes that total project funding of USD 175,490,730 comprises a
request for GCF grant funds of USD 107,490,730 alongside co-finance of USD 68 million
su ggesting a co-finance ratio of 1:0.63.
54.
However, the iTAP has observed some variances in co-financing figures presented in the
funding proposal as compared to the more recent AE’s written responses and understands that
these are yet to be firmed up. In response to queries from the iTAP, the AE has clarified in its
written response that a project co-finance of USD 54,984,863 is expected from three sources,
ba sed on letters of commitment received so far. These include:
(a)
SOFF investments of USD 40.1 million (USD 18 million has already been approved and
an additional USD 22 million is yet to be approved to support the project in seven
countries) – whereas the funding proposal states a figure of USD 30 million. (The AE has
clarified to the iTAP that country proposals have been designed in close coordination
with the SOFF and CREWS secretariat to ensure complementarity with this project.)
(b)
Co-financing commitments from governments – letters have so far been received from
Ethiopia (USD 2,315,000) and Ecuador (USD 3,720,072), while the funding proposal
envisaged a total contribution of USD 35 million and stated that the remaining letters of
commitment would be received by December 2024; and
(c)
Pillar leads comprising the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (indicative
USD 3,124,650), IFRC (USD 3,751,681), and International Telecommunication Union
(USD 1,973,460); whereas the funding proposal envisaged contributions of USD 3
million.
55.
The allocation of funds across components seems to be aligned with the project’s
ambition. The majority of requested GCF resources are allocated to output 2 (87 per cent), with
the balance allocated to output 1 (6 per cent), project management costs (5 per cent), and
mTaobnlieto 4r:i nOgv aenrdv ieevwa loufa ttihoen g(l2o pbearl cEeanrtl)y. Warnings for All project outputs and financing
Project component GCF grant GCF funds as a Total component
contribution proportion of the budget
(USD million) total GCF budget (USD million)
(%)
Outcome 1:
Output 1:
Sustained support for global coordination and support architecture for EW4All
Enhancing enabling 6.41 6 6.41
conditions globally and regionally to
pOruotmcoomtee c 2ou:ntry-level actions
tOouwtaprudts 2 the EW4All goals
End-to-end EWS that is inclusive and builds community resilience to climate hazards
: Accelerating actions in 93.17 87 161.17
select countries towards EW4All
MTootnailt oGrCinFg and evaluation 1072..4799 1002 1752..4799
Project management costs 5.12 5 5.12
Source
Abbreviation:
: Adapted from the multi-country funding proposal and its annex 4.
EW4All = Early Warnings for All
56.
The allocation of resour ces by country is set out in annex 4, but the funding proposal
notes that these are tentative. While there are significant differences in infrastructure gaps,
14
See https://gca.org/reports/adapt-now-a-global-call-for-leadership-on-climate-resilience/

--- Table 1 on Page 175 ---
Project component | GCF grant
contribution
(USD million) | GCF funds as a
proportion of the
total GCF budget
(%) | Total component
budget
(USD million)
Outcome 1: |  |  | 
Output 1:
Sustained support for glo
Enhancing enabling
conditions globally and regionally to | bal coordination and
6.41 | support architecture
6 | for EW4All
6.41
pOruotmcoomtee c 2ou:ntry-level actions |  |  | 
tOouwtaprudts 2 the EW4All goals
End-to-end EWS that is in | clusive and builds co | mmunity resilience t | o climate hazards
: Accelerating actions in | 93.17 | 87 | 161.17
select countries towards EW4All |  |  | 
MTootnailt oGrCinFg and evaluation | 1072..4799 | 1002 | 1752..4799

=== PAGE 176 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 176
technical capacities and frequency/intensity of hazards and disasters between countries, each
country has a notional funding envelope of between USD 12 million and 13 million. The AE has
clarified to the iTAP that these notional country-level allocations are under revision as, so far,
budgets for only three (of seven) participating countries have been finalized, with the
rem ainder expected to be finalized by the end of January 2025.
57.
Given the public nature of MHEWS and the nascent contexts across countries, the
funding proposal acknowledges the limitations in engaging with the private sector. The project
does not expect to attract private-sector investments but instead plans to engage the private
sector through stimulating demand for climate information-based value-added products and
services – for instance, in telecommunications, agribusinesses, tourism and transport, including
a focus on aviation and financial services such as insurance. The level and type of engagement is
likely to vary according to country context, and the iTAP recommends that these approaches are
fur ther defined as part of the project’s financial sustainability planning.
58.
The project has a two-layered governance structure (see fig. 1 below) for each of the
outputs. The global-level arrangement, clearly outlined in the funding proposal, will involve
UNDP leading coordination efforts across all four pillar leads with collective decision-making
authority. However, there will be seven separate governance and implementation arrangements
in each of the participating countries. It will be important to ensure that decision-making is
coordinated across the two levels and for the programme as a whole to leverage synergies and
Figure 1: Governance arrangements for outputs 1 and 2 respectively
maximize coordination.
Source
Abbreviations:
: Multi-country funding proposal.
BPPS = Bureau for Policy and Programme
Support, CBO = community-based organization, CCA = climate change adaptation, CSO = civil society organization, HQ
= headquarters, ICT = Information and Communications Technology, IFRC = International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, INGO = international non-governmental organization, ITU = International
Telecommunication Union, NDMA = National Disaster Management Authority, NGO = non-governmental organization,
UNDP = United Nations Development Programme, UNDRR = United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, WMO
= World Meteorological Organization.

=== PAGE 177 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 177
59.
A long-term strategy to unlock finances and to manage the global architecture will be an
important aspect of sustainability and a basis for countries to make progress at pace and scale
towards developing national MHEWS. The exit strategy aspires to forge partnerships,
strengthen alignment and coordination, and leverage financing through multiple sources for the
global support architecture to be sustainable, but the details are as yet undefined. At the country
level, institutional strengthening, coordinated action, financing strategies, and access to global
and regional expertise are intended to strengthen national capacities and enhance proposal
de velopment capacities.
60.
For output 2, each country proposal will contain an O&M plan, and the AE has clarified
to the iTAP that a multipronged strategy for O&M may be required for some countries,
especially FCAS and those with limited fiscal space. Additionally, O&M costs for observation
equipment will be borne by country NMHS’s and, while the task of technically demanding tasks
will fall to staff of NMHS’s, communities will also be trained to help with basic O&M (e.g.
cle aning and testing of sensors).
61.
The funding proposal contains a high-level monitoring and evaluation framework
encompassing two levels: the global level for all outputs; and the country level for all the seven
participating countries under output 2. Separate arrangements will be put in place to track and
report on logframe indicators at two levels; while the Global Project Monitoring Unit will be
responsible for monitoring and evaluation of the project, Country Programme Management
Un its will track and report on country-level indicators for output 2.
62.
The iTAP has noted that country-level monitoring frameworks have yet to be designed
and the logframe currently does not include detailed indicators to cover the depth of the
programme, including across countries. The AE has clarified to the iTAP that this logframe is
intended to simplify reporting arrangements as multiple agencies are involved in the delivery of
each of the project outputs (four pillar leads for component 1 and seven countries for
component 2). The iTAP also understands that the forthcoming country-level logframes, which
wi ll be aggregated for output 2, are intended to be more detailed.
63.
The iTAP recommends that, once country logframes become available, the overarching
logframe be reviewed and revised during the project inception period to ensure that overall
targets are achievable, inclusive, and disaggregated. The iTAP also recommends that the
monitoring arrangements are revisited and strengthened during the inception phase to ensure
coherence between global and country-level efforts. The preparation of baseline assessments
under output 2, planned in the initial phases of the project, will be critical to reliably assess the
eff ectiveness of the project.
64.
Overall, the iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness potential as medium.
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
65.
The fundamental premise of the overall Multi-country Project Advancing EW4All
funding proposal is sound and presents an opportunity for GCF resources to be deployed in
response to the urgent call from the United Nations Secretary General to advance EW4All by
20 27 in the face of the climate crisis.
66.
The funding proposal presents a programmatic umbrella approach, and the AE has
clarified that details will emerge in separate country proposals for the remaining six
participating countries, by the end of January 2025. While the Ecuador country proposal serves
as a useful model, the iTAP review has been somewhat limited due to the lack of detail on the
remaining six country proposals, particularly on relating country vulnerabilities and needs to
country-level activities and targeted priority sectors. Information on allocation of financial

=== PAGE 178 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 178
resources and country-level results is limited, as well as on how the AE will engage with
sta keholders in different country contexts.
67.
The scale of ambition of the programme, and its reach across diverse country contexts
spread over geographies means that there could be some associated risks in implementation.
The development of a long-term financing strategy will be critical to project success.
Additionally, country readiness to take forward MHEWS, and factors such as political, conflict,
an d security risks remain key considerations that could undermine programme efforts.
68.
The role of UNDP is spread across multiple functions including as the AE, executing
entity, and senior supplier which could bring some risks to coordination and country
ownership. UNDP plans to implement the country programmes under the Direct
Implementation Modality, with UNDP country offices effectively responsible for the day-to-day
operations and collaborative engagement with government agencies and other stakeholders.
This carries some risk that primary ownership may be with the United Nations agency rather
tha n with the respective government.
69.
The iTAP recommends that the AE undertake the following actions:
(a)
Prior to the AE approving implementation for each individual participating country
under output 2, make available to GCF, the full country proposal, including the feasibility
study, detailed budget and results framework, highlighting any variances with the multi-
country funding proposal on which the iTAP assessment is based.
(b)
Ensure that future post-disaster needs assessments in all the selected countries are
targeted and EWS-oriented by focusing on assessing the functionality, gaps, and
outcomes of early warning systems. This includes integrating lessons learned from post-
disaster forensics into post-disaster needs assessments and ensuring that recovery
frameworks are informed by actionable insights to enhance EWS performance and
resilience.
(c)
During the inception phase, update the MEL plan with further details on the steps and
responsibilities for knowledge management and exchange.
(d)
Include in each annual progress report an analysis of how each country project
contributes to the overall programme’s objectives and results.
70.
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this multi-country funding proposal with
Condition to be met prior to the effectiveness of the Funded Activity Agreement:
the following conditions:
(a)
The AE shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, an
updated logframe that is consistent with the theory of change and accurately captures
the milestones and final targets (with beneficiary calculations) across all seven
participating countries of the Programme, disaggregated by sex. The updated logframe
should include an explanatory note setting out how the country-level disaster risk
knowledge systems and Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) dashboards
(activity 2.2.1) for each participating country will link to the overall EW4All MEL system
Condition to be met prior to the first disbursement of funds by GCF under the Funded
and to national reporting.
Activity Agreement:
(a)
The Accredited Entity shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF
Secretariat, a short summary that clearly explains how eligibility criteria will be applied
in the selection of investments, project sites, and beneficiaries to be supported by GCF
proceeds for each of the seven participating countries. This note should also clarify any

=== PAGE 179 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 179
changes in approach across particular country contexts and with the overall multi-
country funding proposal; and
(b)
The Accredited Entity shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF
Secretariat, a short note confirming the institutional set-up for output 2 in each
participating country, as well as the levels of representation of country participants in
Condition to be met prior to the second disbursement of funds by GCF under the Funded
the multilevel governance mechanism under output 1.
Activity Agreement:
(a)
The Accredited Entity shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF
Secretariat, a short note outlining the overall financial sustainability plan for the
Programme, including how this will be approached in each of the seven participating
countries.

=== PAGE 180 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 180
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP258)
Proposal name: Multi-country Project Advancing Early Warnings for All
(EW4All)
Accredited entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Country/(ies): Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Somalia
Project/programme size: Medium
Impact potential
The detailed analysis and observations of the iTAP on the Impact Potential rated as Medium
are noted and appreciated.
We confirm that the estimated target beneficiary numbers for each of the seven participating
countries have been provided to the GCF. All seven country proposals have followed
Ecuador’s approach prioritizing climate vulnerable sectors in line with the overall funding
proposal.
We recognize the ambitious scope of the outputs and acknowledge that the extent of impact
will depend on successfully engaging and working with multiple stakeholders at all levels,
from global to local. We assure the iTAP that the Pillar Leads and UNDP are well positioned to
do this at the global and country levels.
We confirm that the required pace and scale of implementation will be ensured to reach the
intended beneficiaries and meet stated targets.
We fully accept the iTAP's recommendation and confirm that the approach of prioritising
sectors vulnerable to climate impact has been applied to all country projects. The project will
follow the recommended sector focus to enable analysis and targeting of interventions that
address the unique vulnerabilities in each country. We also fully agree that successes in one
Pseacrtaodr iwgmill bshe irfet pploictaetnetdi aaln d scaled up to national levels through coordinated action.
We note the Medium rating given to the paradigm shift potential and appreciate the careful
analysis that has been provided.
We note the critical need for a longer-term financial strategy to sustain the EW4All
architecture beyond 2027 and accept the recommendation that this will be undertaken
through wide consultations with a range of partners. The project will develop a financial
sustainability strategy in each participating country to codify sustainability pathways
relevant to each country's context.
We acknowledge and confirm that mechanisms for knowledge exchange between countries,
the establishment of technical expert groups and sharing of lessons through events and
workshops will be put in place. We fully accept the recommendation to leverage Output 1 to
replicate EW4All across other countries, provided there is additional financing, and Output 2
to define approaches that can be scaled up over the long term.

--- Table 1 on Page 180 ---
Impact potential
The detailed analysis and observations of the iTAP on the Impact Potential rated as Medium
are noted and appreciated.
We confirm that the estimated target beneficiary numbers for each of the seven participating
countries have been provided to the GCF. All seven country proposals have followed
Ecuador’s approach prioritizing climate vulnerable sectors in line with the overall funding
proposal.
We recognize the ambitious scope of the outputs and acknowledge that the extent of impact
will depend on successfully engaging and working with multiple stakeholders at all levels,
from global to local. We assure the iTAP that the Pillar Leads and UNDP are well positioned to
do this at the global and country levels.
We confirm that the required pace and scale of implementation will be ensured to reach the
intended beneficiaries and meet stated targets.
We fully accept the iTAP's recommendation and confirm that the approach of prioritising
sectors vulnerable to climate impact has been applied to all country projects. The project will
follow the recommended sector focus to enable analysis and targeting of interventions that
address the unique vulnerabilities in each country. We also fully agree that successes in one
Pseacrtaodr iwgmill bshe irfet pploictaetnetdi aaln d scaled up to national levels through coordinated action.
We note the Medium rating given to the paradigm shift potential and appreciate the careful
analysis that has been provided.
We note the critical need for a longer-term financial strategy to sustain the EW4All
architecture beyond 2027 and accept the recommendation that this will be undertaken
through wide consultations with a range of partners. The project will develop a financial
sustainability strategy in each participating country to codify sustainability pathways
relevant to each country's context.
We acknowledge and confirm that mechanisms for knowledge exchange between countries,
the establishment of technical expert groups and sharing of lessons through events and
workshops will be put in place. We fully accept the recommendation to leverage Output 1 to

=== PAGE 181 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 181
The concern that the number of beneficiaries is a small proportion of the population is noted.
The figures that are provided in the country proposals are deliberately made conservative,
particularly for FCAS. However, all country projects are designed to maximise the impact
through deliberate integration and coordination with other projects and programmes of the
government. The use of technologies such as cell broadcasting will facilitate the national
reach of early warning communications, hence increasing the potential for project impact. It
is important to note that the project has also looked to ensure that early warnings are able to
reach those most vulnerable, hence ensuring an important focus of additionality that is
consistent with UNDP’s leave no one behind approach.
We appreciate the acknowledgement by iTAP of the different approaches varying by country
capacities and contexts and appreciate their recognition that conditions in FCAS could affect
project delivery. We also acknowledge that the assumptions in the theory of change are
significant and take note they need to be managed well to avoid the risks listed.
The detailed indicators for outputs for the seven countries, including how activities under
Output 2 will be implemented are provided in the country proposals. We confirm that these
wSuilslt baein parbolveid deedv teol othpem GeCnFt bpyo teenndt oiaf lJanuary to mid-February 2025.
The “Medium to High”" rating given to the sustainable development potential for the project
is noted. We thank the iTAP and concur with the detailed assessment of how the project
supports strategic frameworks and the national and global levels and the economic and
environmental co-benefits.
We confirm that each country level proposal contains environmental and social management
frameworks addressing their unique needs. We also confirm that only low risk (category C)
activities will be supported by the project. We appreciate the acknowledgement that the
project design adopted a people centred and participatory approach with specific attention to
needs of vulnerable groups including women, persons with disabilities and indigenous
peoples. Country proposals have all included country specific stakeholder engagement plans
that will be monitored throughout project implementation to ensure that the project’s
participatory and people centred focus remains a priority.
We confirm that the country proposals provide the context and specificity needed for timely,
accessible and responsive EWS. We appreciate the recognition that the proposal integrates
fragility and conflict in its approach and confirm that the project will benefit the health sector
and that Output 1 will lay the foundation for expanding MHEWS to other countries.
We appreciate the acknowledgement made to the substantial differences in factors and
contexts that contribute to sustainable development in these countries. We confirm that the
activities and sub-activities presented in the country proposals address their unique barriers
and leverage available opportunities to maximise the sustainable development impacts of
tNheeesde sin otfe trhveen rteiocnipsi. e nt
We agree with iTAP’s assessment that the needs of the project recipients are “High”. We
appreciate that iTAP recognises the programme is designed to be inclusive so it reaches
vulnerable populations, low-income households and those whose livelihoods are in climate
vulnerable sectors. We also appreciate that the iTAP has noted that there are significant

--- Table 1 on Page 181 ---
The concern that the number of beneficiaries is a small proportion of the population is noted.
The figures that are provided in the country proposals are deliberately made conservative,
particularly for FCAS. However, all country projects are designed to maximise the impact
through deliberate integration and coordination with other projects and programmes of the
government. The use of technologies such as cell broadcasting will facilitate the national
reach of early warning communications, hence increasing the potential for project impact. It
is important to note that the project has also looked to ensure that early warnings are able to
reach those most vulnerable, hence ensuring an important focus of additionality that is
consistent with UNDP’s leave no one behind approach.
We appreciate the acknowledgement by iTAP of the different approaches varying by country
capacities and contexts and appreciate their recognition that conditions in FCAS could affect
project delivery. We also acknowledge that the assumptions in the theory of change are
significant and take note they need to be managed well to avoid the risks listed.
The detailed indicators for outputs for the seven countries, including how activities under
Output 2 will be implemented are provided in the country proposals. We confirm that these
wSuilslt baein parbolveid deedv teol othpem GeCnFt bpyo teenndt oiaf lJanuary to mid-February 2025.
The “Medium to High”" rating given to the sustainable development potential for the project
is noted. We thank the iTAP and concur with the detailed assessment of how the project
supports strategic frameworks and the national and global levels and the economic and
environmental co-benefits.
We confirm that each country level proposal contains environmental and social management
frameworks addressing their unique needs. We also confirm that only low risk (category C)
activities will be supported by the project. We appreciate the acknowledgement that the
project design adopted a people centred and participatory approach with specific attention to
needs of vulnerable groups including women, persons with disabilities and indigenous
peoples. Country proposals have all included country specific stakeholder engagement plans
that will be monitored throughout project implementation to ensure that the project’s
participatory and people centred focus remains a priority.
We confirm that the country proposals provide the context and specificity needed for timely,
accessible and responsive EWS. We appreciate the recognition that the proposal integrates
fragility and conflict in its approach and confirm that the project will benefit the health sector
and that Output 1 will lay the foundation for expanding MHEWS to other countries.
We appreciate the acknowledgement made to the substantial differences in factors and
contexts that contribute to sustainable development in these countries. We confirm that the
activities and sub-activities presented in the country proposals address their unique barriers
and leverage available opportunities to maximise the sustainable development impacts of
tNheeesde sin otfe trhveen rteiocnipsi. e nt
We agree with iTAP’s assessment that the needs of the project recipients are “High”. We
appreciate that iTAP recognises the programme is designed to be inclusive so it reaches

=== PAGE 182 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 182
challenges faced by the seven participating countries in accessing finance and in institutional
and capacity gaps.
We confirm that each country proposal includes a country specific gender analysis and action
plan as well as a stakeholder engagement plan that will ensure project activities are gender
rCeosupnotnrsyiv oew annedr isnhcilpus ive.
The “Medium” rating given to country ownership is noted.
As mentioned in the assessment the project has engaged with NDAs in project development
and no objection letters from the 7 NDAs have been received. We confirm that specific
individual country co-finance contributions have been provided to the GCF, the Global FP has
been updated accordingly. We further confirm that each country-level proposal provides
details of national and local level buy-in as reflected within the country-level stakeholder
engagement plan that includes a description of the consultations at country level while
providing a detailed analysis and strategy for continued stakeholder engagement during the
projects’ life-cycle.
We thank the iTAP for summarising the alignment of the proposals with the country's climate
change priorities and confirm that the respective country proposals and feasibility studies
provide a significantly higher level of detail.
We concur with the observations of the iTAP that some countries, particularly FCAS, lack
governmental agencies and ministries as counterparts for activities and in these cases, in-
country agencies, including NGOs, local civil society organizations and multilateral agencies
with the best comparative advantage will support in the implementation of these activities.
Investment in these countries look to enhance community and local governance systems
while promoting opportunities for enhanced social cohesion and trust.
We would like to emphasise that consultations with national-level stakeholders were
systematically completed in all countries, except in Somalia, where security considerations
limited such work. Details of these engagements are captured in the country-specific
stakeholder engagement plans. In the case of Ethiopia, Somalia and Chad a conflict sensitivity
analysis has been included within the Stakeholder Engagement Plan that provides a
framework for continued consultations and stakeholder engagement.
We confirm that the country-level stakeholder engagement plans provide the details on how
consultations will be undertaken and apologise that this could not be captured sufficiently in
tEhfefi cgileonbacly F aPn ads e tfhfeescet irveepnoerstss were still under preparation.
The rating of “Medium” for efficiency and effectiveness is noted
Thank you for the detailed analysis.
The co-financing figures in the funding proposal are finalised and have been shared with GCF
in the latest version of FP pp. 52-54. including 7 countries’ total budgets.
The letters of co-finance have been provided for all countries and have been submitted to
GCF.
The allocation of resources by country as set out in Annex 4 is now finalised. We are pleased
to inform the iTAP that the budgets for all seven participating countries are now final and the
global FP has been updated accordingly.

--- Table 1 on Page 182 ---
challenges faced by the seven participating countries in accessing finance and in institutional
and capacity gaps.
We confirm that each country proposal includes a country specific gender analysis and action
plan as well as a stakeholder engagement plan that will ensure project activities are gender
rCeosupnotnrsyiv oew annedr isnhcilpus ive.
The “Medium” rating given to country ownership is noted.
As mentioned in the assessment the project has engaged with NDAs in project development
and no objection letters from the 7 NDAs have been received. We confirm that specific
individual country co-finance contributions have been provided to the GCF, the Global FP has
been updated accordingly. We further confirm that each country-level proposal provides
details of national and local level buy-in as reflected within the country-level stakeholder
engagement plan that includes a description of the consultations at country level while
providing a detailed analysis and strategy for continued stakeholder engagement during the
projects’ life-cycle.
We thank the iTAP for summarising the alignment of the proposals with the country's climate
change priorities and confirm that the respective country proposals and feasibility studies
provide a significantly higher level of detail.
We concur with the observations of the iTAP that some countries, particularly FCAS, lack
governmental agencies and ministries as counterparts for activities and in these cases, in-
country agencies, including NGOs, local civil society organizations and multilateral agencies
with the best comparative advantage will support in the implementation of these activities.
Investment in these countries look to enhance community and local governance systems
while promoting opportunities for enhanced social cohesion and trust.
We would like to emphasise that consultations with national-level stakeholders were
systematically completed in all countries, except in Somalia, where security considerations
limited such work. Details of these engagements are captured in the country-specific
stakeholder engagement plans. In the case of Ethiopia, Somalia and Chad a conflict sensitivity
analysis has been included within the Stakeholder Engagement Plan that provides a
framework for continued consultations and stakeholder engagement.
We confirm that the country-level stakeholder engagement plans provide the details on how
consultations will be undertaken and apologise that this could not be captured sufficiently in
tEhfefi cgileonbacly F aPn ads e tfhfeescet irveepnoerstss were still under preparation.
The rating of “Medium” for efficiency and effectiveness is noted
Thank you for the detailed analysis.
The co-financing figures in the funding proposal are finalised and have been shared with GCF
in the latest version of FP pp. 52-54. including 7 countries’ total budgets.
The letters of co-finance have been provided for all countries and have been submitted to
GCF.
The allocation of resources by country as set out in Annex 4 is now finalised. We are pleased

=== PAGE 183 ===
GCF/B.41/02/Add.06
Page 183
We take note of the iTAP recommendation on further defining the country-specific
approaches to engage with the private sector. It is important to note that national proposals
include activities to support the development of long-term financial sustainability strategies
which will include, in some countries, potential engagement of the private sector.
We also take note of the need to ensure that decision-making is coordinated across both
national and global levels for the project as a whole for coordination and to leverage
synergies. All seven countries are represented in the global coordination arrangements, and
we have allocated resources for cross-regional knowledge sharing, lessons learned and
effective coordination between members on the different country and global coordination
structures at policy and programme levels. The project has foreseen a project management
structure that will allow for coordination at both global and national levels through project
management units while providing a space for lessons on the ground to guide knowledge
management and learning.
We take note and accept the recommendation that the overarching log frame will be revised
and adjusted during project inception period once the country log-frames become available.
We also accept the recommendation and confirm that the monitoring arrangements will be
revisited and strengthened during the inception phase to ensure coherence between the
global and country level efforts. We acknowledge the critical nature of the baseline
assessments under output 2 that are planned for the initial phases of the project.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
We greatly appreciate iTAP’s endorsement of the project to the GCF Board.
We thank the iTAP for their flexibility and support and confirm that further country-level
details will be submitted to GCF by the end of January (and mid-January for one or two
countries).
We accept the recommendations proposed by iTAP; however, we would like to provide
one clarification and seek consideration on a revised timeline for one of the conditions
proposed.
On iTAP recommendation in Paragraph 69 (a), we would like to clarify that, based on
GCF Secretariat guidance, we confirm that country-level information (“country project
proposals”) will be made available to the GCF prior to the AE undertaking implementation.
We also confirm there are no variances with the multi-country funding proposal on which
this assessment is based.
On the condition for the second disbursement, given the complexities associated with this
project, we would like to seek iTAP’s and GCF Secretariat’s consideration to set this
condition for the third, instead of the second, disbursement. Two justifications can be
provided to support this proposal: First, the financial sustainability plan would be better
informed if it reflects early lessons from the project implementation, and two full years of
implementation would permit such lessons to be accumulated. Second, by the end of 2027, we
expect to have in place various assessments and stocktakes from the SGs EW4All initiative as
it runs till the end of 2027. This will allow the sustainability plan to fully incorporate lessons
from the SG’s EW4All initiative.

--- Table 1 on Page 183 ---
We take note of the iTAP recommendation on further defining the country-specific
approaches to engage with the private sector. It is important to note that national proposals
include activities to support the development of long-term financial sustainability strategies
which will include, in some countries, potential engagement of the private sector.
We also take note of the need to ensure that decision-making is coordinated across both
national and global levels for the project as a whole for coordination and to leverage
synergies. All seven countries are represented in the global coordination arrangements, and
we have allocated resources for cross-regional knowledge sharing, lessons learned and
effective coordination between members on the different country and global coordination
structures at policy and programme levels. The project has foreseen a project management
structure that will allow for coordination at both global and national levels through project
management units while providing a space for lessons on the ground to guide knowledge
management and learning.
We take note and accept the recommendation that the overarching log frame will be revised
and adjusted during project inception period once the country log-frames become available.
We also accept the recommendation and confirm that the monitoring arrangements will be
revisited and strengthened during the inception phase to ensure coherence between the
global and country level efforts. We acknowledge the critical nature of the baseline
assessments under output 2 that are planned for the initial phases of the project.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:
We greatly appreciate iTAP’s endorsement of the project to the GCF Board.
We thank the iTAP for their flexibility and support and confirm that further country-level
details will be submitted to GCF by the end of January (and mid-January for one or two
countries).
We accept the recommendations proposed by iTAP; however, we would like to provide
one clarification and seek consideration on a revised timeline for one of the conditions
proposed.
On iTAP recommendation in Paragraph 69 (a), we would like to clarify that, based on
GCF Secretariat guidance, we confirm that country-level information (“country project
proposals”) will be made available to the GCF prior to the AE undertaking implementation.
We also confirm there are no variances with the multi-country funding proposal on which
this assessment is based.
On the condition for the second disbursement, given the complexities associated with this
project, we would like to seek iTAP’s and GCF Secretariat’s consideration to set this
condition for the third, instead of the second, disbursement. Two justifications can be
provided to support this proposal: First, the financial sustainability plan would be better
informed if it reflects early lessons from the project implementation, and two full years of
implementation would permit such lessons to be accumulated. Second, by the end of 2027, we
expect to have in place various assessments and stocktakes from the SGs EW4All initiative as

=== PAGE 184 ===
Gender documentation for FP258
Gender Analysis and Action Plan
Multi Country Proposal
Early Warnings for All
January 2025
1

=== PAGE 185 ===
Table of Contents
1 INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................. 3
1.1 PROJECT’S INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL ......................................................... 4
1.2 PROJECT’S INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL ....................................................... 5
2 GENERAL CONTEXT FOR GENDER IN EARLY WARNINGS ................................................................... 6
3 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR ECUADOR ............................................................................................. 8
4 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR CAMBODIA ........................................................................................... 1
5 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR FIJI ..................................................................................................... 10
6 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR CHAD ................................................................................................. 27
7 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR ETHIOPIA ............................................................................................ 45
8 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA .................................................................... 59
9 GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR SOMALIA ............................................................................................ 70
10 GENDER ACTION PLAN MCP EW4ALL ........................................................................................ 87
2

=== PAGE 186 ===
1 Introduction
This Gender Analysis and Action Plan (GAAP) has been prepared in support of a project proposal for Multi-
Country Project (MCP) for Early Warning Systems for All (EW4All) to the Green Climate Fund (GCF). This
project is supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in its role as a GCF Accredited
Entity. The project has two main outputs:
Output 1 will promote regional and global coordination among various stakeholders, including government
agencies, civil society organizations, academia, and the private sector. This Output aims to scale up and
accelerate global and regional support for national efforts to increase MHEWS’ capacity and coverage. This
will be done by enhancing coordination and providing technical support for the implementation of EW4All;
strengthening monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes to support EW4All implementation; and
reinforcing knowledge management and the dissemination of lessons learned. Activities under this Output
will focus on coordination activities; developing guidance, tools and training materials; technical assistance;
capacity building; knowledge management and dissemination, and peer-to-peer learning. This component
will be led by the EW4All project lead agencies in each of the seven countries.
Output 2 will specifically focus on seven countries – Antigua and Barbuda, Cambodia, Chad, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, and Somalia – to roll out national level investment activities to address country and local level
needs to achieve the EW4All target. This Output addresses barriers that prevent the implementation of a
comprehensive, and end-to-end MHEWS in the seven initial target countries, including:
1) Gaps in policies, inter-agency coordination and lack of coherent strategies;
2) Inadequate technical and scientific capacities;
3) Missing observations; and
4) Barriers that prevent effective local actions.
The activities in Output 2 countries for all seven countries will mirror the four pillars of the EW4All Executive
Action Plan (EAP), and will be implemented through the national governments with support from UNDP, the
EW4All pillar leads and their in-country national offices and other partner agencies where relevant. The
EW4All pillars and leads are:
• Pillar 1: Disaster risk knowledge – led by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNDRR);
• Pillar 2: Detection, observations, monitoring, analysis and forecasting of hazards, led by the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO);
• Pillar 3: Warning dissemination and communication, led by the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU);
• Pillar 4: Preparedness to respond, led by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC).
Activities aligned with Pillar 1 will focus on strengthening governance and coordination, establishing clear
functions, roles and responsibilities of agencies in the national warning dissemination process. Considerations
of differential access to information and resources by women and vulnerable groups will be included in the
dissemination strategy. This activity will also establish or strengthen existing local early warning committees
or equivalent grassroots organisations with representatives from elected/traditional leaders, including
women and vulnerable groups. Capacities of these local institutions, from district down to village level, will
be enhanced through regular engagements and training programmes that strengthen institutional structures
and procedures.
Activities aligned with Pillar 2 will focus on disaster risk knowledge and observations in order to improve
awareness about hazards, exposure populations, services, infrastructure, vulnerabilities of communities, and
3

=== PAGE 187 ===
loss and damage accounting. There will be a focus on the strengthening and/or establishment of
meteorological, hydrological and climate forecast and monitoring systems for each participating country.
Activities aligned with Pillar 3 and 4 will and focus on Early Warning dissemination and preparedness. Early
warning messages will be developed in a multitude of accessible formats and languages, including for persons
with disabilities. Information will be disseminated in a manner which ensures that risks and warnings are
understood, are clear and actionable by their target audience. The activity will support a spectrum of actions,
including integrating clear protocols for early warning and early action in disaster management/
preparedness plans. Best practices for data privacy will be put in place. Assessments will be carried out to
understand how best to reach communities at risk. There will also be training of local governments and first
responders. Communities will be engaged in developing holistic plans for early warning and anticipatory
action to respond to and to better manage local disasters reducing risks and to better adapt to climate change
based on feasibility studies, climate information and local knowledge. Specific attention will be given to the
needs of women and vulnerable groups. Communities will be trained on Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
of early warning devices such as water level recorders, rain-gauges and anemometers. A full description of
activities can be found in the MCP. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has also been prepared.
Gender considerations have been mainstreamed into all project activities. A specific gender analysis for each
country has been conducted and can be found in sections 3-9 of this report. Section 10 of this report consists
of a consolidated global Gender Action Plan (GAP) which covers the whole project1.
1.1 Project’s Institutional Arrangements at the Global Level
UNDP will be the Executing Entity of the EW4All-MCP and will be responsible for the overall project.
The global implementation arrangement will comprise of a Project Board or Project Steering Committee (PSC)
comprised of representatives of the Pillar Leads (WMO, UNDRR, ITU and IFRC) who have co-developed this
project. PSC meetings will be held virtually, two times a year. In addition, the members of the committee will
meet physically every year for a knowledge sharing meeting. Three such meetings will be held during the
implementation of the first seven country projects. These meetings will be attended by the EW4All Pillar
Leads, GCF, UNDP and two representatives from each of the country projects, including at least one from the
relevant national governments.
The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required
by the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective
international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest
with the UNDP Executive Coordinator.
A global Project Management Unit (PMU) will be constituted within UNDP for the overall project coordination,
oversight and monitoring, including implementation of the consolidated global GAP that is found in Section
10 of this report. The PMU will also provide technical support help the country PMUs in accessing regional
and international resources through networking. The PMU comprises of three full time staff: a Project
Manager, an Administrative and Finance Assistant and a Procurement Specialist. Part-time staff on the PMU
will include a Technical Advisor, a Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Officer, a Communications Expert, a
Safeguards, Gender and Inclusivity Expert (SGIE) and other subject experts brought in on an as needed basis.
The Project Manager will run the project on a day-to-day basis on behalf of the Project Board within the
constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project
terminal evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP has been completed and
submitted to UNDP. The Project Manager is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for
1 In addition, each country has prepared their own country-level GAP with more detail, which is part of the country-specific funding proposals.
4

=== PAGE 188 ===
the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results
specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of
time and cost. Safeguards, Gender and Inclusivity Expert (SGIE) will work under the supervision of the PM to
implement the global GAP and oversee the country-level GAPs. The SGIE will be in regular contact with
country teams and consolidate the result of country-level GAP implementation into the global GAP.
1.2 Project’s Institutional Arrangements at the Country Level
Under Output 2, UNDP will implement the Project under the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) in all
seven countries. At the country level, each country will have a Project Board or Steering Committee made of
the relevant country agency with overall responsibility for the project and the National Designed Authority
(NDA) for GCF. As the Senior Beneficiary, the implementing partner will be part of the board. Furthermore, as
the Senior Supplier, UNDP will provide quality assurance for the project and ensure adherence to the
guidelines for the implementation modality. The Project Board will be responsible for making, by consensus,
management decisions when the National Project Manager (NPM) requires guidance. Project Board decisions
will be made per standards to ensure management for development results, best value money, fairness,
integrity, transparency and effective international competition. This commitment to fairness and
transparency in decision-making will help build trust in the project. If a consensus cannot be reached within
the Board, the final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme Manager.
The NPM will run the project on a day-to-day basis. The NPM is responsible for day-to-day management and
decision-making for the project, including compliance with country-level GAPs developed. In this regard, the
NPM will be supported by a National Safeguards, Gender and Inclusion Expert (NSGI) expert. The NSGI,
through the NPM, will report to the global PMU on status of the GAP activities at the country level so that
they can be consolidated into the global GAP monitoring.
5

=== PAGE 189 ===
2 General Context for Gender in Early Warnings
Around the world gendered inequalities and norms can be found including around household roles, access to
resources, power, workloads, livelihoods and education. In most countries there are structural and normative
barriers to gender inclusion, and different expectations and access to resources and decision making between
men and boys, women and girls, and people of other marginalized gender groups. Gender differences can
make a significant impact when it comes to receiving Early Warnings and in preparing for disasters.
Currently, there is a significant lack of equitable and meaningful decision-making opportunities and roles for
women in the design and management of Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems (MHEWS) and related areas.
There are significant gender gaps in access to information, technology and digital services. For example, the
divide in mobile internet use is most stark in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa where, more than half a
million women are excluded from the mobile connection and the gender gap scores are 41% and 37%,
respectively.
The impacts of hazard events are not gender-neutral. Women are often placed at greater risk through a lack
of timely and relevant information about imminent hazards. Women may not have equal access to
technology, communication or services, and thus miss out on critical information. This is particularly true for
women and marginalized groups living in rural or isolated areas. On the other hand, women are often the
drivers, strong networkers, managers, organizers and caretakers in a community, playing a constructive and
productive role in EWs and Disaster Risk Management. The value added of women in MHEWS is significant
and multifaceted, contributing to the effectiveness, inclusivity, and sustainability of these systems. Women
can considerably improve the efficiency of MHEWS through their unique perspectives, knowledge, and roles
within communities. Moreover, integrating women's voices and experiences not only improves the outcomes
of MHEWS but also promotes equity and empowerment within disaster-prone communities.
To be effective, early warning systems should not only have a sound scientific basis and reliable technology,
but also should be people-centred, end-to-end, multi-hazard, trusted and accessible to all. EWS should
consider the unique needs and capacities of different groups, including people who are marginalized or living
in vulnerable situations. This includes women. Additionally, EWS must recognize and adapt to diverse factors,
including the socioeconomic situation, accessibility of basic services and resources, literacy levels, access to
communication technologies, cultural values, power dynamics, freedom of movement, and physical location.
Not considering gender differences when developing EWS could mean women miss out on benefits but also
that opportunities are missed, such as not utilizing women-led community support groups and/or informal
dissemination networks.
Barriers and Challenges that can be found in Early Warning Systems
Source: PreventionWeb2
2 Budimin, M. et al. (2023) Gender in early warning and early action: why do we still need to talk about it?
6

=== PAGE 190 ===
Thus, Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems can be enhanced by taking into considerations key gender aspects.
The importance of gender considerations are embedded in the MCP for EW4All. Some general aspects that
will guide the project’s gender approach include:
• Women often have unique insights into community dynamics, including vulnerabilities and coping
strategies, which are crucial for developing targeted early warning messages and response plans.
• Women's involvement helps identify and utilize communication channels that are more accessible
to women, such as community networks, women's groups, and mobile technologies suited to their
preferences.
• Women often play key roles in disseminating early warnings in culturally appropriate ways, ensuring
messages are understood and acted upon effectively across diverse communities.
• Improving community awareness, and in particular women’s understanding of climate change and
disaster risks, using both traditional and modern scientific knowledge, helps to inform community
level disaster risk management and empower women to participate.
• Women's active participation in MHEWS activities can enhance trust and credibility within
communities, increasing the likelihood that early warnings will be taken seriously and acted upon
promptly.
• Women often have extensive local knowledge and networks, facilitating rapid dissemination of early
warnings and mobilization of community resources during emergencies.
• Women's involvement contributes to building community resilience by integrating gender-sensitive
approaches into disaster preparedness and response strategies.
• Women often contribute innovative solutions to enhance MHEWS effectiveness, leveraging their
practical experiences and knowledge of community dynamics.
• Women often advocate for the needs of vulnerable groups, including children, elderly, and persons
with disabilities, ensuring their inclusion in early warning and response efforts.
• There are widespread positive ripple effects from well-supported community- and women-led
MHEWS, including greater gender equality and status of women, and broader community-level
engagement and empowerment.
7

=== PAGE 191 ===
3 Gender Assessment for Ecuador
Ecuador is a middle-income country. Its economy is highly dependent on oil and agricultural exports. In the
last decade, Ecuador has increased social spending and investments in infrastructure, hospitals and
schools. Nevertheless, income inequality remains a problem, with almost half the rural population living in
poverty compared to a third of people nationwide. The rates of extreme poverty in rural areas are double
that of the total population3.
The Human Development Index (HDI) is developed annually by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). This indicator not only measures a country's economic development but also analyzes the health,
education, and income of the population. The HDI is a tool used to assess the progress of countries in terms
of human development and to compare well-being across different nations.
In 2023, Ecuador's Human Development Index was 0.759, ranking 86th worldwide. This represents an
improvement compared to 2020 (the COVID year), when it stood at 0.7314.
The Gender Inequality Index (GII) is an indicator developed by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to reflect the disadvantages women face in three key dimensions of human development:
● Reproductive Health: measured through the maternal mortality rate and the adolescent fertility rate.
● Empowerment: measured by the proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by women and the
proportion of women and men aged 25 and older with at least a secondary education.
● Labor Market Participation: measured by the labor force participation rate of women and men aged
15 and older.
This index reflects the potential loss in human development due to inequalities between men and women in
the aforementioned dimensions. In 2023, Ecuador's Gender Inequality Index was 0.385, ranking 91st
worldwide. This represents an improvement compared to 2022, when it stood at 0.3885.
According to Ecuador government data from June 20236, income poverty stood at 27%, with urban poverty
at 18%, and 46.4% in rural areas. Extreme poverty stood at 10.8%, reaching 5.2% in urban areas and 22.6% in
rural areas7. Therefore, poverty remains a critical issue, with that 20.0% of women are in a situation of income
poverty compared to 17.9% of men, highlighting the vulnerability of women to economic shocks. As for
extreme income poverty, women reach 6.2%, while men register 6.4%.
The youth are especially affected: in 2022, 34.44% of the youth (between 15 and 24 years old) lived in
poverty8. Although income poverty decreased for both men and women in 2022 (from 28.21% to 24.66% for
men and from 29.46% to 26.22% for women), the gender gap stood at 1.56 percentage points, a widening
that suggests a negative impact of other economic variables, such as inequality in the labour market, wage
gaps, unpaid jobs and women spending more time on care. The rate of women who are not in education or
in remunerated employment is 15.5% higher than the rate for men. The major causes relate to lack of
opportunities, unpaid care work that women do and patriarchal gender norms. The multidimensional poverty
rates of indigenous women, montubias9 and girls and adolescents are 78.1%, 57.3% and 45.8%, respectively10.
Between 83% and 85% of indigenous boys and girls are in a situation of multidimensional poverty, being the
most impoverished population group in the country11. In the case of older adults, the percentage of women
3 Ecuador (ifad.org)
4 Source: UNDP.
5 GII is a composite metric of gender inequality using three dimensions: reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market. A low GII value
indicates low inequality between women and men, and vice-versa.
6 202306_Boletin_pobreza_ENEMDU.pdf (ecuadorencifras.gob.ec)
7 20230908-eom-ecuadore-sr-poverty.pdf (ohchr.org)
8 Ibid.
9 Montubio is the term used to describe the mestizo people of the countryside of coastal Ecuador. The Montubio make up 7.4% of the country's
population and they are recognized as having their own cultural identity.
10 Source: INEC - ENEMDU, December rounds.
11 Pontificia Catholic University of Ecuador - Institute of Economic Research [PUCE-IIE], 2022
8

--- Table 1 on Page 191 ---
Ecuador is a middle-income country. Its economy is highly dependent on oil and agricultural exports. In the
last decade, Ecuador has increased social spending and investments in infrastructure, hospitals and
schools. Nevertheless, income inequality remains a problem, with almost half the rural population living in
poverty compared to a third of people nationwide. The rates of extreme poverty in rural areas are double
that of the total population3.

=== PAGE 192 ===
living in multidimensional poverty is 58.4%, 52.5% and 20.6% in the case of Montubias, Indigenous and Afro-
Ecuadorian women, while percentages are 50.2%, 42.2% and 18% for men in the same groups12.
Literacy, Education and Access to Information
From 2010 to 2022, the illiteracy rate in Ecuador decreased by 3.1 percentage points, from 6.8% in 2010 to
3.7% in 2022. According to the results of the 2022 Population and Housing Census, out of the total population
aged 15 and older (12,625,997), 3.7% (472,228) are illiterate, of which 59.7% are women (281,834).
By age groups, people aged 65 and older have the highest percentage of illiteracy, with 51.5%, of whom 63.1%
are women. The population aged 30 to 64 represents 43.9% of the total illiteracy in the country, with 57.4%
of this group being women. The remaining 4.7% of the illiterate population is concentrated in the age group
of 15 to 29 years, with women representing 43.4% of this group13.
Ecuador has an estimated population of 16,938,98614 with 48.7% of men and 51.3% of women. Country-wide
36% of the population have completed only primary level education, 29% have completed only high school
and 25% have also completed tertiary education; 4.5% have no education. Literacy rates are 96.3%. However,
there are significant differences between the genders, areas in the country and ethnic groups. Illiteracy, for
example, is 6.8% in rural areas and nearly 12% for Indigenous peoples. Women are also more likely to be
illiterate (4.3% compared to men at 3.1%). There is more parity in the genders around general school and
high school attendance. For example, 76.5% of women and 75.5% of men attended high school and 70% of
Indigenous groups. Primary attendance is much higher, at 90% or more for all these groups15.
Meanwhile, access to education and vocational training for women is significantly influenced by their ability
to utilize digital technologies. According to the 2019 Multipurpose Survey on Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) conducted by INEC, 58.2% of women aged 5 and older own a cell phone, compared to
61.7% of men. Of these figures, 77.3% of women and 76.3% of men use a smartphone16.
In Ecuador, women's access to information varies based on several factors such as age, ethnicity, geographic
location, and socioeconomic status. Below are the main ways women access information and the differences
observed between men and various groups of women.
Ways of Accessing Information
Traditional Media:
• Radio: It is an important source of information, especially in rural areas. Women often listen to radio
programs that cover health, education, and government programs; while farmers listen to the radio
between 5 and 6 a.m. as they head to the fields (WFP, 2023).
• Television: It is accessible in many urban and rural areas. News broadcasts and general interest
programs are followed by many women to stay informed (WFP, 2023).
• Print Media: Although less common, some groups of women, especially in urban areas, read free
newspapers to obtain information (WFP, 2023).
12
End of Mission statement by Mr Olivier de Shutter. Special Rapporteur on Poverty and Human Rights. Visit to Ecuador 28 August 8
September 2023 20230908-eom-ecuadore-sr-poverty.pdf (ohchr.org)
13
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Censo de Población y Vivienda 2022.
https://www.censoecuador.gob.ec/resultados-censo/. See table in the Annexes, page 15.
14 Ecuador Census data:
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiNWUzMjQwOWMtZjFhOS00NjczLTk0YTItNjcwZmRmY2YxMjkyIiwidCI6ImYxNThhMmU4LW
NhZWMtNDQwNi1iMGFiLWY1ZTI1OWJkYTExMiJ9
15 Ibid.
16
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Encuesta Multipropósito - Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicación-
TIC, 2019. https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/tecnologias-de-la-informacion-y-comunicacion-tic-2019/
9

=== PAGE 193 ===
Digital Media and Social Networks:
• Internet: Internet access is growing, but significant gaps still exist. Young and urban women are the
most likely to use the internet to obtain information. In the lowest income quintile, internet access is
present in 43.7% of households, while in the highest income quintile, it is present in 79.4% of
households (INEC ENEMDU, 2023).
• Social Networks: Platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp are popular for sharing and
receiving information, especially among young women.
• Text Messages (SMS): Used by government programs and health organizations to send information
directly to mobile phones.
Community and Personal Sources:
• Other Women: Many women obtain information through conversations with friends, family, and
neighbors.
• Community Leaders: In rural communities, community leaders and local organizations play a crucial
role in disseminating information. Community leaders mainly use WhatsApp to coordinate with
public and local institutions.
• Word of mouth: this is a form of communication that primarily occurs in rural villages.
• Schools and Educational Institutions: Young women and mothers often receive information through
their children's schools.
Women and men in Ecuador can access information in similar ways; however, there are some notable
differences:
● Digital Divide: Men tend to have greater access to digital technologies and the internet compared to
women, especially in rural areas. 63.2% of male heads of household have internet access, while 60.3%
of female heads of household have internet access (INEC ENEMDU, 2023).
● Gender Roles: Women, due to their traditional roles in the household, may have less time and fewer
opportunities to access information through certain media, such as the internet and television.
There are also differences among groups of women depending on their age, ethnicity, location and socio-
economic status.
Age:
• Young Women: Prefer social networks and the internet.
• Older Women: Prefer traditional media like radio and television.
Ethnicity:
• Indigenous Women: In rural areas, radio and community leaders are important sources. Language
barriers can also influence how they access information. Indigenous people are the ethnic group with
the lowest number of active cell phones (30.2%) (INEC ENEMDU, 2023).
• Afro-Ecuadorian Women: Similar to indigenous women, but with a greater tendency to use digital
media in urban areas.
Geographic Location:
• Urban Women: Greater access to the internet and social networks. At the urban level, 81.1% use the
internet, while at the rural level, only 54.5% use the internet (INEC ENEMDU, 2023).
• Rural Women: Greater reliance on radio and community leaders. Digital illiteracy is present in 19.4%
of the rural population (persons between 15 and 49 years old who meet the criteria of not having an
active cell phone, not using a computer, and not using the internet) (INEC ENEMDU, 2023).
10

=== PAGE 194 ===
Socioeconomic Level:
• High and Middle: Greater access to a variety of media, including the internet, cable television, and
print media.
• Low: More dependent on radio and free television
As far as phones are concerned, based on the results of the 2022 Population and Housing Census, a total of
12,485,705 people use cell phones, which represents nearly 100% of people aged 15 and over in the country.
Of these, 48.7% are men and 51.3% are women, indicating a slight majority of female users. Based on data,
55.6% of people specifically own a smartphone17.
Broken down by age groups:
● Among those aged 5 to 29 years, 5,654,184 people use cell phones, of which 46.2% are men and
44.4% are women. The slight majority of men in this group may be influenced by usage patterns and
access to technology at early and young ages.
● Among those aged 30 to 64 years, 5,953,529 people use cell phones, with 46.7% being men and
48.4% being women. Women slightly outnumber men in this age group, which may reflect a higher
adoption and use of mobile technology among women in their productive years.
● In the 65 and older age group, 877,992 people use cell phones, of which 7.1% are men and 6.9% are
women. The difference here is minimal, indicating an almost equal adoption of cell phone use among
older men and women18.
According to the 2022 Population and Housing Census, conducted by INEC, the following results are detailed
regarding the access of the population aged 5 years and older to ICT use in the last 3 months:
• The total number of women accessing mobile phones is 6,409,731, which corresponds to 51.3% of
the national total. Of these, 67.9% (4,351,301 women) are in urban areas, and 32.1% (2,058,430
women) are in rural areas. This denotes a notable disparity between urban and rural areas,
suggesting the need for specific interventions to improve connectivity and access to technology in
rural areas to foster more equitable digital inclusion.
• Regarding women’s access to the internet, a total of 5,580,284 women use this service, representing
51.4% of the national total. Of these, 70.9% (3,955,179 women) are in urban areas, while 29.1%
(1,625,105 women) reside in rural areas. The disparity in internet access between urban and rural
areas can widen the digital divide, contributing to inequalities in socioeconomic, educational, and
employment opportunities.
• Regarding women’s access to the use of computers or laptops, 2,636,736 women use these devices,
representing 51.1% of the total population. Of this group, 77.2% are in urban areas (2,034,796
women) and 22.8% in rural areas (601,940 women). This indicates a significant gap compared to
urban areas, which can be attributed to various factors such as lower availability of technology and
internet access in rural areas, fewer opportunities for training in digital technology use, or lower
purchasing power to buy devices.
• A total of 903,876 women use tablets, representing 51.0% of the total population. Of this group,
80.2% are in urban areas (725,009 women) and 19.8% in rural areas (178,867 women). Tablet use in
17 https://datahub.itu.int/data/?e=ECU&i=28318
18
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Censo de Población y Vivienda 2022.
https://www.censoecuador.gob.ec/resultados-censo/
11

=== PAGE 195 ===
women can be broken down by: 17.2% are women aged 5 to 14 years, 31.9% are women aged 15 to
29 years, 46.1% are women aged 30 to 64 years, and 4.7% are women over 65 years. Tablet use
among women is concentrated in ages 15 to 29, used for both studies and recreational and social
activities, and in ages 30 to 64, indicating intensive tablet use for professional activities, personal
management, and continuous learning. The gap between rural and urban areas has similar factors to
the gap in access to computers and laptops.
• Regarding women’s access to mobile phones by age group, of the total 6,409,731 women, 12.8% are
women aged 5 to 14 years, 31.6% are women aged 15 to 29 years, 48.6% are women aged 30 to 64
years, and 6.9% are women over 65 years. This shows a diverse distribution by age group, with high
penetration in productive ages and a significant presence even at the extremes of the age
distribution.
• Regarding women’s internet use by age group, of the total 5,580,284 women, 15.4% are women aged
5 to 14 years, 32.6% are women aged 15 to 29 years, 47.1% are women aged 30 to 64 years, and
4.9% are women over 65 years. Internet use among women varies significantly by age group, with
higher adoption in productive ages and notable penetration among the youngest.
• The national total of women using computers or laptops is 2,636,736. Of this total, 16.2% are women
aged 5 to 14 years, 36.2% are women aged 15 to 29 years, 44.7% are women aged 30 to 64 years,
and 3.0% are women over 65 years. The use of computers or laptops by women presents higher
adoption in productive ages and significant presence even among the youngest19.
Employment, Labour Participation and Typical Social Expectations on Gender
Gender inequality in employment is evident in both quantitative and qualitative terms. Women have a higher
unemployment rate (4.7% vs. 3.2% for men) and are overrepresented in informal jobs, with 67.9% of women
in such positions compared to 51.9% of men. Women’s average income is significantly lower, highlighting a
substantial gender pay gap. Additionally, women represent a smaller portion of the economically active
population. The informal employment rate is higher among women (53.2%) than men (51.9%), with young
women (ages 18 to 29) facing particularly high unemployment rates, reflecting barriers to labor market entry.
In 2023, the average labor income for men at the national level was USD 496.8, while for women it was USD
420.3. More starkly, the median labor income for men was USD 416.4, in contrast to USD 297.4 for women.
This difference of USD 76.5 in average income indicates a gender wage gap, where men earn approximately
18.2% more than women on average. The difference in the median, which is USD 119, shows an even larger
gap when considering the midpoint of incomes. Men earn 40% more than women in the median income20.
In 2023, the participation rate in unpaid employment for women was 75.8%, which is three times higher than
the rate for men at 24.2%. This reveals significant gender disparities in unpaid work. Regarding age groups, it
is mainly concentrated in the population aged 15 to 17, with a rate of 82.1% for women and 63.8% for
men.21This burden of unpaid work at an early age can interfere with education and development,
perpetuating a cycle of gender inequality22.
19
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Censo de Población y Vivienda 2022.
https://www.censoecuador.gob.ec/resultados-censo/
20
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo - ENEMDU
Acumulada Anual 2023. https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/enemdu-anual/
21
See table in the Annexes, page 17.
22
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo - ENEMDU
Acumulada Anual 2023. https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/enemdu-anual/
12

=== PAGE 196 ===
In Ecuador, social expectations and cultural beliefs about gender roles are deeply rooted and vary according
to region and age groups. These expectations are influenced by historical, economic, social, and cultural
factors.
Traditionally, men are expected to be the primary economic providers for the family. They are assigned the
role of protectors, and strength, authority, and independence are valued as desirable masculine traits.
Meanwhile, women are assigned the role of caregivers and household managers. They are expected to take
care of child-rearing and domestic chores. Valued characteristics in women include submission, patience, and
dedication to the family.
The activities dominated by men are five times those dominated by women (332 versus 63), and the latter
are linked to care and teaching services. According to data from the Central Bank of Ecuador (2021), the
activities with the highest proportion of female employment include animal husbandry, publishing directories
and mailing lists, hairdressing and beauty services, primary and preschool education, care in institutions,
social assistance, clothing manufacturing, jewelry making, among others. Meanwhile, the activities with the
highest proportion of male employment include central banking, tobacco product manufacturing, sugar
production, wood extraction, wood sheet manufacturing, private security activities, motor vehicle
manufacturing, precious mineral product manufacturing, other mineral extraction, machinery
manufacturing, among others.23
Based on the concept of Unpaid Work, which is the time dedicated to domestic activities, caregiving, and
community support without receiving payment or remuneration, women’s participation is 75.8% and men’s
is 24.2%. This reflects the social and cultural norms and expectations that assign women the primary
responsibility for domestic and caregiving tasks24.
In many households, domestic chores and childcare primarily fall on women, regardless of whether they also
participate in the labor market. This unequal distribution of domestic responsibilities reflects a cultural
expectation that women should balance work outside the home with household tasks. On average, women
spend 31 hours a week on caregiving and unpaid household work, while men spend an average of 9 hours a
week on caregiving and unpaid household work. This gap is particularly high for rural, indigenous, montubio
women, and those aged 30 to 44 (INEC, EUT, 2012).
There are regional and generational variations to these gender expectations. In cities, there is a growing trend
toward gender equity, with more women participating in the labor market and occupying leadership
positions. However, traditional expectations still persist in certain sectors and there are challenges particularly
around caregiving responsibilities. In rural areas, traditional gender expectations are more pronounced.
Women have less access to education and job opportunities, reinforcing their traditional role as household
caregivers. In addition, 36% of rural women have access to land compared to 43% of men, resulting in a 4.3%
gap in land ownership. In the agricultural sector, 13% of women are remunerated, compared to 35% of men;
this figure is explained by the fact that women's work is often unpaid as it is considered an extension of
domestic work. Rural women perform 23 more hours of unpaid caregiving and domestic work per week
compared to men (INEC, EUT, 2012). This results in lower educational levels, fewer hours available for paid
work, lower income, and less access to health care, relying almost exclusively on environmental factors such
as soil productivity, water quantity, and quality.
Meanwhile, younger generations (15-34 years) are increasingly challenging traditional gender expectations.
Young women are seeking higher levels of education and labor market participation, more willing to question
23 See table on Ecuador: Occupation by Economic Activity (CIIU4) in the Annexes, page 18
24
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo - ENEMDU
Acumulada Anual 2023. https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/enemdu-anual/
13

=== PAGE 197 ===
and challenge traditional gender roles, with greater professional aspirations, seeking more equity in the
distribution of domestic tasks, and with high use of technology and social networks, facilitating access to
information, there is an increase in the acceptance of more egalitarian gender roles. On the other hand, older
individuals (around 50 years) tend to adhere more to traditional gender norms. Older women may have had
less access to education and employment and likely have performed domestic roles for most of their lives.
The cultural and social expectations that these generations grew up with strongly influence their perceptions
and behaviors. Lower use of technology and access to information, compared to younger generations, may
limit their exposure to new ideas about gender equality.
Representation and Participation in Decision Making
In Ecuador, women's political participation has shown significant progress in recent years. Following the legal
reforms of 2008 and 2009, measures have been implemented to promote gender parity in politics. As of 2024,
women hold 43.8% of the seats in the National Assembly25.
At the local level, women's representation increased in 2023 compared to the 2019 elections. Of the country’s
221 cantons, 34 have female mayors, 16 more than in 2019. Regarding provincial prefectures, 7 of the 24
provinces are led by women, representing an increase of 3 compared to the previous elections26.
Regarding the representation of women heading State ministries, in November 2023, the current government
appointed 11 women as ministers and secretaries of State, which represents 52% of the total positions in the
National Cabinet27.
According to the results of the 2022 Population and Housing Census28, out of a total of 5,188,827 households
nationwide, 38.5% of the persons recognized as household representatives are women, while 61.5% are men.
In urban areas, 40.6% of household representatives are women and 59.4% are men. In rural areas, the
percentages are lower, with 34.7% of women and 65.3% of men as household representatives.
According to ethnic self-identification, the gender distribution of household representatives is as follows:
● In indigenous communities, 35.9% are women and 64.1% are men.
● In Afro-Ecuadorian communities, 46.7% are women and 53.3% are men.
● Among Montubios, 34.2% are women and 65.8% are men.
● Among Mestizos, 38.7% are women and 61.3% are men.
● Among whites, 38.3% are women and 61.7% are men29.
Despite progress, women's participation in public consultations still faces significant challenges in Ecuador.
According to a study by CEPAL30, although women attend public consultations, their decisive participation
remains limited. This is due to the socioeconomic context, age, region, and the structural and cultural barriers
that restrict their real influence in decision-making.
In urban areas, women have more opportunities and resources to participate in public consultations due to
a greater presence of feminist organizations and inclusion policies, which have increased women's visibility
25
Source: Asamblea Nacional del Ecuador. https://www.asambleanacional.gob.ec/es/pleno-asambleistas.
See table in the Annexes, page 18
26
Source: Consejo Nacional Electoral. https://www.cne.gob.ec/resultados-electorales/
27
Source: Presidencia de la República del Ecuador. https://www.presidencia.gob.ec/
28
See table in the Annexes, page 19.
29
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), Censo de Población y Vivienda 2022.
https://www.censoecuador.gob.ec/resultados-censo/
30
Annual Progress Report on Women in Latin America, 2020
14

=== PAGE 198 ===
and active roles. According to a UN Women report31, urban women tend to be more empowered and occupy
more leadership spaces in social movements. In rural areas, participation is more limited due to factors such
as lack of access to information, lower educational levels, and traditional gender roles. A study by FLACSO
Ecuador32 indicates that in rural areas, women are primarily seen as caregivers, and their public participation
is limited. Similarly, women from higher socioeconomic classes have more opportunities and resources, while
those from lower strata face additional barriers such as poverty, lack of time due to work and domestic
responsibilities, and the scarcity of resources for mobility.
From a cultural and social perspective, women face significant challenges in speaking openly and freely about
the issues that affect them due to deeply rooted gender norms and stereotypes. In Indigenous communities,
for example, women may face greater restrictions due to patriarchal traditions and social structures and may
even be subject to reprisals or discrimination from community leaders or other community members.
Women with greater access to higher education and technology tend to be more empowered and have more
influence in their communities. A UNICEF study33 shows that young people participate more actively in social
movements and the defense of their rights, whereas older women show less involvement in gender
empowerment movements. Furthermore, there are examples of female leadership in indigenous
organizations, showing a gradual change in this dynamic34.
In conclusion, from a sociological point of view, women's participation in public consultations in Ecuador is
influenced by a combination of geographical, socioeconomic, cultural, and generational factors. Although
there are significant advances, especially in urban areas and among younger generations, structural barriers
persist that limit the participation and empowerment of many women in the country. Training initiatives and
inclusion policies are crucial to continue advancing gender equality and women's participation in public life.
Gender-Based Violence
Gender-based violence remains a critical issue in Ecuador. According to the National Survey on Family
Relations and Gender Violence Against Women (ENVIGMU), conducted by the INEC in 2019:
● 65 out of every 100 women in Ecuador have experienced at least one incident of some type of
violence in various contexts throughout their lives including (i) psychological violence 56.9%, (ii)
physical violence 35.4%, (iii) sexual violence 32.7%, and (iv) patrimonial violence 16.4%.
● Data from 2019 show that 32 out of every 100 women in Ecuador had experienced at least one
incident of some type of violence in various contexts in the last 12 months. The percentages by type
of violence are as follows: (i) psychological violence 25.2%, (ii) physical violence 9.2%, (iii) sexual
violence 12.0%, and (iv) patrimonial violence 6.1%.
● By ethnic self-identification, 72% of Afro-Ecuadorian women, 64% of Indigenous women, 58% of
Montubio women, and 65% of Mestizo women have experienced at least one incident of some type
of violence throughout their lives.
● By age groups, 45% of women between 15 and 17 years, 65% between 18 and 29 years, 69% between
30 and 44 years, 66% between 45 and 64 years, and 65% over 65 years have experienced at least one
incident of some type of violence throughout their lives.
31
Women's Political Participation in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2019
32
Gender and Political Participation in Ecuador, 2018
33
Youth and Participation in Latin America, 2021
34
Radcliffe, S. and Laurie N., 2006
15

=== PAGE 199 ===
● By marital status, 77% of separated women, 65% of married women, and 55% of single women have
experienced at least one incident of some type of violence throughout their lives.
● Nationally, throughout their lives, 19% of women experienced some type of violence in the
educational sphere, 20% in the workplace, 33% in the social sphere, 20% in the family sphere, and
43% in the partner sphere35.
Gender Policies and Legal Framework
Ecuador is a signatory to several international conventions and agreements aimed at promoting gender
equality, including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Ecuador has specific legislation on gender equality,
gender violence, and national programs and committees dedicated to these issues. These frameworks aim to
address gender disparities in various sectors, including education, health, and employment, but gaps remain
in their effective implementation, particularly in rural and marginalized communities.
Gender Equality Legislation:
● Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador (2008): Establishes equal rights and prohibits discrimination
based on gender.
Gender Violence Legislation:
● Comprehensive Organic Law to Prevent and Eradicate Violence against Women (2018): This law
establishes measures to prevent, punish, and eradicate violence against women in its various forms.
● Three recent laws aimed at addressing gender inequalities are: the Organic Law on Voluntary
Termination of Pregnancy in Cases of Rape (2022), the Organic Law to Promote the Violet Economy
(2023), and the Organic Law on the Right to Human Care (2023).
● Other complementary legislation includes the Labor Harassment Prevention Law (2017), the Human
Mobility Law (2017), and Executive Decree 696 (2019).
National Programs:
● National Plan for the Eradication of Gender Violence against Children, Adolescents, and Women
(2022-2025): A plan that coordinates efforts to prevent and eradicate gender violence.
● National Agenda for Gender Equality (2021-2025): A territorial planning instrument that reflects
collective work with the materiality of human rights.
● National Agricultural Strategy for Rural Women (ENAMR): A public policy instrument aimed at
recognizing and making visible the participation and work of women and their importance to Family
Farming and contributing from the competencies of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock to
guarantee their rights.
Gender-Related Institutional Arrangements
Ecuador has established various institutional arrangements to support gender equality, including;
● The National Council for Gender Equality (CNIG): An agency responsible for ensuring the
implementation of public policies for gender equality.
● The Ministry of Economic and Social Inclusion (MIES): Has specific programs aimed at protecting and
promoting women's rights.
35
Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (INEC), la Encuesta Nacional sobre Relaciones Familiares y Violencia de Género
contra las Mujeres (ENVIGMU), 2019. https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/documentos/web-
inec/Estadisticas_Sociales/Violencia_de_genero_2019/Principales%20resultados%20ENVIGMU%202019.pdf
16

=== PAGE 200 ===
● The Ministry of Women and Human Rights (MMDDHH): Ensures and promotes Human Rights through
public policies of prevention, care, and reparation to promote gender equality.
These bodies are responsible for developing and enforcing policies that promote women’s rights and gender
equality.
Women’s Representation and Participation in DRM Sectors
Women's participation in disaster risk management (DRM) sectors is essential for building resilient
communities. Efforts to include women in DRM decision-making processes and leadership roles are ongoing,
but greater representation and targeted support are needed. Programs that train and empower women in
DRM roles can enhance community preparedness and response capabilities, making disaster management
more inclusive and effective.
The Organic Law on Risk Management, in its articles 35, 36, and 39, establishes the need for the creation of
Community Risk Management Committees as humanitarian response bodies. At the level of certain
municipalities, such as Guayaquil, the Community Committee has already been created, which included
gender organizations, vulnerable groups, and rural communities. Within this framework, training related to
early warnings have been developed; however, they are neither continuous nor planned. UNDP carries out
ongoing training projects on disaster preparedness and EWS at community level with the financial support of
the European Commission Humanitarian Office (ECHO) and the Bank of Latin American and the Caribbean,
this process has special measures to include women and men in an equitable approach. Also, the Ecuadorian
Red Cross carries out ongoing training processes for communities on Early Warning mechanisms, as well as
preparation for response to emergencies caused by natural phenomena.
Women's participation in activities related to climate change and disaster risk management has been
increasing in recent years, although it varies between institutions. In the National Institute of Meteorology
and Hydrology (INAMHI), 70 people work, of which only 21% are women (INAMHI, 2024), while in the case
of the National Secretariat for Risk Management (SNGR), there are approximately 473 employees, of which
50% are women (SNGR, 2024).
Gender in Early Warnings and Disaster Risk Response
Emergencies and their impacts increase the risks to human life, endangering livelihoods, food security, and
health. Women and girls, especially those living in poverty and marginalization, face higher levels of risk and
an increased workload due to socially and culturally imposed gender roles. Additionally, they have limited
opportunities to respond effectively to emergencies and emerging threats, such as (i) natural hazards: floods,
droughts, fires, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions; (ii) social issues: security crises and other forms of
violence.
The impacts of crises on women, both rural and urban, are multidimensional, differentiated, and, in some
cases, disproportionate, depending on local contexts as well as the networks and structures of communities,
the State, and other public and non-governmental entities. Among the differentiated risks are:
● Depending on the location (rural or urban) of women, the loss of livelihoods varies significantly. In
rural areas, a larger percentage of livelihoods depends on agricultural and livestock activities, while
in urban areas, formal and informal employment is more predominant. Depending on the source of
work, different needs can be identified for the recovery of these livelihoods after an emergency, as
well as the implementation of preventive actions to minimize the impacts in the event of a disaster
or emergency.
● Another differentiated impact relates to the state network for guaranteeing access to rights
(education, health, among others) in different territories. The existence and strength of these
networks during emergencies influence the degree of weakening of public systems. While everyone
may experience limitations on their rights during a crisis, the weaker the state structure, the greater
17

=== PAGE 201 ===
the difficulty in restoring it and ensuring those rights. In rural areas, the recovery of these structures
that guarantee rights can be more complex.
Additionally, women are particularly vulnerable to climate change, emergencies, and disasters, as social,
economic, and political inequalities place them in a position of reduced resilience to adverse effects. A clear
example of this is rural women, who, due to limitations in access to and ownership of land, as well as deeply
rooted cultural values, face difficulties in accessing credit, financing, tools, or machinery that would enable
them to develop enterprises or implement necessary improvements to address challenges.
Among the challenges faced by women are:
● Access to prior information (preparation and warning systems) and during the emergency, regarding
actions they can take to safeguard their lives.
● Caring for others during the emergency, as women mostly take on the role of caregivers. This role, in
addition to influencing the specific situation during the emergency, impacts both the loss and
recovery of livelihoods due to the care of these individuals.
● During emergencies, there has been an increase in pre-existing forms of violence, such as domestic
violence, gender-based violence, human trafficking, and other forms of violence that, according to
available information, primarily affect women (girls, adolescents, and adults).
Climate change and resource scarcity also have a differentiated impact on women and girls. For example, the
decrease in water sources forces them to travel greater distances to access this resource, increasing the daily
hours dedicated to unpaid work, which, according to INEC (ENEMDU, 2023), is three times greater for women
than men, both in urban and rural areas. During emergencies, such as the pandemic, women's unpaid
responsibilities increased significantly, as they took on the care of the home, the elderly, and the sick, in
addition to becoming teachers to support their children's education, which created an overload of
responsibilities.
The impacts of natural disasters and emergencies are unequal from a gender perspective. Before the COVID-
19 health crisis, women were already overrepresented in poverty situations, a situation that worsened after
the pandemic. In 2023, for every 100 men in poor households, there were 111.7 women, reflecting their lack
of economic autonomy. The health crisis and its economic consequences have deepened poverty and
inequality, severely affecting women due to the decline in economic activity in key sectors for female
employment, such as tourism, manufacturing, agriculture, commerce, and paid domestic work. This
increased vulnerability during emergencies may further limit their access to land ownership, housing,
education, health, and participation in political and decision-making spheres, reducing their adaptive
capacities (INEC, 2023).
In rural areas, barriers to accessing productive assets (land, technical assistance, machinery) and financial
instruments (credit and insurance), coupled with their limited mobility and participation in decision-making,
restrict women's ability to develop their productive skills and place them at a disadvantage in producing,
marketing, and expanding their businesses, which is reflected in a higher concentration of women in sectors
such as agriculture, livestock, forestry, and fishing.
During and after disasters, not all evacuation sites identified by the relevant authorities incorporate a gender
or disability perspective, which largely depends on local capacities and infrastructure. The risk of gender-
based violence, including domestic violence, can increase, especially in temporary shelters where a lack of
privacy and security is common. In rural areas, gender-based violence may be normalized and less frequently
reported, making it difficult to provide adequate response and support to victims in emergency situations.
Additionally, displaced women may lose their livelihoods and face discrimination when attempting to access
reconstruction and economic recovery programs, particularly in rural areas where the loss of land, homes,
and crops has a devastating impact, forcing them to migrate in search of resources for survival.
18

=== PAGE 202 ===
In summary, natural disasters tend to exacerbate pre-existing gender inequalities, and women often face
greater risks and challenges compared to men. This unequal impact highlights the need for a gender-sensitive
risk management approach that ensures equitable participation of women in all aspects of disaster planning
and response.
Some of the differentiating factors between men and women regarding exposure to hazards and response
capacity are as follows:
● Access to preventive information: Fewer women have access to this information compared to men.
Even when they do have general access to information, due to their participation in work-related
activities focused on early warnings, they are not always part of their community's alert systems.
● Access to response information: Women have less access to this information compared to men.
● Legal vulnerability: Women, especially in rural areas, face greater legal vulnerability. The levels of
legal ownership of assets such as land, houses, vehicles, and others are usually lower compared to
urban areas, and existing legalizations do not always include women.
However, women also have great potential as agents of change in natural resource management, although
these strengths are often underestimated by society. The creation of networks and distribution services in
rural areas, the development of enterprises, and the adoption of innovative decisions to address current
problems arising from disasters and emergencies highlight this potential.
In the country, the main hazards affecting the population are landslides, earthquakes, floods, and droughts.
Response capacity in rural areas is particularly affected by a lack of infrastructure, access to production
factors, basic services, connectivity, and cultural barriers. In urban areas, the development of response
capacities is weak and not adequately socialized at the community level, especially affecting vulnerable
groups such as girls, boys, and women.
There are global databases, such as DESINVENTAR, that record multi-hazard disasters with a gender
perspective. This information can be used to design multi-hazard early warning systems (MHEWS) and
establish specific alert thresholds for communication targeted at women. In the event of disasters,
organizations such as the Red Cross, NGOs, state entities, international cooperation, the Church, and
volunteer groups, among others, provide support to women. These institutions participate as beneficiaries in
pillar 4 of the project, which focuses on preparedness and response capacity. It is anticipated that, starting in
2025, the Ecuadorian Red Cross will establish mechanisms to consolidate and analyze information, ensuring
that actions align with the Movement's approach to protection, gender, and inclusion.
Public policy, through government entities at the central and local levels, supports the management of
Community Risk Management Committees, providing financing, technical assistance, training, monitoring,
follow-up, distribution of goods and services, information systems, response kits, shelters, and humanitarian
centers, among others. However, in many cases, specific gender policies for risk management are not
considered.
New proposals for regulations and public policies that include a gender perspective represent an opportunity
to implement programs and projects aimed at MHEWS that consider differentiated responses according to
the needs and realities of territories and vulnerable groups. Currently, there is no significant difference in the
level of awareness of early warning information between men, women, boys, and girls, as alerts are delivered
through official communication channels and social networks without any specific directionality.
Recommendations
In order to enhance inclusiveness and participation it is crucial to consult women about their needs and
preferences through:
19

=== PAGE 203 ===
Guided interviews with key women in the target communities, which will allow for the collection of
detailed testimonies and experiences. Interviewers should preferably be women.
Focus group discussions with women of various ages and backgrounds to gain a deeper
understanding of their perspectives and needs.
Develop and administer specific surveys for women that include questions about the project's
requirements.
WhatsApp groups for women, where a very specific exchange of information can take place.
Continuous online consultation platforms, where women can provide ongoing feedback on the
project.
Proposed activities for the project
1. It is necessary to start with an assessment of needs and preferred communication channels.
2. Both the needs assessment process and the communication of alerts must be in clear and accessible
language, including local languages and adapted to local culture. In short, communication strategies
must be inclusive, accessible, and culturally relevant.
3. For the planning of activities related to the design and dissemination of alert messages, it is important
to involve local governments, leaders, civil society organizations and women’s organizations. Support
networks could be built, or forms of local cooperation could be fostered. In the indigenous areas, the
organizational schemes, which are more developed than in the rest of the population, can be
leveraged and also, ancestral knowledge for early warning systems.
4. Capacities should be developed (cascade methodology) and groups of women who have active roles
within their communities, such as women leaders, women entrepreneurship and heads of
households, or those actors who want to participate actively in the development of project-related
activities should be empowered. They should be categorized as information disseminators and
response leaders. This should include raising awareness among the families of the women
participating in the project, considering the topic of positive masculinities with young people and
husbands, and shared responsibility in household activities.
5. Any measure to disseminate information must include facilitating access to the technology that will
be used to receive alerts and real-time updates.
6. According to the planning of activities, it is necessary to work on risk management education
programs in schools, colleges, and communities, specifically aimed at women and girls.
7. Additionally, training and awareness workshops can be organized on interpreting early warnings and
response measures, adapted to the needs and available time of women for their participation.
8. A monitoring and evaluation methodology must be implemented that includes gender indicators to
measure the impact of the implemented measures and make adjustments during the development
of the project
20

=== PAGE 204 ===
4 Gender Assessment for Cambodia
Cambodia is ranked ‘medium’ equality on the UNDP Gender Development Index 2023-2436, comparing
Human Development Index achievements for women and men37. Women consist of 50.5% of the total
population in Cambodia38 and 31.9% of Cambodian households are female-headed39. Cambodia has a large
rural population with 74% of the population living in rural areas40 and the majority of them work in the
agriculture sector. About 24.4% of the population or 3.4 million people are living with disabilities in
Cambodia, including 20.3% with mild or moderate degrees of disability and 4.1% with a severe disability41.
The percentage of women living with disabilities (57%) is higher than that of men (43 %)42. Cambodia’s gender
equality-related indexes are ranked the lowest among the neighboring countries in the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) region. Cambodia is ranked 122th out of 193 countries in the Gender Inequality
Index (GII)43 and 102nd of 146 countries in the Global Gender Gap Report 2023.
Cambodia’s rapid economic growth from 2009 to 2019, combined with structural change, helped to increase
labor earnings and reduce poverty. Living standards have improved, helping Cambodia to narrow urban-rural
gaps. However, low-income and rural households still lag in access to basic services and earning
opportunities.44
Education, Vocational Training and Literacy
Cambodia has made significant progress in achieving gender parity in education. The net enrolment in
primary education is around 96% for female students and 95.5% for male students for the academic year
2022-202345. The enrolment rate at lower secondary schools is about 86% for female students and 81.4% for
male students while the enrolment rate for both sexes is lower for upper secondary schools, 46% for women
and 36.5% for men46. However, the proportion of female students in tertiary education and technical
vocational training is lower than that of male students, particularly for non-traditional areas of study, such as
science, technology, engineering, and math. The Ministry of Education (MoEYS) estimates that only 17% of
female students, compared to 40% of male students, studied a Bachelor’s Degree in STEAM-related
subjects47. Literacy has improved steadily for both women and men but remains higher for men at 89.5%
compared with 80% for women in 202148. There is also a literacy gap for both genders between rural and the
capital of Phnom Penh, of 80.7% and 92.4 % respectively.
Gender gaps in access to education are particularly evident among ethnic minorities and people with
disabilities. Indigenous women in Cambodia have a higher illiteracy rate and fewer educational opportunities
than their male counterparts49. The drop-out rate for both Indigenous female and male adolescents aged 14-
18 is of significant concern. Girls are more affected than boys due to a higher demand for girls to do extra
household chores during the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a widening educational disparity for
Indigenous groups, people with disabilities and people living in poverty50. This gender gap in education has
hampered the ability of rural women to access informed decision-making, hold a job outside of the home,
understand laws and regulations that relate to them, and access technologies, extension services, and finance
as well as climate change and disaster risks, including early warning information51.
36 Ranked Group 3 out of 5 categories.
37 UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24. Group 3: Countries with absolute deviation from gender parity of 5-7.5 percent are
considered countries with medium equality in HDI achievements between women and men
38 Population, female (% of total population) - Cambodia | Data (worldbank.org)
39 Female headed households (% of households with a female head) - Cambodia | Data (worldbank.org)
40 Rural population (% of total population) - Cambodia | Data (worldbank.org)
41 MoP/NIS (2022). Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS), 2021-2022.
42 NIS, MoSAVY and DAC (2023). Persons with disabilities in Cambodia: findings from the Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey, 2014, 2021-
2022.
43 UNDP (2023) Human Development Report 2023.
44 World Bank Group (2022) Cambodia Poverty Assessment 2022. Toward a more inclusive and resilient Cambodia
45 Ministry of Education Youth and Sports (2022). Education Statistics 2022-2023.
46 Ministry of Education Youth and Sports (2022). Education Statistics 2021-2022.
47 Ibid
48 MoP & NIS (2022). National socio-economic survey report..
49 IWGIA indigenous global report 2022
50 Cambodia COVID-19 Joint Education Needs Assessment Working Group, 2021 cited in United Nations (2022).
51 USAID (2019). Green Future Activity: Gender analysis, strategy and action plan.
1

--- Table 1 on Page 204 ---
Cambodia’s rapid economic growth from 2009 to 2019, combined with structural change, helped to increase
labor earnings and reduce poverty. Living standards have improved, helping Cambodia to narrow urban-rural
gaps. However, low-income and rural households still lag in access to basic services and earning
opportunities.44

=== PAGE 205 ===
Employment and Labor Participation
In 2023, the women’s labor participation rate in Cambodia was 79% compared to men’s labor participation
rate of 89%52. The Cambodia Social and Economic Survey (CSES) showed that 38.3% of women aged 15 to 64
years were employed in the agriculture, forestry, and fishing sectors, 24.2% in the industry sector, and 37.5%
services sector (including hospitality and tourism, finance, healthcare and education)53. However, only 40.6%
of women are wage and salaried workers, while 59.3% are in ‘vulnerable employment’, usually working in
the informal sector, with insecure working conditions, low pay, and no access to social protection54.
Overall, gender gaps remain large between women and men in Cambodia, across industries and occupations.
A United Nations study55 found that Cambodian women earn about 80% of men’s wages while owning fewer
assets and that they face more barriers that prevent their equitable access to better-paying work
opportunities. The average gender wage gap in Cambodia is around 19%. This is tied to gender disparities in
education (a higher share of no primary education, and lower tertiary enrolment), as well as labor market
discrimination, gender-segregated occupations, and social norms associated with women’s primary domestic
role.56 Unequal caregiving and domestic loads are major structural barriers for women to take and stay in
formal paid employment, undertake skills training, and pursue opportunities for career development.
Representation and Participation in Decision Making
Although there is a robust gender equality perspective reflected in national gender equality policy initiatives
and legal frameworks, challenges remain for equal representation and participation of women and men in
decision-making positions. Women are still under-represented at all levels of legislative and executive bodies.
Women account for about 14% of total parliament members in the current mandate57, a decrease from 21%
in 2018. More than 10% of senior ministerial positions and around 16% of under-secretary and secretary of
state positions are held by women in the executive body. As of 2022, women hold around 27% of leadership
positions in civil service, which include roles such as deputy chiefs of offices to director generals. Overall,
women make up 42% of the total civil service workforce 58.
At the sub-national level, the proportion of women remains low in the positions of governor at the capital
city/province (8%) and municipality/khan/district (3.43%). The proportion is also low for the positions of chief
of Commune/Sangkat (10.65%) and deputy governors at the capital city/provincial (13%), with slightly higher
numbers for the position of deputy governor at the municipality/khan levels (20.3%) and members of
councilors of Commune/Sangkat with 22%59.
Gender-Based Violence and Social Norms
Gender-based violence is still widespread and a remains a concern in Cambodia. An estimated 21% of women
aged 15-49 years in Cambodia have experienced physical, sexual or emotional violence from intimate
partners in their lifetime, and 43% of them report experiencing severe violence with sustained injuries60.
Emotional abuse by a partner is less visible but no less traumatizing61 and affects almost one-fifth of
Cambodian women (19%). Rural women face higher rates of intimate partner violence than women in urban
areas, as do women in their late twenties to forties.62 The UN in Cambodia notes that “harmful gender norms,
such as the idea that men are entitled to sex regardless of consent, directly contribute to gender-based
violence”63. Women and girls from Indigenous groups who are survivors of gender-based violence face more
52 MoP & NIS (2022). National socio-economic survey report for 2021.
53, Ibid
54 Ibid
55 United Nations Cambodia. (2022). Gender equality deep dive for Cambodia – common country analysis.
56 Ibid.
57 Neary Ratanak VI – Promotion of Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women and Children (2024-2028), Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA).
58 Ibid
59 MoWA (2023). Key gender statistics in Cambodia in December 2023.
60 MoP/NIS (2023). Cambodia demographic and health survey (2021-22).
61 Fulu, E., Warner, X., & Moussavi, S. (2013). Men, gender and violence against women in Cambodia: Findings from a household study with men on
perpetration of violence. UN Women Cambodia
62. MoP/NIS (2022). Cambodia demographic and health survey (2021-2022).
63 United Nations Cambodia (2022).
2

=== PAGE 206 ===
challenges in seeking legal advice, safe shelter and mental support than non-Indigenous women64. The
Cambodian cultural practices and social norms continue to contribute to the unequal division of labor in the
household and the community as a whole. Besides being involved in productive activities such as farming
and generating income, women and girls are also primarily responsible for household and childcare duties.
Much of their time is devoted to household chores, childcare, cooking, and cleaning, and Indigenous women
in particular, carry a heavy burden in terms of household chores, including housework, farming, raising
animals, and collecting forest foods, especially in times of food shortage and disasters. Women are still
expected to follow social norms and beliefs that endorse men’s privilege while women are undervalued for
their capacity and potential. This impacts the roles of women and men in decision-making in the household
and the society as a whole. A Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA) report65 shows that women are involved
in managing the household budget, but men are the primary decision-makers for major expenditures.
Moreover, a gender analysis report by the ADB66 also points out that social norms and low level of education
and literacy, are the major barriers preventing women and girls from accessing information, technical skills,
and training, having their voices heard, and enjoying preference in their families and society.
Gender Policies and Legal Framework
The Royal Government of Cambodia is committed to promoting gender equality and social inclusion in
disaster risk reduction and management, aligning with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development's goal
of "leaving no one behind." Key national legislation and policies support this commitment:
• The Constitution of 1993 guarantees equal rights for women and men, including human rights,
equality before the law, and active participation in all aspects of national life.
• The Law on the Prevention of Domestic Violence and Protection of Victims addresses domestic
violence and promotes gender equality.
• The 2015 Law on Disaster Management focuses on the needs of women, children, the elderly, and
people with disabilities during disasters.
• The Government’s Pentagonal Strategy Phase I promotes gender equality and women's leadership
in key sectors, aiming to reduce vulnerability to gender-based violence and improve social protection
for the most vulnerable.
• Neary Ratanak VI (2024-2028), a five-year plan by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, focuses on gender
equality and women’s empowerment across various sectors, emphasizing care economy, well-being,
legal protection, climate change, and governance.
• Cambodia’s Updated Nationally Determined Contribution includes gender-focused measures for
climate change adaptation, incorporating gender impact assessments and evaluations.
• The National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (NAP-DRR) 2024-2028 emphasizes gender and
vulnerable group-responsive approaches in disaster risk reduction and climate resilience.
• The Climate Change Strategic Plan for Gender and Climate Change (2013-2023) focuses on addressing
the needs of vulnerable women and other groups through policy-making, leadership development,
and green growth initiatives.
• The Guideline for Gender Mainstreaming in Disaster Management provides practical guidance for
integrating gender perspectives in disaster management policies.
Cambodia is also committed to international and regional frameworks promoting gender equality and social
inclusion in disaster risk management, including Convention on All forms of Discrimination against
Women(CEDAW), United Nations Declaration on the Rights of indigenous People (UNDRIP), United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), the Sendai Framework, ASEAN Agreement
on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER) Work Programme 2021-2025, and the Beijing
Agenda for Global Action on Gender-Sensitive Disaster Risk Reduction.
64 Ministry of Women’s Affairs (2019). National action plan to prevent violence against women 2019-2023 (NAPVAWIII).
65 Ministry of Women’s Affairs (2014). Cambodia gender assessment.
66 Asian Development Bank (2015), Promoting Women’s Economic Empowerment in Cambodia.
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/156499/promoting-womens-economic-empowerment.pdf
3

=== PAGE 207 ===
Despite these efforts, challenges remain, such as limited knowledge and skills within ministries for gender
analysis, and insufficient resources and funding for gender-focused interventions
Gender-Related Institutional Arrangements
Cambodia has established mechanisms at both national and sub-national levels to advance gender equality
and women's empowerment, coordinated by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA) in collaboration with
sectoral ministries, local governments, and development partners.
MoWA plays a crucial role in promoting gender equality by coordinating efforts across public institutions, civil
society, and the private sector through various programs and the Technical Working Group on Gender (TWG-
G). MoWA also supports the Cambodian National Council for Women (CNCW) in implementing CEDAW and
ensuring legal protection for women. MoWA has line departments that work at the provincial level.
Sectoral ministries have Gender Mainstreaming Action Groups (GMAGs) responsible for developing,
implementing, and monitoring gender mainstreaming action plans (GMAPs). The National Committee on
Disaster Management (NCDM) is forming a gender working group within its secretariat and the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs is one of the key members of NCDM.
At the sub-national level, Women and Children Consultative Committees (WCCCs) operate at provincial and
district levels, and Commune Committees for Women and Children (CCWCs) at the commune level. These
committees advise on gender equality and women’s and children’s issues.
The sub-committees for disaster management were also established at the sub-national level to handle
various disaster risks, with a primary focus on emergency responses. The Provincial Department of Women’s
Affairs and a member of WCCC and CCWC are members of the sub-committees respectively at the province,
district, and commune levels, and mostly in the health and hygiene team. Besides this, no specific provision
ensures equal representation and participation of diverse groups, including women in the planning, response,
and recovery phases.
Women’s Representation and Participation in DRM Sectors
Women’s representation in government, especially in water resource management, meteorology, hydrology,
and disaster management, remains low. According to the latest data from 202367, the Ministry of Water
Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM) has a total of 1,401 officials, with 316 being women (22.5%).
Nonetheless, only 16% of these women hold leadership and decision-making positions, including two women
as secretaries of state (16%), one woman as under-secretary of state (6%), and two women as deputy general
directors (15%). There are no women in the roles of department director or provincial department director.
Moreover, a few women are working in technical areas of meteorology and hydrology at both the ministry
and provincial levels. For example, in Kratie province, no women are working as technical staff in meteorology
and hydrology, and there is only one woman in this field in Kampong Thom province68.
There is no comprehensive national data on women in Disaster Management Committees, but in provinces
like Kratie, Stung Treng, Ratanakiri, and Banteay Meanchey, women represent less than 13% of officials in
existing provincial disaster management committees, which is low compared to civil servants at the provincial
level and in other sectors. The majority of them are engaged in the finance and administration work. The
mindset and belief that water and disaster management work is more appropriate for men than women
persist in Cambodia as men are perceived to be good with science-related technical skills. This contributes to
gender gaps in the education sector in the field related to STEM, and gender disparity in government
institutions and other sectors.
67 Ministry of Water Resource Management and Meteorology (MoWRAM) (2023). Annual congress on 2023 achievements and direction for 2024.
68 PDoWRAM in Katrie – there are 5 women among a total of 35 staff but no woman working in meteorology and hydrology; in Kampong Thom –
only one woman in meteorology and hydrology offices among 4 women out of 22 staff.
4

=== PAGE 208 ===
Table 1: Female officials in Disaster Management in selected provinces69
Provinces/Committee's Roles Total Women Percentage
Kratie
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 48 5 10%
Explore, rescue, and security team 13 0 0%
Response and Recovery Team 33 5 15%
Secretariat 18 4 22%
Total 112 14 12.5%
Stung Treng
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 38 4 10%
Explore, rescue, and security team 6 0 0%
Response and recovery team 24 2 8%
Secretariat 12 4 33%
Total 80 10 12.5%
Ratanakiri
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 60 3 5%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team 12 1 8%
Response and recovery team 31 4 13%
Secretariat 18 2 11%
Total 121 10 8 %
Banteay Meanchey
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 55 4 7%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team 23 1 4%
Response and recovery team 29 3 10%
Secretariat 22 4 18%
Total 129 12 9 %
(source: List of members of the Provincial Committee for Disaster Management in the Preparedness and Contingency
Plan in Ratanakiri (2024), Kratie (2024), Stung Treng (2023), and Banteay Meanchey (2022).
Gender in Early Warnings and Disaster Risk Response
Efforts to improve disaster information and risk knowledge, such as the CamDi database and PRISM70
dashboard, lack of gender-disaggregated data, which hampers understanding the specific vulnerabilities of
different groups. Better data collection, analysis, and sharing are crucial for targeted interventions.
NCDM has worked to strengthen disaster information to increase risk knowledge and understanding with the
support of development partners, national and international organizations, and the private sector. CamDi
serves as a platform database for providing historical damage and loss information. NCDM has produced
flood risk maps as well as ID Poor household maps for the 25 municipalities and provinces that were used to
integrate into the national and sub-national flood contingency plans and publicly used to raise awareness,
particularly in communities prone to hazards and disaster risks. However, none of these initiatives include
disaggregation of data such as sex, age, disabilities, and other diversities. The lack of this data disaggregation
is one of the biggest barriers to comprehensively understanding of vulnerabilities and impacts of hazards and
disaster risks on different groups of people.
In partnership with WFP, NCDM also works to enhance the interactive web-based dashboard called Platform
for Real-time Impact Situation Monitoring (PRISM). PRISM assesses the potential risk and impact of climate
69 List of members of The Provincial Committee for Disaster Management in the Preparedness and Contingency Plan in Ratanakiri (2024), Kratie
(2024), Stung Treng (2023), and Banteay Meanchey (2022).
70CamDi database is a platform database for providing historical damage and loss information. “Platform for Real-time Impact Situation Monitoring
(PRISM), “assesses the potential risk and impact of climate hazards on the most vulnerable communities” by combining “information from satellites
and other remote sensing sources, field assessment information, early warning systems with data on socioeconomic vulnerability to create
actionable climate information, allowing prioritize assistance to those most in need”.
5

=== PAGE 209 ===
hazards on the most vulnerable communities by combining information from satellites and other remote
sensing sources, field assessment information, and early warning systems with data on socioeconomic
vulnerability to create actionable climate information, allowing priority assistance to those most in need.
Gender and Access to Early Warning Information and Technologies
Cambodia’s Early Warning System 1294 (EWS) has been implemented by NCDM nationwide in partnership
with PIN for flood and Action Aids for drought to provide alerts and information about disaster risks for better
preparedness and mitigation. The EWS 1294 requires users to have a registered mobile phone to receive
warnings about natural hazards. Early warning systems (EWS) like EWS 1294 are effective but not inclusive,
particularly for women, the elderly, and those without mobile phones. A recent study of PIN71 shows that
most community people, including people living with disabilities, the elderly, women, and Indigenous people
were not aware of the existence of the system and did not subscribe due to a lack of knowledge and/or
understanding of how to utilize it. Awareness and usage of EWS are lower among women, who often receive
information indirectly from local authorities.
Generally, awareness of EWS systems and related information remains limited for both women and men.
However, men overall tend to have more information than women, as they regularly follow local news
through TV and radio and have better access to smartphones and digital communication such as social media
and mobile apps. A national survey (2021-2022) shows that women are less likely than men to own a mobile
phone (85% versus 91%)72. The access to mass media in Cambodia, particularly in rural areas for women is
also lower than that of men, with 22% of women and 30% of men watching TV and fewer women than men
listening to the radio at least once a week73. In Kratie, 9 out of 10 people who come to check the water level
measurements are men. During the focus group discussion meeting with community men, most of them74
also reported that they accessed information on the river water level and weather forecasting through mobile
apps (weather apps) and social media, particularly Facebook. Some of them learned about weather apps and
searched the Facebook page of MoWRAM from their children. Based on the national survey, none of the
interviewed community women either used weather apps or Facebook (only very few of them use
smartphones) and rarely listened to radio. All of them said they received flooding alert information from local
authorities, particularly group/village leaders through home visits or loudspeakers in some communes, while
people living with disabilities mostly received EWS information from their family members. Therefore, multi-
channels of communication and dissemination are critically important to ensure everyone and all groups of
people have access to EWS information.
Preparedness, Early Actions, and Responses
Contingency and emergency plans include no distinction between the needs of women and more vulnerable
groups such as persons with disabilities residing in the affected areas. Moreover, despite community
engagement being very important for the contingency and emergency planning process, women and the
most vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, are not aware of the process and less likely to be engaged
in the planning. Most of the women and men groups in the community meetings in Kratie and Stung Treng
provinces reported that they have not been invited or engaged in the consultation about the preparation of
their commune contingency and emergency plans or commune development plans. They are not aware of
the needs and interventions included in the planning.
During the focus group discussion with groups of persons with disabilities, representatives of organizations
for people with disabilities (OPD) in Kratie and Kampong Thom provinces pointed out that despite local
authorities and the Committee on Disaster Management team being supportive during the emergency
response, the interventions have not been appropriately responding to the specific needs of persons with
disabilities, considering the different types of disabilities, including individuals with functional limitations and
71 People In Need (PIN) 2022. Impact assessment on EWS1294 read on vulnerable groups – people living with
disabilities, elderly, women, and minority groups.
72 MoP/NIS (2022). Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS) 2021-2022.
73 Ibid
74 Findings from focus group discussion during the project design mission from April to May 2024.
6

=== PAGE 210 ===
their limited access to the other services. The stakeholders in the consultation workshop also emphasized
the need to enhance the capacity and skills of all involved in disaster management on gender equality and
disability inclusion to ensure the interventions and responses appropriately address the needs and
vulnerabilities of the affected groups of people.
Access to Safe Evacuation Places
Although efforts have been made to improve safe evacuation sites, concerns remain about the adequacy of
facilities and ensuring safety. For instance, in Kratie, only 5 out of 150 listed safe evacuation sites meet the
national minimum requirements adopted from WFP, which include at least separate toilets for men and
women, clean water storage, and sanitation facilities. Similarly, in Stung Treng, only 2 out of 120 sites meet
these basic needs. Public buildings such as schools, pagodas, high roads, and health centers are used as
evacuation sites. However, people generally move to these sites only in situations when it is impossible to
remain in their homes, as staying at home or on higher ground is often more convenient. Concerns include
overcrowding, shared sleeping and cooking spaces, and lack of secure storage for valuables. Additionally,
community members, particularly women in Kratie province who participated in focus group discussion
meetings and have used these evacuation sites reported that there are inadequate facilities, including
shelters, clean water, and toilets. Many had to use flood water for washing and bathing, sometimes filtering
it for cooking, or collecting clean water from other places for cooking and drinking. The lack of proper facilities
makes it especially challenging for the elderly and persons with disabilities to stay in these safe evacuation
places.
Besides the physical facilities, a concern about being safe from other abuses was also pointed out by women
who participated in the focus group discussion meetings. Women have reported incidents of physical and
emotional violence against women and children in their communities which can worsen during their stay in
the evacuation places. The prevalence rate of violence against women is higher in the provinces of Banteay
Meanchey (35%), Stung Teng (32%), Ratanakiri (26%), and Kratie (16%)75. Ensuring inclusive, well-equipped
evacuation sites and addressing gender-specific needs and safety concerns are critical for effective disaster
response.
Limited Access to Resources and Services
Vulnerable groups in Cambodia, including the poor, rural women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, and
Indigenous communities, have limited capacity to prepare for disasters due to restricted access to resources
and services. According to focus group discussion meetings for this project with community members in
disaster-prone areas, people holding ID poor cards, and from at-risk households, reported not having extra
savings to buy extra food, boats, or household supplies to prepare for emergencies, as they barely earn
enough to survive day by day. Both women and men in drought-prone communities noted that during the
dry season, especially with increasing high temperatures and heat in early 2024, their crops, agricultural and
livelihood activities were severely affected. This impacted their income with inadequate to support their
families and no savings for emergencies. They also experienced a lack of water for household use (cooking,
washing clothes, and bathing) and safe drinking water, as there was insufficient water from canals, water
pumps, and rainwater storage. Some families had to buy water for drinking and household use, exacerbating
their vulnerability and exacerbating poverty in these already poor and near-poor families. Thus, limited
access to resources for the poor, women, elderly, and persons with disabilities limited these groups’
capacities to better prepare and take early anticipatory actions to mitigate the disaster risks and impacts on
themselves and their households.
The Cambodian government has expanded its social protection policy to include ‘shock-responsive social
protection’ for at-risk households, aiming to build resilience and mitigate disaster impacts. For better
preparation of a more inclusive shock-responsive social protection policy and program, there needs to be a
75 MoP/NIS (2022). Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2021-2022.
7

=== PAGE 211 ===
comprehensive understanding of different needs, vulnerabilities, and effects of a crisis on women and men,
and most vulnerable groups, particularly in the context of climate disaster risk reduction.
Community-Led Early Warning and Disaster Risk Reduction Initiatives
There are two key initiatives to empower women, and people with disabilities, to engage and lead community
disaster response, described below.
Women’s Champion Networks: Founded by ActionAid in four provinces, these networks promote women's
leadership in disaster management and support communities in understanding and preparing for hazard
risks.
Disability Inclusive Climate Action Project: Implemented by Save the Children and partners, this project
enhances the inclusion of persons with disabilities in climate actions and disaster risk reduction, ensuring
they have access to early warning information and are more resilient.
Areas for Improvement in Early Warning and Gender Inclusiveness
The following are areas where improvement in gender inclusiveness should be considered, which have been
taken into account when preparing the Gender Action Plan (GAP).
Enhancing GEDSI Analysis:
• Integrate Gender Equality, Disability, and Social Inclusion (GEDSI) analysis into disaster risk
assessments to capture the needs of diverse groups.
• Improve platforms like PRISM and CamDi to include disaggregated data and make them publicly
available.
Improving Early Warning Dissemination:
• A comprehensive review and action plan for Emergency Warning (EW) systems should provide
analysis and strategies to include inclusivity and to address the digital gender gaps.
• Use multiple communication channels, including cell broadcasting for wider reach, community-based
intervention, including outreach activities, targeting women or persons with disabilities who have no
access to mobile phones.
• Provide clear, actionable information tailored to different groups' needs.
• Training and awareness campaigns should also specifically target women or ensure gender balance
and youth participation.
Preparedness and Early Action:
• Ensure evacuation sites meet minimum standards and are safe for all, particularly women and girls,
and are designed inclusively.
• Train and equip community members, including women and persons with disabilities, for early
warning actions.
• Building evidence for shock-responsive social protection schemes for preparedness and anticipatory
action in the target provinces, especially to include the poor, women, and persons with disabilities.
Cross-Pillar Coordination:
• Create GEDSI mainstreaming guidelines and training for emergency warning systems.
• Increase the representation and participation of vulnerable groups in preparedness and response
activities.
8

=== PAGE 212 ===
Incorporate GEDSI aspects into standard operating procedures and monitoring frameworks, collecting and
analyzing disaggregated data.
9

=== PAGE 213 ===
5 Gender Assessment for Fiji
In 2023 the estimated population of Fiji was 936,37576 , of which 469,490 are male (50,14 %) and 466,885
are female (49,86%). As of 2023, approximately 41% of Fiji’s population lives in rural areas.77
Fiji has made strides toward gender equality, yet it faces persistent obstacles rooted in traditional social
norms and patriarchal values, especially impacting women’s roles in rural areas. While government and non-
governmental organizations have promoted gender equality in education and employment, challenges
remain, including limited leadership representation, pay inequality, and gender-based violence. These
structural issues have direct implications for women’s health, education, and economic engagement78.
For instance, maternal health has improved, with the maternal mortality ratio decreasing from 49 per
100,000 live births in 2000 to 38 in 2020, a rate that falls below the regional average. Adolescent birth rates
have also declined, though 26 births per 1,000 females aged 15-19 were still recorded in 2022. Educational
access is comparatively high, with 99% of girls and 92% of boys completing lower secondary school,
highlighting progress in youth education.
Despite these advances, economic participation gaps remain substantial. In 2023, labour force participation
was 39.1% for women compared to 77.3% for men, showing that female labour engagement has stagnated
despite government efforts. Additionally, women remain more likely to work in vulnerable employment,
though this rate is lower than the regional average. Unpaid domestic work still disproportionately affects
women, who spend nearly three times as much time as men on household tasks. Gender-based violence
(GBV) also remains a serious issue, with 52% of Fijian women ages 15-49 reporting intimate partner violence,
far above the global average (27%). In terms of political representation, women held only 10.9% of
parliamentary seats in 2023, reflecting slow progress in leadership inclusion. These indicators underscore
both Fiji’s achievements and ongoing barriers to achieving true gender equality.79 Progress will require
sustained initiatives that address cultural, economic, and social factors comprehensively.
Fiji is ranked 104th out of 193 countries in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI)80. Life expectancy at
birth for female is 70.2 and for males is 66.5. Expected years of schooling are 14.4 for females and 13.3 for
males in 2022. Mean years of schooling are 10.4 for females and 19.3 for males in 2022. Estimated Gross
National Income per capita is 6,282 US Dollars for females and 16,158 US Dollars for males (2017).81 Fiji’s
Gender Development Index (GDI) value is 0.940, placing the country in group 3 countries 82.
Literacy, Education and Vocational Training
The literacy rate in Fiji has progressively increased in recent years with an adult literacy rate of 99.08% --
99.09% for women aged 15 years and older and 99.08% for men 15 years and older. Fiji has achieved 100%
net enrolment in primary education with 100% completion rate, and 88% net enrolment in secondary school.
This ratio reflects broader patterns in Oceania, where secondary retention and completion rates are often
higher for girls than boys due to factors such as dropout rates influenced by economic and social pressures
on young males to enter the workforce earlier.
In Fiji, tertiary education enrolment demonstrates a significant gender difference, with a higher proportion
of women attending compared to men. Data from 2019 shows a female-to-male enrolment ratio of
approximately 1.31, meaning that for every male student, about 1.31 female students were enrolled at this
level. This aligns with broader trends across the Pacific region where female enrolment tends to exceed male
76 Population, total - Fiji | Data
77 Rural population (% of total population) - Fiji | Data
78 Country Fact Sheet | UN Women Data Hub
79 Indicators source: Fiji | World Bank Gender Data Portal
80 UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24, pg.289
81 UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24, pg.289
82 Countries are divided into five groups by absolute deviation from gender parity in HDI values.
UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24, pg.289
10

--- Table 1 on Page 213 ---
In 2023 the estimated population of Fiji was 936,37576 , of which 469,490 are male (50,14 %) and 466,885
are female (49,86%)

=== PAGE 214 ===
enrolment in higher education. Specifically, gross enrolment rates show 59.9% for women compared to 41.4%
for men, suggesting increased female participation and retention in tertiary education83.
Vocational training programs in Fiji also cater to young people, especially those from rural or disadvantaged
backgrounds, aiming to provide practical skills for employment. The government’s ongoing investment in
rural education infrastructure further seeks to equalize educational opportunities across urban and rural
areas. Vocational training for Fijian girls is expanding through programs like the Makoi Women’s Vocational
Training Centre, which offers courses in fields such as aged care and culinary arts, helping over 1,600 women
gain marketable skills84. Additionally, initiatives like the Girls in STEM camp by Fiji National University and
Graduate Women Fiji encourage young women to enter STEM fields through hands-on STEM activities and
career talks85. These efforts aim to boost women’s economic opportunities and address gender gaps in
vocational and technical fields.
The table below on Student Roll by School Type, Gender, and Ethnicity offers valuable insights into gender
distribution across different school types, highlighting areas where gender imbalances persist, alongside
ethnicity.
Student Roll by School Type, Gender and Ethnicity; table adapted from Ministry of Education Strategic Development
Plan 2023-2026
Source: FEMIS 2023
Employment and Labor Participation
Traditionally women’s role is to care for family members and carry out domestic work. This includes caring
for children, the elderly and family members with disabilities in the household. According to the World Bank,
women in Fiji spend 2.9 times as much time on unpaid domestic and care work than men86.
Fiji has a labour force participation rate of 57.6 per cent. Labour force participation and employment for
Fijian women show significant disparities compared to men. As of 2023, the female labour force participation
rate was about 39.1%, while male participation was around 77.3%. This difference reflects not only lower
participation rates among women but also an overrepresentation of women in informal, low-paid, or unpaid
work. In the formal sector, about 35.2% of women hold paid jobs. Women tend to earn about one-third less
than men, with much of their employment concentrated in lower-paying sectors, adding to financial
instability and inequality.87
In its 2018 review, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women highlighted ongoing
concerns about the low participation rate of women in Fiji's workforce. These concerns were reiterated in
Fiji’s 2019 Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and in a direct request from the Committee of Experts on the
Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR). Key issues included Fiji’s wide gender pay gap—
83 Fiji Female to male ratio, students at tertiary level education - data, chart | TheGlobalEconomy.com ; Ratio of Female to Male Tertiary School
Enrollment for Fiji (SEENRTERTFMZSFJI) | FRED | St. Louis Fed ; Fiji - Ratio of female to male tertiary enrollment; World Bank Document
84 89 women graduated from the Makoi Women’s Vocational Training Centre
85 https://www.fijitimes.com.fj/fnu-and-graduate-women-fiji-hold-camp-to-boost-female-participation-in-stem/
86 Source:- PDF - Theresa Gigov May 2023. Tackling Gender Inequality in Fiji: Business Responsibilities & Opportunities. Ocean and Human Rights.
(www.ocean-humanrights.org/resources)
87 ILO (2024) Fiji country Factsheet 2024; Fiji Female labor force participation - data, chart | TheGlobalEconomy.com;
11

=== PAGE 215 ===
the largest in the region—as well as the high concentration of women in low-paying, informal sector jobs,
where they often lack access to maternity rights, legal protections, secure benefits, and representation.
Additionally, workplace sexual harassment and other forms of sexual assault remains an issue. In response,
Fiji became the second country to ratify ILO Convention C190 in 2020, aiming to address workplace violence
and harassment. However, some women continue to face limited employment options, with some
compelled to engage in sex work due to economic pressures and challenges with enforcing child support
obligations88.
Efforts to improve women’s economic empowerment are ongoing, with the Fijian government and NGOs
working on policies and action plans that target key barriers, such as lack of access to markets, limited
training opportunities, and restrictive cultural norms. Additionally, Fiji's Women’s Economic Empowerment
National Action Plan aims to create a more supportive environment for women’s equal participation in the
economy, from microenterprise support to skills development and advocacy for fair policies89.
Rural women play a significant role in the economic survival of their families. This is especially relevant in Fiji
where agriculture is the main source of income and employment in rural areas. According to the FAO Country
Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector in Fiji (FAO/SPC, 201990), employment opportunities
are very limited in rural Fiji and informality prevails, accounting for two thirds of all informal workers in the
country. Rural women earn a quarter less than their male peers and seem to be dedicated to physically
strenuous and time-intensive agriculture tasks that add to their reproductive role responsibilities, linked to
caring for her families, household chores and needs. Poor access to agricultural land is also a constrain to
women’s agricultural activities. Their inability to own land is a key factor that constrains women’s ability to
cultivate commercial crops and engage in agribusiness
Within agricultural households, women make decisions related to their domestic responsibilities and may
share decisions about economic activities with their husbands/partners. However, due to patriarchal norms,
men are generally considered the family decision makers. Women tend to have less voice in decisions about
community-based management of natural resources, even though they rely on these resources for their
subsistence and income-generating activities.
Whie women have full rights of inheritance and property ownership by law, local authorities often exclude
them from decision-making processes on disposition of indigenous communal land. Limiting women’s access
to land is a central barrier to founding a formal business and puts pressure on them to marry. Women’s
dependency on men is a central challenge.91
Roles and Responsibilities of Women in Fiji's Economic Sectors
Women in Fiji play integral roles across various sectors in both rural and urban settings, contributing
significantly to the economy and society. While their contributions are often essential to community well-
being, they are frequently concentrated in sectors that may lack high visibility or tend to be lower-income
and low-productivity fields. This section explores the diverse economic roles of Fijian women, from
agriculture and food security to professional and technical fields, highlighting the challenges and
opportunities they face92.
88 ILO (2024) Fiji country Factsheet 2024
89 Urgent need to develop a Fiji Women’s Economic Empowerment National Action Plan - Cabinet
90 https://openknowledge.fao.org/items/bc192084-98fb-4efb-a1dc-8eec1d01dc90
91 Theresa Gigov May 2023. Tackling Gender Inequality in Fiji: Business Responsibilities & Opportunities. Ocean and Human Rights. (www.ocean-
humanrights.org/resources)
92a FAO and SPC. 2019. Country gender assessment of agriculture and the rural sector in Fiji. Suva. https://openknowledge.fao.org/items/bc192084-
98fb-4efb-a1dc-8eec1d01dc90
17b Data and figures in section are taken from : Fiji Country Gender Assessment Deep Dive 2023.
https://www.mwcsp.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/0227_DeepDive_SINGLE_PAGES.pdf
12

=== PAGE 216 ===
Food Security and Nutrition
Women are central to food security and nutrition across Fiji. In rural areas, women actively cultivate food
crops, contributing to the community’s food supply. In both rural and urban households, women are typically
responsible for buying, preparing, and ensuring the availability of nutritious food for their families. This role
is vital to the health and well-being of families and communities, as women ensure that family members
have consistent access to essential nutrients.
Market Vendors and Economic Participation
Women account for 80% of the approximately 3,000 market vendors across Fiji’s thirteen municipal markets.
These vendors contribute significantly to local economies, providing a vital link between agricultural
production and consumer markets. The presence of women in markets highlights their role as economic
agents within their communities, enabling them to generate income, support their households, and
participate in the local economy.
Farming, Forestry, and Fisheries
Though women represent only about 4% of the workforce in farming, forestry, and fisheries, their
involvement in these sectors remains important. Women in these areas often engage in subsistence
agriculture, fisheries, or small-scale farming to supplement household income and contribute to family food
security.
Tourism Sector
The tourism industry employs a considerable portion of the female workforce in Fiji, with women comprising
at least one-third of this sector. However, while women are prevalent in tourism, they are underrepresented
in higher-paying professional or managerial positions, with only about one-quarter holding such roles.
Handicrafts and Artisan Value Chains
Women dominate the handicraft and artisan sector, where they often work as individual artisans, within
family units, or in small collectives. These groups are sometimes self-formed but are also facilitated by civil
society organizations (CSOs), international entities, and government agencies. By producing traditional Fijian
crafts, these women preserve cultural heritage while also generating income through tourism and local
markets.
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)
Women are highly active in Fiji’s informal economy, where most micro, small, and medium enterprises
(MSMEs) operate. Approximately half of all MSMEs are owned by women, highlighting their entrepreneurial
spirit and resilience. However, many of these women-owned businesses are concentrated in crowded, low-
productivity areas like canteens, tailoring, beauty services, food processing, and second-hand clothing.
Professional and Technical Fields
Fijian women have an established and growing presence in professional and technical fields, supported by
their strong participation in educational institutions. Increasingly, women are moving into leadership roles
within various professional associations, indicating that their presence in professional fields will likely
13

=== PAGE 217 ===
continue to rise. This trend reflects the impact of education and professional networks on women’s career
growth and development.
Mining Sector
Although women's participation in the mining sector is minimal, their roles are often in skilled and technical
positions. Women make up 12.4% of the workforce in mining, primarily holding scientific and technical roles
such as laboratory technicians, geologists, and environmental management specialists. Their presence in
skilled positions within mining demonstrates their capacity to succeed in traditionally male-dominated fields,
though opportunities remain limited.
Global Outsourcing Services
Fiji’s global outsourcing industry employs a substantial proportion of women, who make up approximately
65-70% of this workforce. This sector offers women employment opportunities that might not otherwise be
available locally, contributing to both personal and national economic development.93
Female Representation in Fiji’s Public Sector and Governance
Women in Fiji are progressively entering traditionally male-dominated fields such as the judiciary, law
enforcement, and senior civil service positions. However, only 5 out of 55 parliamentary seats (9.1%) are
held by women94. Similarly, women account for a low percentage of leadership roles in Fiji's management
boards. A recent study by the Fiji Women’s Rights Movement found that women comprise only 21% of board
members (40 out of 192), with 10 out of 38 boards having less than 30% female participation95. While the
female share of senior and middle management roles in Fiji’s workforce was 38.6% as of 2016,
representation in ministerial-level positions was only 5.26% in 202296.
Gender relevant legal framework and institutional arrangements
Fiji has made significant strides in promoting gender equality through both international commitments and
national legislation. As a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and through policies like the National Gender Policy and the Women’s Economic
Empowerment National Action Plan, Fiji demonstrates its commitment to gender equity. However, cultural
norms and ingrained societal practices continue to challenge the pace of progress. This section provides an
overview of some of Fiji's major gender-focused laws, policies, and initiatives.
National Gender Policy (2014)
In 2014, Fiji adopted the National Gender Policy, establishing a framework to promote gender equity,
equality, social justice, and sustainable development. The policy aims to improve the quality of life for both
men and women by:
• Promoting gender mainstreaming across government agencies
• Addressing and removing gender inequalities
• Advancing sustainable development through gender equity
93 Fiji Country Gender Assessment Deep Dive 2023.
https://www.mwcsp.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/0227_DeepDive_SINGLE_PAGES.pdf
94 Source: Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2023.
95Perception Study on Leadership in Fiji. Fiji Womens Rights Movement. Nov 2022.
http://www.fwrm.org.fj/images/fwrm2017/PDFs/research/FWRM_Gender_Diversity_Incl_GoF_Boards-Final_.pdf
96 World Bank Gender Data Portal
14

=== PAGE 218 ===
Through this policy, Fiji prioritizes the integration of gender perspectives in all government policies,
programs, and projects to reduce gender-based discrimination and support social progress.97
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and Committee
Oversight
As a CEDAW signatory, Fiji aligns its policies with global standards for gender equality. The CEDAW
Committee monitors Fiji's progress and compliance, urging the government to enact measures that ensure
women's rights across all spheres, including education, employment, and personal safety. Fiji’s engagement
with the CEDAW Committee highlights its ongoing commitment to these international standards.
National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against All Women and Girls (VAWG) 2023-2028
This five-year action plan, launched in 2023, represents a comprehensive approach to tackling violence
against women and girls in Fiji. The plan includes:
• Strategies to prevent violence through education and advocacy
• Initiatives that address social and cultural norms contributing to gender-based violence
• Partnerships with civil society, the private sector, and international organizations
The plan is critical to reducing violence and enhancing support for survivors, underscoring Fiji’s dedication
to safeguarding the rights and well-being of women and girls98.
Family Law Act (2003)
The Family Law Act modernized Fiji’s approach to family and domestic relations, introducing laws that
promote gender equality within families. This includes:
• Rights regarding marriage, divorce, and custody that aim to protect both partners and children.
• Provisions to ensure that family law disputes are resolved fairly, with attention to the rights and
needs of women and children.
The act is a step forward in addressing gender biases in family law and supporting equitable relationships
within households.
Employment Regulations Act (2007)99
The Employment Regulations Act introduced important provisions for workplace equality and protection,
including:
• Ensuring fair treatment and protection from discrimination in employment
• Establishing standards for workplace safety, conditions, and benefits
• Protecting women’s rights in employment, especially regarding maternity and equal pay
This law supports women’s economic empowerment by providing legal recourse for gender discrimination
in the workplace.
National Policy on Sexual Harassment in the Workplace (2007)
97 National-Gender-Policy-FIJI-.pdf; https://www.fiji.gov.fj/
98 Source - fiji_nap_2023-2028-digital-final.pdf
99 EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS ACT 2007 - Laws of Fiji
15

=== PAGE 219 ===
To combat workplace harassment, Fiji introduced the National Policy on Sexual Harassment, which includes:
• Clear guidelines for employers and employees to prevent harassment
• Procedures for reporting and addressing complaints of harassment
• Protective measures to foster respectful and safe work environments
This policy is a critical measure for gender equality, ensuring that women feel secure and valued in their
workplaces.
Fiji has enacted significant legislation and action plans to promote gender equality, protect women’s rights,
and empower women across all sectors of society. However, despite these advancements, cultural practices
and longstanding social norms continue to pose challenges to achieving full gender equity. Nonetheless, Fiji’s
legislative framework sets a foundation for continued progress towards gender equality, creating pathways
for women to thrive in all aspects of life.
Institutional arrangements
In Fiji, a diverse network of institutions works toward achieving gender equality and empowering women
across all facets of society. This section examines key governmental bodies, such as the Ministry of Women,
Children, and Social Protection and the Ministry of iTaukei Affairs, alongside Ministry of Rural, Maritime &
Disaster Management and Ministry of Housing and Local governments which administers local councils,
district and provinces, they drive policies and programs supporting women’s rights, economic
empowerment and social welfare.
Additionally, non-governmental organizations, international agencies, and faith-based groups play crucial
roles in addressing issues like gender-based violence, economic empowerment, and inclusive leadership in
Fiji. Organizations like the Fiji Women’s Crisis Center and Women’s Fund Fiji provide essential support and
advocacy, especially for marginalized communities. Faith-based groups, including the House of Sarah and
Catholic Women’s League, further strengthen social networks for women through community engagement
and support.
Together, these institutions form a comprehensive framework that promotes gender equity and helps build
a more inclusive and resilient Fiji.
Government Ministries and Local Governments
Fiji's governance structure includes four divisions (Central/Western/Northern/Eastern) serving a total
of 14 provinces, and various local councils with distinct functions.
Ministry of Women, Children, and Social Protection
The Ministry has three departments: Department of Women, Department of Children, and Department of
Social Welfare. Each department implements various services and programs to support families, protect
children, and empower women.
The Department of Women focuses on gender equality through initiatives like:
▪ REACH Project (Rights, Empowerment, and Cohesion of Rights for Rural and Urban
Fijians): A mobile service delivery project prioritizing outreach to remote
communities.
▪ Women’s Economic Empowerment National Action Plan (WEE NAP) 2024-2029:
Supports national development through economic empowerment of women.
▪ Women’s Plan of Action: Focuses on gender-based violence.
16

=== PAGE 220 ===
Ministry of iTaukei Affairs
o Responsible for the welfare and governance of the iTaukei people, this Ministry oversees
cultural mapping and integrates iTaukei development interests into national plans.
o Programs emphasize sustainable development, climate resilience, and partnerships with
non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations.
o Provincial Offices and Soqosoqo vaka Marama: Represents iTaukei women in governance
matters and supports their social and economic advancement.
Ministry for Rural Maritime Development and Disaster Management
The Ministry plays a critical role in working with other government agencies to better serve marginalised
communities. The ministry has three main portfolio that is (i) rural development (ii) maritime development
and (iii) disaster management. Under its five strategic priority areas are capital programs which includes:-
- Community access, roads, footpaths, footbridges
- Self-help programs
- Water programs
- Rural outer island programs
- Rural housing assistance
- Seafaring entrepeunial assistance
- Sanitation programs
Projects under these capital programs have benefitted women, children, youths, aging people and
persons living with disability
Ministry for Housing and Local Government
The ministry oversees two portfolios: Department of housing and local government. The department of
Local Government supports & monitors the functions of the municipalities and is responsible for overseeing
the administration and regulations of the councils, as well as overseeing the functions of the National Fire
Authority. Local government plays a role in economic empowerment and development of rural women
vendors in the municipal markets and licensing of informal business sectors such as street hawkers (for
example jewellery sellers, florists, food sellers etc). It is responsible for infrastructural developments that
address the safe keeping and protection of women and children within the market work space.
The National Fire Authority through their community awareness and education program are extending their
training programs to build community capacity skills and knowledge by empowering abled men and women
as well as youths as frontline responders during disasters. This information was gathered from the
communities visited during the field interview.
Provincial Councils (supported by the Ministry of iTaukei Affairs): Empower and protect indigenous Fijians’
land and resources.
Municipal Councils: Local governance bodies that oversee urban areas under the Ministry of Local
Government.
Rural Local Authorities: Manage governance in non-municipal rural areas, providing additional support and
services to rural populations.
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
Soqosoqo Vakamarama i-Taukei
17

--- Table 1 on Page 220 ---
The ministry oversees two portfolios: Department of housing and local government. The department of
Local Government supports & monitors the functions of the municipalities and is responsible for overseeing
the administration and regulations of the councils, as well as overseeing the functions of the National Fire
Authority. Local government plays a role in economic empowerment and development of rural women
vendors in the municipal markets and licensing of informal business sectors such as street hawkers (for
example jewellery sellers, florists, food sellers etc). It is responsible for infrastructural developments that
address the safe keeping and protection of women and children within the market work space.

The National Fire Authority through their community awareness and education program are extending their
training programs to build community capacity skills and knowledge by empowering abled men and women
as well as youths as frontline responders during disasters. This information was gathered from the
communities visited during the field interview.

Provincial Councils (supported by the Ministry of iTaukei Affairs): Empower and protect indigenous Fijians’
land and resources.

=== PAGE 221 ===
Founded in 1924, this is one of Fiji's oldest Indigenous Women’s Organizations, advocating for iTaukei
women's rights and representation at the provincial level.
Fiji Women’s Crisis Center (FWCC)
Provides essential services to survivors of gender-based violence, with counseling, legal, and medical
support, along with a 24/7 toll-free hotline.
Fiji Women’s Rights Movement (FWRM)
A feminist organization that champions women's human rights, focusing on legislative reform to remove
discrimination and promote gender equality.
We Rise Coalition
A coalition of feminist organizations working toward gender equality and inclusive rights for diverse gender
identities, supporting transformative change through collaboration.
Women’s Fund Fiji
Established in 2017, the Fund provides financial support and capacity-building for women’s organizations,
especially those serving marginalized communities such as women with disabilities and LGBTQ+ groups.
FemLink Pacific
A feminist media organization with programs like FEMTalk 89FM and Suitcase Radio that give women a voice
in media, disaster preparedness, and gender equality.
International and Multilateral Organizations
UN Women - Fiji Multi-Country Office
Works with governments and civil society to design and implement laws, policies, and programs aimed at
achieving gender equality, in line with global standards.
UNDP Pacific Office – Fiji Multi-Country Office
UNDP Fiji MCO is committed to integrating gender equality and women empowerment into every facet of its
programmatic activities. Its transformative gender-focussed efforts has led to the achievement of the Gender
Equality Gold Seal. The accelerator lab has contributed immensely to finding innovative solutions to address
the root causes of gender inequalities in the Pacific Islands. Furthermore, their work in Fiji has shown support
and co-ownership of gender equality across programmes and operation. These includes the implementation
of 2021-2022 Gender Equality Strategy, partnering with Fiji Police Force to support survivors of gender-based
violence, supporting women’s political participation in processes, in parliament and caucus membership,
strengthening access to justice for women that survive violence, using sports to promote gender equality by
establishing non-discriminating and teamwork values and analysing the laws and policies from a gender
perspective.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)
The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) has several initiatives to promote gender equality in the
Pacific region, including: Pacific Platform for Action (a roadmap to achieve gender equality and improve the
well-being of women and girls in the Pacific. It supports the commitments made by Pacific Island countries
18

=== PAGE 222 ===
and territories to gender equality), Pacific Gender Statistics Dashboard (a tool that provides a
comprehensive overview of gender-related indicators and metrics in the Pacific. The dashboard organizes
data into five thematic areas, including population demographics, economic participation, education,
health, and safety), Pacific Partnership to End Violence Against Women (a program that includes working
with Ministries of Education, teachers, and teacher training institutes to develop gender-responsive school
policies. The program also partners with young people to build a pool of trainers to deliver community-
based interventions, SPC Gender Flagship (a program that charts the pathway for gender equality in the
Pacific).
It also highlighted other gender-related initiatives, including: training authorized justices to issue Interim
Protection Orders for survivors of domestic violence, breaking barriers for LGBTQI human rights,
International Women's Day and Micronesian Women's Conference.
International Women’s Development Agency (IWDA)
IWDA is a feminist organization working towards resourcing women rights organization, promote systematic
change, strengthens feminist movements, equality insights – the use of data to drive transformative change
and resource empowerment through research to develop tools, frameworks and policies. In Fiji, IWDA works
in partnership with FemLINKpacific and Fiji Women’s Rights Movement (FWRM).
Faith-Based Organizations
House of Sarah (Association of Anglican Women)
Launched in 2009, House of Sarah provides counselling and support services for women affected by violence
and builds coalitions within the Christian community.
Catholic Women’s League, Fiji
Established in 1968, this organization has over 2,000 members across 36 parishes, promoting social and
spiritual development for women.
Fiji Muslim Women’s League
An organization affiliated with the National Council of Women in Fiji, addressing the needs of Muslim
women, especially in areas like housing and youth support.
Methodist Women Fellowship in Fiji
Part of the World Federation of Methodist and Uniting Church Women, promoting leadership and
development among Methodist women in Fiji.
Gender-Based Violence
Data reveals that Fiji has some of the highest rates of violence against women in the world. It is deemed
that 72% of women in Fiji (aged between 18-64) have experienced physical, emotional, or sexual violence by
their intimate partners in their lifetime25 with 16% of adult women have reported being sexually abused
before the age of 15 years26. Director of Public Prosecution reported 94% of rape survivors were women with
68% of cases involving girls under the age of 18 years27. Additionally, 73% of children directly or indirectly
experience GBV, usually by male family members, 74% reported sexual violence cases of children under age
19

--- Table 1 on Page 222 ---
It also highlighted other gender-related initiatives, including: training authorized justices to issue Interim
Protection Orders for survivors of domestic violence, breaking barriers for LGBTQI human rights,
International Women's Day and Micronesian Women's Conference.

=== PAGE 223 ===
of 18 years. 100 The most common form of sexual violence in Fiji is child sexual abuse, primarily of girls and
some boys under the age of 18 years101.
The trend of violence against women and girls in Fiji reveal 2 in 3 ever-partnered women in Fiji have
experienced physical and/ or sexual violence from a male intimate partner in their lifetime, 1 in 3 ever-
partnered women experienced marital rape, 1 in 4 women experienced economic abuse, 1 in 3 women have
experienced violence from a man who is not their partner, and 1 in 5 women have experienced sexual
harassment in the workplace in the formal sector, noting rates are unknown in the informal sector .
People of diverse sexual orientations, gender identities, and sex characteristics (including lesbian, bisexual
and transgender women, gay men, transgender men and gender nonconforming people) experience higher
rates, and more severe forms of violence from partners, family members and communities26.
Women living with disability are particularly at risk for experiencing physical, economic, sexual and emotional
violence from family members, partners, caregivers and institutions (health, social services, etc.) with more
rigorous research required to understand the full extent of violence experienced26.
Social Norms and Gender Roles in Fiji
In Fiji, social norms and cultural beliefs strongly shape women’s roles, influencing their participation in
decision-making and public life. These norms, rooted in Fiji’s diverse ethnic traditions, often limit women’s
autonomy, particularly in community settings, where traditional hierarchies shape how women express their
needs and concerns.
Women’s Participation in Public Consultations
While women in Fiji do participate in public consultations, their involvement is often constrained by cultural
hierarchies. When women have decision-making power, they are able to give voice to their interests,
preferences and needs, either directly through holding positions of power in the public and private sectors
or indirectly by lobbying and advocating through diverse individual and collective, formal and informal
mechanisms and channels102.
In i-Taukei communities, women typically voice concerns indirectly through community women’s groups or
leaders, adhering to established protocols. In Indo-Fijian and settlement communities, similar structures
exist but vary in form. Women's participation, therefore, is shaped by these social structures, which may
limit their ability to openly and freely discuss issues affecting them.
Social Expectations and Empowerment
Fiji’s patriarchal society reinforces a perception of male dominance, especially within households, and
expectations around gender roles remain strong. Women are often seen as caregivers and supporters, while
men hold primary decision-making roles. These expectations differ somewhat across ethnic groups and
between rural and urban settings, with rural communities and older generations holding more traditional
views. Younger Fijians, especially in urban areas, may be more open to shifting gender roles, though
traditional beliefs continue to exert significant influence.
25 Sexual and reproductive health and gender-based violence in Fiji: A review of policy and legislation.
https://pacific.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/fiji_policy_and_legislative_review_290922.pdf
101Fiji National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against All Women and Girls (VAWG) 2023 – 2028.
https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2023-09/fiji_nap_2023-2028-digital-final.pdf
27 Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions Rape and Sexual Offenses Statistics for the years 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020.
http://odpp.com.fj/mediaupdates-2/
28 Fiji Women’s Crisis Centre (FWCC), 2013, ‘Somebody’s life, Everybody’s business! National Research on Women’s Health and Life Experiences in
Fiji’. Available at: http://www.fijiwomen.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/National-Survey-Summary.pdf
20

=== PAGE 224 ===
Regional and Generational Differences
Gender expectations in Fiji vary widely based on ethnicity, region, and age. Rural areas and older generations
tend to uphold traditional gender roles, while younger, urban Fijians are more likely to embrace progressive
views on women’s empowerment and participation. These differences reflect a gradual shift towards gender
equity in some areas, though patriarchal norms persist, especially in rural and traditional communities.
Social norms in Fiji both shape and restrict women’s roles in public life, with traditional beliefs reinforcing
male dominance and limiting women’s participation. As urbanization and generational change introduce
more progressive perspectives, Fiji continues to navigate the balance between tradition and the push for
gender equality.
Bridging Fiji’s Digital Divide: Data Insights and Strategic Suggestions for Women’s Inclusion
In Fiji, access to digital tools and information reveals notable gender disparities, especially among low-
income communities and rural populations. Although 66% of Fijians were reported to have internet access
in 2020, and mobile phone ownership exceeded the population at 139%103, barriers remain for many women
in terms of accessing and using technology on an equal footing with men. Digital adoption data is primarily
general, but available research suggests that men and women in Fiji do not experience technology access in
the same way.
Globally, data from GSMA’s Women104 project shows that women in low-income communities are 21% less
likely to own mobile phones than men, with many women reporting comfort with basic phone functions like
making and receiving calls but far less confidence in using advanced features such as texting. Additionally,
fewer than half of the women surveyed felt proficient in sending text messages. Even so, many women
expressed strong interest in learning about more advanced features, like mobile banking, online bill
payments, and internet browsing—services that are increasingly essential for participating in modern digital
economies. However, technical literacy and familiarity with these features are often limited, especially in
rural or isolated areas. Local context also plays a significant role, as factors like gender norms, age, and
geographic isolation can impact women’s access and comfort with technology.
Internet access is also uneven between urban and rural areas. A 2022 survey by the United Nations Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF) found that while 45% of Fijians aged 15–74 possess a payment card linked to a
current account, only 16% of adults made an online purchase in the three months before the survey. This
low adoption rate for digital transactions highlights several barriers, including limited eCommerce
infrastructure, low financial literacy, and gaps in digital infrastructure, especially in rural and maritime
regions. Fiji’s dispersed islands and rugged geography complicate the development of consistent network
coverage and technology access, and approximately 2% of the population remains outside of the reach of
2G, 3G, or 4G connectivity. Digital transformation in these rural and remote areas lags significantly behind
that of urban centres105.
In terms of accessing information, Fijian women rely on multiple sources, including radio, television, SMS,
social media, and newspapers printed in English, iTaukei, and Urdu. Word-of-mouth remains a vital channel,
especially in rural areas where community leaders, such as village heads, chiefs, and church leaders, play
crucial roles in distributing important information. Although men and women generally use similar
information sources, women from different demographics—especially those in rural areas, of different
ethnicities, or varying age groups—experience these sources differently. For instance, older women and
103 Country Gender Assessment report 2023 https://www.mwcsp.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/0227_DeepDive_SINGLE_PAGES.pdf
https://www.mwcsp.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/0227_DeepDive_SINGLE_PAGES.pdf
Digital 2020: Fiji — DataReportal – Global Digital Insights
104 https://www.gsma.com/solutions-and-impact/connectivity-for-good/mobile-for-development/programme/connected-women/mwomen-bop-
apps-challenge-closes-tomorrow/
105 https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/fiji-information-and-communication-technology
21

=== PAGE 225 ===
those in more remote communities often depend on local leaders or word-of-mouth rather than digital
platforms, which may be more accessible to younger or urban women.
Nevertheless, technology access for Fijian women encompasses a broad spectrum, including smartphones,
basic mobile phones, laptops, television, and radio. Digital access is becoming increasingly widespread and
plays a pivotal role in empowering women’s involvement in decision-making. As of 2023, an estimated 65%
of Fijians (over 600,000 people) are Facebook users, underscoring the platform’s reach and influence. Social
media has even given rise to a form of digital activism among Fijian women, who leverage platforms like
Facebook to share information, connect with community initiatives, and participate in decision-making
processes. However, the extent of technology use can vary significantly across the country. Women in urban
areas, especially those who are younger and more educated, are more likely to engage with digital resources,
while those in rural areas or from lower socioeconomic backgrounds may lack similar access106.
Significant challenges remain, however, in ensuring that women have equitable access to information,
especially in emergency or disaster situations. Fiji is one of the most digitally developed nations in the Pacific
Islands, with extensive submarine cables connecting it to neighbouring islands and major
telecommunications hubs, yet the country still ranks only 107th out of 176 countries on the ITU ICT
Development Index. In addition, approximately 5% of Fiji’s rural population remains without mobile network
coverage. As a result, remote communities often rely on alternative means of communication, such as
community loudspeakers, sirens, and direct communication from local leaders107. Studies and Post-Disaster
Needs Assessments (PDNAs) in the Pacific have shown that these communities predominantly rely on
interpersonal networks—village heads, church leaders, and women’s groups—to receive warnings and
critical information108.
Given these challenges, engaging women effectively in digital communication strategies requires consulting
with communities to understand their unique needs and preferences. Across the Pacific, communities tend
to trust and rely on a combination of national authorities, local leaders, and religious institutions for
information. This reliance underscores the importance of using culturally appropriate channels and trusted
messengers when tailoring communication to reach women. Traditional and local knowledge also plays a
vital role in how Fijian communities detect hazards, respond to emergencies, and share information, making
these approaches indispensable for engaging women effectively.
Several strategies could enhance women’s access to information, particularly in the context of climate
hazards. Community-level interventions that involve social engagement, training, awareness programs, and
consultations can play crucial roles in reaching women in rural and urban areas alike. For instance, local
workshops on disaster preparedness, digital literacy training, and sessions on emergency response protocols
can empower women to take proactive roles in their communities. Programs like FemLINKpacific’s Young
Women’s Leadership Team exemplify how youth-centered initiatives can amplify young women’s voices and
strengthen community resilience. Adopting basic preparedness actions, such as creating emergency plans,
participating in community drills, and assembling essential supplies, can also equip women to better prepare
for emergencies.
In sum, while Fiji is advancing in digital access and ICT development, there are still significant gender-based
barriers, particularly in rural and remote communities. Addressing these disparities requires concerted
efforts to integrate gender-responsive approaches in digital and information strategies. By promoting digital
literacy, fostering trust through local networks, and ensuring that women’s unique needs are represented in
emergency planning, Fiji can continue to bridge its digital divide and empower women across the nation.
Gender, Climate Change and Early Warning Systems and Disasters Response
106 Country gender assessment report, 2023. https://www.mwcsp.gov.fj/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/0227_DeepDive_SINGLE_PAGES.pdf
107 https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/fiji-information-and-communication-technology
108 gender-responsive-and-disability-inclusive-early-warning-and-early-action-in-the-pacific-region_0.pdf
22

=== PAGE 226 ===
In Fiji, men, women, boys, and girls experience disasters differently, even within the same household. Social
roles, expectations, and vulnerabilities vary significantly by gender, affecting how each group prepares for,
reacts to, and recovers from natural hazards. Gender inequality in disaster contexts arises from these socially
expected roles, which influence socioeconomic status, decision-making agency, and access to resources,
ultimately shaping the diverse impacts of disasters on men and women109. Additionally, certain groups, such
as children, LGBTQ+ individuals and low-skilled migrant workers, face increased vulnerability across all
ethnicities in Fiji due to intersecting social and economic factors110. Women often face differing risks during
disaster preparedness activities, reflecting varied perceptions of vulnerability and required resources.
Underlying drivers of vulnerability include living in high-risk disaster zones, poor housing conditions, poor
health, and limited access to local institutions or preparedness measures.
Social and cultural norms in Fiji influence women’s access to information and their capacity to act on early
warnings. While traditional knowledge and past experiences are valuable, they can also create a false sense
of security as recent weather events become more extreme than in previous generations.
Recommendations
Gender sensitive indicators and Capacity Building in Climate Resilience
Developing indicators related to women and climate change, particularly concerning natural hazards and
emergencies, can provide actionable insights into gender-differentiated impacts. Empowering existing
women’s groups to take active roles in these initiatives is a promising strategy. Early Warning Systems (EWS)
are essential tools that can benefit from gender-sensitive approaches, ensuring that women receive critical
information and can respond effectively during crises.
Opportunities for Women’s Participation in Disaster Preparedness
There are opportunities to build capacity among Fijian women to contribute to the development and
implementation of Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems (MHEWS). Women’s church groups, active in many
villages, have become vital to civil society and community resilience. Originally formed to support women’s
spiritual and domestic growth, these groups have evolved to raise awareness of gender-specific issues such
as domestic violence and reproductive health. However, despite their impactful community role, they often
face social pushback as they advocate for women’s rights and broader community resilience111.
These gender initiatives, built on existing structures, present an effective way to leverage local networks for
disaster preparedness, thereby ensuring that gender dynamics are recognized and addressed in Fiji’s
approach to climate resilience.
Field work findings related to gender-specific vulnerabilities and needs in Hazard-Prone Communities of
Viti Levu
The information collected are a result of interview of forty people living in hazard and disaster-prone
communities using structured questions in a data collection tool. Respondents included an equal
representation of male and female respondents from ten hazard-prone communities along Viti Levu’s
Queens Highway. Nine communities are Indigenous iTaukei communities and one is informal settlement with
different ethnic groups settling on sugarcane tramline. Eight communities are located near river channels
and flooding drains, one near the coast and one in drought area. Fieldwork results reveal that gender plays
a significant role in shaping access to information, roles in community response, and specific needs in
109 Vulnerability and Vulnerable Populations (https://wkc.who.int).
110 -PDF - Theresa Gigov May 2023. Tackling Gender Inequality in Fiji: Business Responsibilities & Opportunities. Ocean and
Human Rights. (www.ocean-humanrights.org/resources)
111 Fiji gender assessment report 2023, pdf
23

=== PAGE 227 ===
disaster-prone areas of Viti Levu. Women’s needs are closely tied to household and caregiving roles, while
men’s needs align with community mobilization and protection efforts, underscoring the importance of
gender-sensitive disaster preparedness and response strategies in these communities.
Leadership Roles: While men dominate leadership roles as community gatekeepers and youth leaders in
iTaukei communities, women in leadership are generally involved in community or business-oriented
women’s groups. This division suggests that gender impacts the types of leadership roles accessible, with
men more likely to handle broader community safety responsibilities and women focusing on social and
economic aspects within female-oriented groups.
Awareness and Access to Early Warnings: Gendered access to early warnings varies, largely shaped by access
to media and household responsibilities. Generally, those with access to media devices—like mobile phones,
TVs, and radios—are well-informed about early warnings, regardless of gender. However, aging men and
women (particularly those over 70) and people with disabilities often rely on family members or community
gatekeepers for information. It was noted that there are cases where men do not take SMS alerts seriously,
given that "it is always too much work putting up shutters and putting it down when the warning is not really
serious”. In mixed-ethnicity settlements, the Fijians of Indian descent and iTaukei people approach disaster
preparedness differently. In the mixed-ethnicity settlement of iTaukei and Fijians of Indian descent, social
organization varies by group. The iTaukei community has a communal structure with strong kinship ties
organized by religious or regional affiliations, fostering mutual support during emergencies. Fijians of Indian
descent, however, have a more individualistic approach; while men tend to form social groups, women often
stay focused on household roles with fewer community connections. Despite these structural differences,
most households have access to early warning information through devices like TVs, radios, and mobile
phones, allowing them to respond quickly to flood alerts and reach evacuation centers when needed.
Gender and Vulnerability-Specific Needs: Respondents unanimously agreed that early warning and disaster
response needs differ by gender, age, and vulnerability group. Women’s requirements during hazards focus
on essentials for household maintenance, health, and personal hygiene, including cooking tools, food,
sanitary products, and blankets. In contrast, men prioritize supplies and tools for community mobilization,
such as ropes, torches, and boats, which reflect traditional roles focused on protection and infrastructure.
For adolescent girls, personal hygiene products (e.g., sanitary pads, clean clothes) are necessary, highlighting
the gender-specific needs that often accompany physical development. Boys, meanwhile, primarily need
clean clothing. Vulnerable groups, including elderly and disabled people, face challenges that require
specialized support, such as communication assistance or medical supplies.
Community Engagement and Participation: Women leaders and youth leaders note that vulnerable
individuals, particularly the elderly, disabled, and isolated settlers, often depend on family or community
members to receive critical information. Additionally, some community members from the iTaukei
communities miss out on preparedness training, which is usually held at provincial centers and not directly
accessible to all, particularly those who do not work outside the village. In settlements, social and cultural
diversity complicates collective action, requiring focused campaigns to increase attendance and motivate
participation across gender and ethnic lines.
Training and capacity building: Community training initiatives aim to build capacity for hazard response and
early warning systems. These trainings, organized by provincial offices, the Red Cross, the National Fire
Authority, and South Pacific Business Development (SPBD), cover topics such as climate change, emergency
response, first aid, and small business empowerment for women. The training and capacity-building efforts
in these communities show some gender inclusion but lack broader accessibility, especially for people with
disabilities and the elderly. Both men and women have access to training sessions, although participation is
limited and generally restricted to selected community leaders like women’s leaders, youth leaders, and
gatekeepers. Women in particular are engaged through initiatives like the South Pacific Business
Development (SPBD), which focuses on empowering women in small businesses. However, training access
remains uneven: while some youths, primarily males, receive specialized training (e.g., fire warden
24

=== PAGE 228 ===
certifications), women are generally less represented in these roles. People with disabilities face significant
challenges in accessing these programs, largely due to physical barriers at venues and community attitudes
that discourage their involvement.
Community members suggest a need for more practical and inclusive training on first aid, rescue techniques,
interpreting warnings, and specific disaster responses. They also emphasize that these sessions should be
accessible to all, especially for people with limited mobility, to ensure full preparedness across diverse needs
and abilities within the community. women and disabled individuals are often overlooked in emergency
preparedness roles.
Recommendations for gender and vulnerability responsive actions: These recommendations made by the
interviewed community members emphasize increasing gender inclusivity and accessibility in disaster
preparedness and response through community-based, inclusive training and infrastructure improvements.
1. Inclusive Training: Ensure that training sessions include representatives from all community groups,
with both men and women participating. Schools should also incorporate hazard awareness to reach
children, as they are often more prone to ignoring warnings. Involve women in the National Disaster
Management Office (NDMO) trainings to increase membership in the committee as they will have
the skillset to qualify their involvement.
2. Empowering Local Committees: Strengthen all registered community committees, including youth,
women, health, and disaster committees, by equipping members with training on early warning
systems. This builds on traditional knowledge while enhancing response capabilities.
3. Accessible Evacuation Centres: Improve evacuation centres to be accessible for the elderly, people
with disabilities, and women, particularly by addressing location, restroom accessibility, and flooring
conditions. This would alleviate the burden felt by vulnerable individuals who currently face
challenges reaching and using these centres.
4. Enhanced Communication: Use community women’s groups and local sports teams for awareness
programs, tapping into popular activities for effective communication about emergency
preparedness. Additionally, improve communication channels like mobile networks in remote and
disaster-prone areas to ensure timely warnings.
5. Resource Stockpiling: Establish a community charity committee to stockpile essential items (e.g.,
clothing, diapers) at community halls for emergency relief, which would address the needs of
women, children, and vulnerable groups.
6. Inclusive Leadership: Increase women’s involvement in disaster committees like the Disaster
Management Committee (DISMAC), which are often male-dominated, by providing relevant training
and mentorship. This helps ensure that women have the skillsets needed for active roles in early
warning and emergency response.
7. Consistent Engagement: Maintain regular programs and outreach for women and vulnerable groups
to sustain engagement and motivation in disaster preparedness efforts. This includes mentorship for
young mothers and awareness programs targeting women and girls.
8. Visible Support Structures: Install billboards in vulnerable areas with instructions on responding to
hazards, maps of evacuation centres, and preparedness guidance, ensuring clear and accessible
information for all community members, including women and other vulnerable populations.
Based on the note provided at the end of the study it is also suggested to:
1. Partner with Religious Groups: Use existing networks (e.g., Christian denominations, Muslim
Women’s League, Hindu Women’s Club) to deliver community programs, as residents align closely
with these groups.
2. Form Community Clusters within Religious Groups: Organize smaller clusters within these groups
for better engagement and cohesion.
3. Improve Local Representation: Appoint leaders from within the settlement or from each religious
group to better represent resident needs and liaise with the District Office.
25

=== PAGE 229 ===
4. Conduct Programs at Religious Venues: Hold workshops and empowerment initiatives at religious
sites, which are familiar and trusted by the community.
These findings and recommendations have been used to inform the Gender Action Plan for Fiji’s EW4All
proposal.
26

=== PAGE 230 ===
6 Gender Assessment for Chad
While the second and most recent General Population and Housing Census of 2009 (RGPH2) counted Chad's
total population at 11,039,873, the World Bank estimated this population at 18,278,568 in 2023, compared
with 18,675,547 according to recent INSEED projections for 2024. The proportion of forced migrants is
significant, with 1,200,000 refugees from Sudan, the Central African Republic and Nigeria, plus 244,000
returnees and 215,900 IDPs in 2024112. In 2021, the World Bank estimates a population density of 13.6
inhabitants per km2, with a sex ratio of 1.008, i.e., 8,623,530 men (50.2%) for 8,556,210 women (49.8%). The
sex ratio at birth was 1.042 for the same year. The average household size is 5.3 and the average age of the
population is 19.3, while the median age is 13.0 in 2018113.
According to the ECOSIT4 survey conducted in 2018, Chad's population (15,503,179) is predominantly rural
(76%). More than half (52%) of this working population in rural areas is made up of women. Their main
activities are farming, livestock rearing and fishing. Most Chadian households derive most of their income
from the rural sector. The urban population, which represents only 24% of the total population, is
concentrated in N'Djamena and the departmental capitals, which are considered urban centres. The
proportion of the nomadic population is relatively low, at 3.5% of the total population of Chad (RGPH2).
Women represented 49.8% of Chad's total population in 2023114 and 22.1% of Chadian households were
headed by women115 in 2015. Chad has a large rural population, with 76% of the population living in rural
areas116 in 2023, the majority of whom work in the agricultural sector.
Chad's gender equality indices are the lowest in the world, in Africa and in the sub-region. In the UNDP
Gender Development Index (GDI) 2023-24117 , which compares the achievements of women and men in the
UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) 2023-2024118 , Chad is ranked 179e out of 182 countries, with an
index of 0.776. It is also ranked 145th out of 146 countries in the Global Gender Gap Report. In the UNDP
Gender Inequality Index (GII) for 2022, which combines indicators of sexual and reproductive health,
education and political and economic participation, the country is ranked 163rd out of 166 countries, with
an index of 0.671. The Gender Global Gap (GGI) Index of the World Economic Forum (WEF, 2023), which takes
into account four (4) areas (economic participation and opportunities, education outcomes, health and
survival, and political empowerment), ranks Chad 145th out of 146 countries, with an index of 0.570.
According to the MICS 2019 survey based on the latest general population census (RGPH 2009), the disability
rate for people aged 18 to 49 at national level is higher among women, at 5.8% (4.1% in urban areas
compared with 6.2% in rural areas) than among men, at 3.0% (2.5% in urban areas compared with 3.1% in
rural areas). Disabled women are doubly marginalised, both because of their gender and their disability. They
have very limited access to education, health services and economic opportunities. Disabled women are also
more exposed to gender-based violence (GBV) and social exclusion.
Chad's economy remains largely undiversified and heavily dominated by the primary sector, which accounted
for 61.2% of national GDP in 2011, with oil accounting for 39.3%, agriculture for 10.5%, livestock farming for
9% and mining for 2.2%. As for the secondary sector, whose activities are becoming increasingly diversified,
its contribution to GDP was limited to 7.7% in 2011. The tertiary sector contributed 20.7% to GDP in 2011,
with commercial activities accounting for 13% and public administration for 10.7%119 . The agricultural sector,
which is limited to food crops such as cereals, and cash crops such as cotton, sugar cane and gum arabic, is
highly vulnerable to the vagaries of the weather and is also dependent on the security situation. The private
sector is made up of small and medium-sized enterprises, most of which operate in the informal economy.
112 OCHA : Bulletin humanitaire Tchad mai 2024
113 ECOSIT4
114 World Bank: Population, female (% of total population) - Chad | Data
115 World Bank: Female headed households (% of households with a female head) - Chad | Data
116 World Bank : Rural population (% of total population) - Chad | Data
117 The GDI is the ratio of the HDI for men to that for women. Chad is ranked in group 5 of the GDI, where the absolute gender parity gap is greater
than 10%.
118 UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24.
119 Rates assessed by INSEED and the World Bank
27

=== PAGE 231 ===
The rural sector plays a crucial role in the Chadian economy, contributing 42.5% of GDP in 2020120.. Rural
development therefore remains a government priority, with the aim of stimulating economic growth and
reducing poverty in rural areas, while addressing cross-cutting issues such as adaptation to climate change
and gender.
Education, vocational training and literacy
Education in Chad shows significant disparities between men and women aged 15 to 49. According to
ECOSIT4, the literacy rate for those aged 15 and over is 41.5%. It is higher among men than among women
(57.6% compared with 28.1%), and more so in urban than in rural areas (66.0% compared with 32.5%). There
are major disparities between N'Djaména, the capital, and other urban centres (76.1% in N'Djaména
compared with 58.8% in other urban centres). There are two categories of provinces: those with literacy rates
well below the national level (Lac, Salamat, Batha, Hadjer-Lamis, Kanem, Barh El Gazal, Sila, Chari-Baguirmi,
Guéra, Borkou/Tibesti, Logone Occidental, Wadi Fira, Ennedi Est/Ouest and Mandoul) and the other
provinces with high literacy rates. The literacy rate varies from 8.1% in Le Lac to 76.1% in the capital. Looking
only at the poorest households, it rises from 3.0% in the province of Le Lac to 60.7% in N'Djaména, while
among the richest, it ranges from 17.4% in Le Lac to 83.5% in the city of N'Djaména. The disparities are caused
by early marriage, with 55% and 18.9% of women married before the age of 18 and 15 respectively, as well
as by economic constraints, encouraging women to stay at home after primary school (MICS 2019).
Educating girls and promoting gender equality in Chad requires a considerable amount of work, coordinated
by all the players. The gender parity gap is observed throughout schooling and decreases considerably at the
different levels of education. It is 0.9% at primary level, 0.7% at lower secondary level and 0.6% at upper
secondary level (MICS 2019).
According to the MICS 2019 survey, the net primary school enrolment rate excluding pre-school attendance
is 43% for the country as a whole. However, this rate varies according to gender, with 45.5% of boys attending
school compared with 40.4% of girls, though this varies by area. For instance, in urban areas 59.1% girls
attend school compared with 67.9% boys in urban areas, while in rural areas 36.3% of girls attend school
compared with 40.8% of boys. These proportions also vary from one province to another, with the lowest
rate recorded in Kanem (4.2% girls and 6.3% boys) and the highest in Moyen Chari (71.2% girls and 73% boys).
Overall, the primary school completion rate is 27%, with a clear gender difference (30.3% boys and 23.3%
girls), with girls more likely to leave school before completing their studies due to early marriage and
domestic responsibilities. Depending on their place of residence, the primary completion rate varies
significantly between urban areas (55.5%) and rural areas (19.4%), and also between provinces, with 2.4% in
Kanem compared with 58.3% in N'djamena and 10% in Ouaddai.
In addition to the socio-cultural constraints that limit girls' attendance at school, there is the weight of
religion, which is reflected, for example, in the low enrolment rate of children whose head of household is
Muslim (23.6%) compared with children whose head of household is Catholic (68.5%) or Protestant (74.6%).
There are also sexist prejudices in the education system, and this accentuates discrimination at professional
level. Socio-cultural constraints such as women's and girls' very busy schedules, forced and early marriages,
early and unwanted pregnancies, etc., limit girls' and women's access to education and vocational training.
Girls and women find it difficult to obtain information, read, train and acquire the knowledge and skills they
need to enter the labour market.
There are few young women in higher education or in technical and vocational education and training (TVET).
In higher education, 2014 official sources say that the institutions were attended by more than 40,000
students, 16% of whom were young women. In 2012, the participation rate of young women in TVET and
higher education was 28.5%, compared with 71.5% for young men.
The education sector is directly and indirectly affected by climate change, with extreme weather phenomena
leading to child deaths and damage to school infrastructure, as well as shortages of water, sanitation and
120 Rapport analyse genre coopération Tchad 2021
28

=== PAGE 232 ===
hygiene that compromise the quality of children's education. Chad is ranked as the second country in the
world where children are most at risk from climate change according to UNICEF's Climate Risk Index for
Children (CRIC).
The education sector plays a crucial role in reducing vulnerability to disasters, particularly for women and
girls. Taking gender and climate change into account in education and communication will strengthen the
knowledge and skills needed to deal with climate challenges at individual, institutional and community levels.
In the context of climate change, the level of education influences the ability to carry out resilient livelihood
activities. Unequal access to education can reduce the ability of women and girls to adapt to climate shocks
through migration. Girls with limited access to education may be at a disadvantage in seeking alternative
livelihoods, particularly when traditional livelihoods become less viable. This may have gender implications,
as the skills traditionally acquired by children may be more or less adaptable to other social contexts. For
example, as migration routes are closed to herders and livestock rearing becomes less viable, children
voluntarily left out of school to help herd livestock may find themselves at a particular disadvantage later in
life.
Employment and participation in the labour market
Chadian women face significant obstacles to their economic participation, including discriminatory
regulations and restrictive social norms. Although they often hold informal and agricultural jobs, they remain
under-represented in positions of responsibility and have difficulty accessing financial services. In terms of
rural finance, women's access to financial services is limited, with only 5% having a bank account and 11.8%
accessing credit. Initiatives such as the National Strategy for Inclusive Finance aim to improve access, but
challenges remain, particularly in rural areas (ECOSIT 4).
In Chad 60% of the population aged 15 and over is economically active (49.3% of women compared with
72.8% of men) with a ratio of 67.7 women for every 100 men (World Bank, 2018)121. Although women make
up a significant proportion of the working population in Chad, they remain under-represented in
management positions and skilled jobs, which contributes to the persistence of gender pay gaps in other
words, women earn less than men due to their position in the labour market. There are no statistics on wage
differentials between men and women by sector of activity. However, women are in the minority in skilled
and responsible jobs, i.e., 14% of senior managers, 10% of middle managers, 16% of skilled workers and 11%
of employers (DAI, 2021)122. Thus, the traditional division of labour assigns domestic and craft tasks to
women, relegating them to jobs that are less well paid and less valued than those of men (Ndoloum and
Djimbaye, 2020).
Estimated gross annual income differs by gender. In 2017, a Chadian man earned an average of around
$2,088, while a Chadian woman earned an average of $1,412. The agricultural sector employs the most
women. Only 27% of working women work in another sector (FAO, 2021)123.
In 2022, agriculture remains the main economic activity in rural areas, employing almost 69.1% of the
working population124. Women make up a large proportion of the agricultural workforce, 68.8% of them in
employment, but are often confined to tasks that are less well paid than those performed by men (69.4% of
men). Access to land is a major challenge for rural women, with only 15% of women owning land, compared
with 58% of men125.
Agriculture is a crucial economic pillar in Chad, contributing 23% of GDP in 2018 (PNA, 2021). Agricultural
production in Chad involves both men and women, but the value of women's contributions is not fully
recognised. In the agricultural sector, women account for a similar proportion of jobs to men, but are more
121 World Bank: Labor force participation rate, total (% of total population ages 15-64) – Chad | Data
122 UE : Rapport analyse genre coopération Tchad 2021
123 FAO : Profil national genre des secteurs de l’agriculture et du développement rural - République du Tchad
124 World Bank: Employment in agriculture (% of total employment) (modeled ILO estimate) - Chad | Data
125 EDS-MICS 2015
29

=== PAGE 233 ===
involved in food processing activities. The differentiated roles of women and men reflect socio-cultural
norms, with women often involved in activities considered secondary in the contribution to food.
Representation and participation in decision-making
Women are in the minority in almost all formal economic sectors. This situation is largely due to delays in
school enrolment and the persistence of socio-cultural, religious and other stereotypes. In addition to these
causes, school wastage is another factor, often due to early pregnancy and early marriage. This imbalance in
formal employment can also be explained by the massive presence of women in the informal agricultural
sector126 in rural areas.
Women's involvement in rural development is marked by traditional production practices and a low level of
product processing and conservation techniques, which limits added value. They spend an average of 63
hours a week on farming activities, in addition to domestic chores, but are under-represented in the sector's
decision-making spheres, accounting for just 19% of decision-makers. Female representation in livestock
umbrella organisations is also low, which limits women's voice in decision-making and the defence of their
interests. Decision-making processes take place at different levels, from national to local, and involve a
combination of formal and informal mechanisms.
At national level, women are mainly represented in these processes by civil society organisations, particularly
umbrella organisations such as the Cellule de Liaison et d'Informations des Associations Féminines (CELIAF).
However, this participation is often hampered by a lack of accountability and dissemination of information to
rural women, which reduces their real impact on the decisions taken. At provincial and local level, women
are often under-represented on provincial, departmental and local action committees, which reduces their
ability to influence the choices made at these levels. This under-representation limits their access to
resources and decision-making opportunities, even though they are increasingly present on water and
natural resource management committees. Their role in sanitation management is also often secondary,
focusing mainly on hygiene responsibilities.
Women are often excluded from land ownership and land management decision-making, which contributes
to their economic marginalisation. Land conflicts, fuelled by these demographic and economic pressures,
threaten family farms and access to land for the most disadvantaged.
Despite these challenges, women's organisations play a crucial role in promoting women's interests in the
agroforestry and fisheries value chains, advocating for greater inclusion, equitable representation and greater
access to resources and economic opportunities. As agents of change, these organisations continue to defend
women's rights and work to improve their situation, helping to build a more equitable and sustainable
society.
There have also been positive developments with the inclusion of a female component in bodies such as the
Conseil national de concertation des producteurs ruraux au Tchad (CNCPRT). Nevertheless, this integration
remains partial, with men often retaining a dominant position in these bodies, which highlights the need to
continue efforts to achieve gender-balanced representation in decision-making processes relating to
agriculture and rural development.
Over the past few years, the government has implemented a number of policies to increase the participation
of women in decision-making, with a clear increase compared to previous years, but still far from equalling
that of men.
With regards to the rate of women holding seats in the national parliament, it was only 12.8% in 2017, which
represents a considerable improvement (2.4% in 1995) at national level, but places the country among the
last in terms of women's representation in parliament worldwide (UNDP, 2018)127.
126 FAO, National Gender Profile of the Agriculture and Rural Development Sectors, Chad,
127 FAO, National Gender Profile of the Agriculture and Rural Development Sectors, Chad,
30

=== PAGE 234 ===
In 2018, Chad adopted an ordinance-law aimed at introducing parity in nominative and elective functions,
with a 30% quota granted to women from the outset. However, gender inequalities persist in access to civil
and political rights. Women remain largely under-represented in decision-making bodies. After the death of
President Idriss Déby in April 2021, the transitional government appointed on 2 May 2021 included only 9
women out of 40 ministerial posts and secretaries of state (22.5%), and women accounted for only 15% of
the members of parliament designated as advisers to the National Transitional Council (CNT). There are no
women on the Military Transition Council (CMT).
In the diplomatic and administrative sectors, the situation is similar, with only 2 women out of 24
ambassadors (8.33%), 6 women out of 30 at the Economic, Social and Cultural Council (20%), and 2 women
secretaries-general out of 29 (6.89%). In the ministries, women hold 29% of department head posts, 14% of
division head posts, 12% of director general posts and 13% of technical director posts.
According to data from the Direction de la Solde, women are in the minority in the civil service, with only
14% of women compared with 86% of men in 2021. The highest proportion of women is found among
contract employees (46%), followed by middle management (22%), senior management (22.8%) and support
staff (3.8%). A comparison between the sexes shows that of the 14% of women in the civil service, only 2%
are in senior management. The highest proportion of women in any grade is in middle management (Grade
B), which is the grade for executive assistants. The astonishing discrepancy in the first two grades is due to
the very low level of education among women, which is now rising sharply as a result of policies in favour of
women. The support staff category, which requires few qualifications, is the only category where the gap
between the two is minimal. These figures show that women are rather marginalised in the field of
employment, especially when it comes to access to positions of responsibility. The Ministry of Women's
Affairs tops the list in terms of female employees, with 48%, compared with 5% for the Ministry of Territorial
Administration and 7% for the Ministry of Justice.
At territorial command level, only 2 out of 56 prefects (3.6%) and none out of 23 governors are women. In
the 2011 communal elections, 5 women out of 43 were elected mayors (12%), and only 13% were municipal
councillors are women. Over and above these statistics, it should be noted that in Chad there are only 8
female notaries for 64 male notaries; there is only one female doctor specialising in immunology, and only
one female bailiff. The difference between the provinces is also quite marked, with only 712 women working
in the provinces, i.e., outside N'Djamena, which accounts for 95% of formal employment at national level.
Lastly, 29% of the new government of the 5th Republic of 2 January 2024 (Republic of Chad 2024) is made
up of women. This government, comprising a prime minister and 41 ministers, including 5 ministers of state
and 11 secretaries of state, includes 12 women. Despite progress in involving women in grassroots
organisations, their presence in governing bodies remains low. Women's participation in decision-making
remains well below the 30% recommended by the Beijing Platform for Action.
Gender-based violence and social norms
In Chad, gender-based violence (GBV) is a major risk for women and girls, not only during conflicts but on a
daily basis. The presence of refugees, displaced persons and humanitarian workers has an impact on the
living conditions of local populations in a context of limited natural resources. Moreover, in eastern Chad,
GBV accounted for 55% of reports of human rights violations (Solhjell et al., 2010). Domestic or conjugal
violence is the type of violence most frequently reported among local populations, internally displaced
persons and refugees in Chad (Global Protection Cluster, 2012).
According to Chad's latest multiple indicator demographic and health survey (EDS-MICS, 2014-2015), the
structural and gender-based power differentials between men and women mean that women aged 15-49
are much more exposed to multiple forms of GBV, the most recurrent and particularly damaging of which are
physical violence (29% of women), sexual violence (11.7% of women), physical or sexual violence (32.6% of
women) and domestic violence (physical, sexual or emotional) (34.8% of women). In addition, among people
aged between 20 and 24, child marriage before the age of 15 (28.5% of women compared with 4.4% of men),
child marriage before the age of 18 (65.9% of women compared with 37.1% of men) and female genital
31

=== PAGE 235 ===
mutilation (38.1%) are all types of violence that are difficult to eradicate because of communities' attachment
to their cultural, social and religious customs and traditions.
On average, 74% of non-single women cite their husband or partner as the main perpetrator of violence
(76.7% sexual violence and 71.7% physical violence), while others also report physical violence inflicted by
their mother or father's wife. This last point concerns 12% of women in couples compared with 43% of single
women. So the common idea that violence against women is necessarily perpetrated by men needs to be
qualified. Furthermore, at any point in their lives, 6.5% of women who have experienced violence have also
assaulted their spouse, compared with 1.7% of women who have never experienced violence who have
nevertheless assaulted their husband (EDS-MICS, 2014-2015). Overall, 28% of women reported that their
husband/partner had displayed at least three (3) controlling and domineering behaviours.
Gender equality policies and legal framework
Chad has specific legislation on gender equality and combating gender-based violence, as well as national
programmes and committees dedicated to these issues. Here is an exhaustive list of the main legislation,
strategies and structures in place:
Specific legislation
• Constitution of the 5th Republic (2023): This constitution reaffirms equal rights between the sexes,
prohibiting all forms of discrimination (Articles 14 and 15) and encouraging the political participation
of women (Article 34).
• Revision of the Penal Code (2017): Includes provisions on sexual and domestic violence, child
marriage and female genital mutilation, taking into account gender-specific issues.
• Law n°022/PR/2018: Institutes parity in nominative and elective offices, requiring a 30% quota for
women's participation.
• Law n°029/PR/2015: Prohibition of child marriage, protecting the rights of underage girls.
• Law n°007/PR/2007: Protection of the rights to education, training and socio-economic integration
of people with disabilities, including women with disabilities.
• Law n°006/PR/2002: Combating female genital mutilation, early marriage and domestic violence.
• Law n°024/PR/2018: Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which
includes specific provisions for women with disabilities.
• Law n°021/PR/2019: Governs legal aid and legal assistance, including victims of gender-based
violence.
• Law n°019/PR/95: Adoption of the Declaration on the policy of integrating women into
development.
• Law n°038/PR/96: Labour Code guaranteeing gender equality in employment, with specific
restrictions on night work for women.
• Law n°015/PR/2018: Creation of the Maison de la Femme, a centre dedicated to the promotion and
protection of women's rights.
• Ordinance n°012/PR/2018: Institutes parity in nominative and elective functions, ratified by Law
n°022/PR/2018.
• Order n°043/PR/2018: Orientation of the Agrosylvopastoral and Halieutic System, involving women
in the governance bodies of development policies and strategies.
National programmes and strategies
• National Gender Policy (PNG 2017-2020): Drafted in 2011 and adopted in 2017, this policy
accompanied by its five-year national action plan (PA-PNG 2019-2023) validated in December 2018,
aims to promote gender equality and reduce physical and/or sexual violence against women and
girls.
32

=== PAGE 236 ===
• National Strategy to Combat Gender-Based Violence (Stratégie Nationale de Lutte Contre les
Violences Basées Genre - SNVBG): Drafted in 2015 and revised in 2022, this strategy aims to
eliminate gender-based violence through prevention and by responding to the needs of victims.
• National Gender and Climate Change Strategy (SNGCC 2024): Designed to reciprocally integrate, the
gender dimension into climate policies at national, provincial and sectoral levels. This strategy
strengthens the resilience of women and vulnerable groups to climate change.
• National Social Protection Strategy (SNPS 2016-2020): Aims to establish a comprehensive social
protection system to reduce vulnerabilities and ensure access to basic social services for all Chadians.
• National Strategy for Inclusive Finance in Chad (SNFIT 2017-2030): Promotes the financial inclusion
of women, particularly in rural areas, through better organisation and use of financial services.
• Vision 2030 "The Chad we want": A global strategic framework that includes gender equality and
social inclusion objectives in its various axes, in particular good governance and improving the quality
of life for all citizens.
• National Development Plan (NDP): The 2017-2021 NDP and the future 2022-2026 NDP highlight the
importance of gender equality for Chad's economic and social development.
Committees and coordination structures
• National Gender Policy (NGP) Monitoring and Coordination Committee: This committee is
responsible for implementing and monitoring the NGP, in collaboration with the ministry responsible
for gender promotion.
• Technical Committee for the National Strategy to Combat Gender-Based Violence or National GBV
Coordination: Coordinates efforts to combat gender-based violence at national level. Its mission is
to implement and evaluate the national strategy to combat GBV.
International commitments
Chad has ratified several international conventions aimed at promoting gender equality, including :
• The Charter of the United Nations (1945) ;
• The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) ;
• The four World Conferences on Women, 1975-1995
o Mexico City Conference (1975), which launched the "United Nations Decade for Women" by
adopting a World Plan of Action focusing on equality, development and peace.
o Copenhagen Conference (1980), which assessed progress since 1975 and highlighted the
continuing challenges of equal access to education, employment and healthcare.
o Nairobi Conference (1985), which marked the end of the Decade for Women, by adopting
the "Forward-looking Strategies" for equality, development and peace to the year 2000.
o Beijing Conference (1995), which is famous for adopting the "Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action", an ambitious plan to achieve gender equality in twelve critical areas.
• Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), ratified in
1996.
• Resolution 48/104 (1993): on the declaration on the elimination of violence against women;
• Resolution 54/134 (25 November 1999): on the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
against Women;
• United Nations Resolution 13/25 on Women, Peace and Security (2000) and the ten (10) resolutions
that followed (Resolution 18/20 adopted in 2008, Resolution 18/88 adopted in 2009, Resolution
18/89 adopted in 2009, Resolution 19/60 adopted in 2010, Resolution 21/06 adopted in 2013,
Resolution 21/22 adopted in 2013, Resolution 22/42 adopted in 2015, Resolution 24/67 adopted in
2019, Resolution 24/93 adopted in 2019 and Resolution 25/38 adopted in 2020): Guide gender
policies in conflict and post-conflict situations.
33

=== PAGE 237 ===
• African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (27 June 1981): Recommends guaranteeing women's
rights in African states.
• Maputo Protocol (2003): Relating to women's rights in Africa.
• Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa (2004): Adopted by the African Union to promote
gender equality.
Regulatory texts
• Decree no. 2035/PR/MFPPESN/2017: Adoption of the National Gender Policy (PNG).
• Decree no. 0186/PR/MASF/2002: instituting SENAFET (National Chadian Women's Week).
• Decree n°0433/PR/MFPPE/2021: Application of Ordinance n°012/PR/2018 on parity.
• Decree no. 1521/PR/MFPPESN/2019: Implementing rules for law no. 007/PR/2007 on the protection
of people with disabilities.
• Order n°106/PR/PM/MASSNF/SE/DPFIG/2010: Creation and responsibilities of the national
coordination for prevention, protection and response to gender-based violence
These laws and strategies demonstrate Chad's commitment to promoting gender equality and combating
gender-based violence, in line with international and regional standards. However, challenges remain in the
effective application of these measures, particularly in rural areas and with regard to traditional and religious
practices.
Gender-related institutional arrangements
The institutional framework relating to gender issues and the promotion of women's rights in Chad is made
up of several structures, including (i) national mechanisms or public institutions, (ii) specialised services
responsible for the promotion of women or gender (gender focal points, the Observatoire de la Promotion
de l'Egalité et de l'Equité de Genre (OPEG) and other public administrations), (iii) civil society organisations
and technical and financial partners.
The Ministry for the Promotion of Gender, renamed the Ministry for Women, the Family and Child Protection
(MFFPE) in 2021, is the national mechanism responsible for issues relating to the promotion of women and
gender. Its mandate includes coordinating action on gender equality and equity, women's empowerment,
advisory support, monitoring-evaluation and advocacy, as well as mobilising resources to finance the
implementation of development policies and programmes (Final report, Analyse Genre Tchad, 2021/UE).
This ministry is responsible for implementing the National Gender Policy (PNG) and its action plan (PA-PNG),
but it suffers from budgetary constraints and a lack of technical and financial support, generally limiting its
actions to improving women's living conditions rather than helping to change their position in society. This is
reflected in the difficulties in implementing the PA-PNG, ensuring effective coordination and monitoring-
evaluation (there is no monitoring and evaluation unit within the ministry) of the various and multifaceted
actions implemented directly by the ministry or in partnership with the sectoral ministries, since the MFFPE
has little contact with them and at central level those in charge do not understand the gender concept (Final
report Analyse Genre Tchad, 2021/UE).
The gender focal point, appointed by each ministry at the request of the ministry responsible for gender
issues, is responsible for ensuring that gender issues are integrated into the policies, strategies, programmes
and projects of their administration. However, these officials often do not have the necessary capacity to
really influence decisions within their administration. Their profile, their generally non-strategic position and
their lack of institutionalisation, in particular the absence of this position in the ministry's organisation chart,
are obstacles to their effectiveness. In addition, they do not always report to the structures responsible for
gender issues in their administration, which further limits their action.
Gender focal points generally do not receive specific training on gender issues and do not have the necessary
financial and technical resources to fully fulfil their role. This limits their ability to promote and advocate for
gender mainstreaming. In addition, high staff turnover among gender focal points hampers the continuity of
34

=== PAGE 238 ===
initiatives and compromises communication channels. In addition, there is no mechanism for monitoring and
evaluating the activities of these officials by the Ministry for Women or their own administration, which
makes it difficult to assess their performance and improve their actions. Sometimes the new gender focal
points are not even put in touch with the Ministry for Women, which hampers their integration and
effectiveness in their role.
To overcome the lack of monitoring and evaluation, an Observatory for the Promotion of Gender Equality
and Equity (OPEG) was set up in July 2022 in accordance with the provisions of the PNG. The Observatory's
mission is to monitor, control and evaluate the progress made in promoting gender equality and women's
rights. As such, it must collect, produce, centralise and disseminate qualitative and quantitative data through
analyses, studies and research on the gender situation at local, national and continental level. It reports to
the Prime Minister and is chaired by the Minister for Women. It is made up of a Steering Committee, an
Executive Secretariat, technical committees and ad hoc committees. The Observatory's resources consist of
State subsidies, donations and legacies.
The creation of the "Maison Nationale de la Femme" (National Women's Centre), inaugurated in 2014 and
officially recognised as a structure for awareness-raising, training, supervision and psychosocial care for
victims of violence, which offers low-cost computer and sewing courses to young women and girls to help
them reintegrate into society and the workplace, is an effective way of combating violence and discrimination
against women and girls.
There is also the Centre d'Étude et de Formation pour le Développement (CEFOD), set up in 1966. This
research institute has studies and references on the status of women in Chad, as well as a collection of texts
on women's rights. Although very active in achieving gender equality goals, civil society organisations (CSOs)
often focus on women's practical needs rather than promoting their strategic interests. They face challenges
such as lack of financial resources, technical skills and coordination, as well as socio-cultural barriers. Despite
this, they play an important role in raising awareness and advocating for women's rights. They are essentially
made up of NGOs and women's associations operating at national level (including women's groups and
networks).
Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs) support the government's efforts to promote women's rights, but
they encounter difficulties with harmonisation and coordination, which sometimes leads to inefficiency and
wasted resources. They also identify challenges such as the lack of gender-disaggregated data, the lack of up-
to-date information and the lack of financial resources.
Representation and participation of women in disaster risk management sectors
In Chad, women's participation in disaster risk management remains limited, despite their crucial role in
community resilience. Specific data on their representation in this sector remains difficult to access due to a
lack of national statistics and specific studies. However, initiatives to strengthen their involvement do exist.
For example, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has implemented projects aimed at
improving ecosystem management128 and strengthening the resilience of local communities129 , particularly
women, to climate risks. In addition, as part of several initiatives, training has been given to women both in
the provinces and at central level, to raise their awareness of hydrometeorological disasters and climate
adaptation techniques, thereby increasing their participation in risk reduction actions.
The representation of women in disaster risk management, meteorology, hydrology and natural resource
management remains very low. According to recent estimates, women account for around 15% of civil
servants in these fields, but their presence in decision-making positions remains marginal, often below 10%.
For example, among the civil servants in the provincial and national departments involved in risk
management, very few women hold positions of responsibility such as department directors or heads of
128 Lake Chad ecosystem restoration and rehabilitation project
129 Community-based climate risk management project
35

=== PAGE 239 ===
technical services. According to a study carried out as part of the SWEED project, women account for 5% of
civil servants at the Ministry of Territorial Administration130 and Decentralisation (MATD), and 16% at the
Ministry of Transport, Civil Aviation and National Meteorology (MTACMN). It is also important to note that
the sector includes a director of civil protection in the MATD, a director of risks and disasters in the Ministry
of Social Action, Solidarity and Humanitarian Affairs (MASSAH) and that both MASSAH and MTACMN are
headed by women ministers.
In provincial and local disaster management committees (CPA, CDA, CLA), women are often under-
represented, representing less than 15% of members, and their role is often limited to administrative or
financial tasks. In addition, cultural norms and gendered perceptions, which associate technical skills and
science with male roles, hinder women's access to influential positions in technical fields, particularly
meteorology and hydrology. This low representation is also due to persistent disparities in access to
education and professional opportunities, compounded by a lack of awareness and support mechanisms to
promote female leadership in these strategic sectors.
Despite these efforts, it is essential to pursue initiatives to increase the representation of women in disaster
risk management in Chad.
Gender in early warning and disaster risk response
Faced with increasing risks from floods and droughts, Chad is striving to strengthen its early warning systems
and response mechanisms, notably through community-based EWS, Food Security and Early Warning
Information System (SISSAP) at national level and the Platform for Real-time Impact Situation Monitoring
(PRISM), supported by the World Food Program (WFP). However, a major challenge lies in the lack of data
disaggregated by gender, age and other diversities, which limits a comprehensive understanding of the
specific vulnerabilities of women, children, the elderly and people with disabilities in the context of climate-
related disasters. This gap hinders the planning of inclusive and gender-sensitive interventions.
The PRISM platform, which uses satellite data, early warning systems and socio-economic assessments to
prioritise aid, could become a more effective tool by integrating gender-disaggregated data and collaborating
with national institutions such as the National Meteorological Agency (ANAM), the Water Resources
Directorate (DRE) and the SISAAP. These institutions play a key role in data collection and analysis, but their
systems often lack the capacity to capture and exploit information relating to gender and diversity.
For inclusive risk management, it is essential to strengthen the collection and analysis of data on the specific
vulnerabilities of marginalised groups, including rural women, transhumant herders and people with
disabilities. This could be achieved by expanding the capacity of PRISM and national institutions to include
gender-sensitive indicators. Such an approach would not only improve understanding of the impacts of
disasters, but also enable responses to be designed that are better adapted to the needs of the most
vulnerable groups, while integrating national and local priorities into climate disaster risk management plans.
Vulnerability and findings from Consultations
During consultations with stakeholders in preparation for this project, several groups of people were
identified as being particularly vulnerable to disasters, including women, the elderly, people with disabilities,
children, farmers, nomadic herders, as well as refugees and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). These groups
are at greater risk due to their limited access to resources, information and early warning systems, as well as
their potential exclusion from decision-making processes and efforts. Early warning and risk management
must take account of these specific vulnerabilities if they are to be truly inclusive and effective.
Although assistance theoretically depends on the targeting of the most vulnerable by the local authorities
(administrative and traditional), in practice, food and non-food items are still not being distributed to the
130 Study on women's skills in Chad (2021)
36

=== PAGE 240 ===
most vulnerable, even though this category is the most in need. This observation is reinforced by the
insignificant amount of assistance, which does not cover the 10% of needs and which would therefore require
better targeting of victims and other disaster victims. During our discussions, we were told that some
vulnerable groups had not received the planned assistance, to the detriment of others. This is the case for
disabled people's associations and certain women's organisations in Abéché and Bol. The exclusion of this
category of people from formal and informal response mechanisms makes them more vulnerable to the
impact of disasters.
Women and girls are often among the most vulnerable and exposed to disaster risks, due to their socio-
economic position, their traditional role in society and their limited access to information and resources. In
rural communities, women are traditionally responsible for managing water, food and resources for their
families. In times of drought, when there is a shortage of water and food, they have to travel long distances
to find these resources, exposing them to additional risks, particularly in terms of health and safety. In rural
areas, they often have limited access to information and early warning systems, due to their limited exposure
to the media, education and technology. Their multiple domestic responsibilities and social status keep them
away from sources of information that are often the main means of disseminating warnings, such as
community radio and community meetings traditionally aimed at a male audience. Women are often under-
represented in decision-making processes relating to disaster risk management, which means that their
specific needs are not always taken into account in the planning of interventions at local and provincial level,
or even in contingency plans that do not reflect a real sensitivity to sex and gender.
The elderly are another vulnerable group in times of disaster, due to their reduced mobility, increased
dependency and isolation. In the event of a disaster, the elderly may find it difficult to evacuate quickly or
move to a safe location. In times of flooding or water erosion, their reduced mobility increases their risk of
being isolated or left behind. Older people, particularly those living in remote areas, may have limited access
to early warning systems and information in general, especially if this information is disseminated via modern
channels, such as mobile phones or online platforms, to which they often do not have access. Older people
are often dependent on family or community members for access to essential resources such as water and
food. In times of crisis, this dependence makes them more vulnerable, particularly if their relatives are
themselves affected by the disaster and unable to provide the necessary assistance.
Children and young people are particularly at risk during disasters, due to their dependency and vulnerability
to physical and psychological impacts. Children are physically more vulnerable to the direct impacts of floods
and droughts. Lack of access to drinking water and sufficient food can lead to health problems such as
malnutrition and water-related diseases, which are particularly widespread after floods. For example, in
Nokou, Lac et Kanem, there was a very high prevalence of water-borne disease and malaria during the rainy
season this year. Droughts and floods can also disrupt access to education, as schools may be damaged,
inaccessible or simply occupied by disaster victims. This directly affects children and young people, depriving
these groups of essential education and increasing their vulnerability in the long term.
The national and local context lends itself to solidarity and stem or extended families rather than
individualism and nuclear families, which gives rise to the presence of several generations within the same
household, encouraging the sharing of information between young people and their elders. This remains true
for the response and support of vulnerable people in times of crisis at household and even community level.
It is very rare to find people living alone, let alone elderly or disabled people, without any assistance from a
family member. However, there are more and more exceptions in certain areas affected by armed conflict,
the influx of refugees, the displacement of people and drug trafficking, which has a devastating effect on
young people (e.g. Lac). On the other hand, in times of crisis, young people, particularly those from poor
households, are often forced to look for work to support their families, exposing them to dangerous
environments, particularly when moving to urban areas or migrating to other countries considered to be
prosperous. Young people used to migrate to Niger and Nigeria (in the Lac region), Libya (in the Kanem region)
and Sudan (in the Ouaddaï region) in search of better opportunities. This trend is set to be reversed with the
armed conflicts in these border countries.
37

=== PAGE 241 ===
People with disabilities are often among the most excluded and exposed during disasters. They face physical,
social and communication barriers that limit their ability to protect themselves and access warning systems.
People with reduced mobility or physical disabilities are particularly at risk in the event of flooding or water
erosion. They may need special help to evacuate, but this is not always available, especially in rural areas
where evacuation infrastructures are limited. The weakness of the legal framework was deplored, in
particular law no. 007 of 09 May 2007 on the protection of people with disabilities, which is not being applied
to subsidise transport for people with reduced mobility.
People with disabilities, particularly those with sensory impairments (hearing or visual), may have limited
access to warning information. If warning systems are not adapted to their needs, they risk being excluded
from early warning systems. During our interviews, people with disabilities and those living with HIV were
keen to highlight the risk that they may be excluded from preparedness and response plans at community
level, as they are not always consulted or involved in decision-making processes, which can lead to solutions
that do not meet their specific needs.
Farmers and Nomadic herders are particularly vulnerable to disasters, due to their direct dependence on
natural resources (water, pasture) and their increased exposure to climatic hazards. Depending on the
amount of rainfall, urban development, the vulnerability of ecosystems and the province's hydrographic
network, low rainfall leads to drought, while excess rainfall can cause flooding and water erosion. All these
hazards contribute to food insecurity.
Farmers mainly grow rainfed crops (maize, sorghum, millet, etc.), market gardening in the ouadis (Kanem and
Ouaddaï) and lowland polders (Lac), as well as off-season crops to a lesser extent. They are directly affected
by droughts and floods, which destroy their crops through lack of water and excess water respectively,
causing economic losses and exacerbating food insecurity. Farmers often have limited access to forecasts,
where they exist, and cannot plan ahead sufficiently to protect their crops or store food.
Nomadic livestock farmers, who depend on water and pasture resources for their herds, are exposed to
increased risks in the event of drought or flooding. In both cases, there are losses of livestock, income and
increased food insecurity. Very often, animals are exposed to bad weather, parasites and other vectors of
disease in the event of flooding, not to mention the destruction of pastures in some flood-prone areas. In
the event of drought, they are exposed to a lack of water and grazing.
Movement is essential to the survival of nomadic herders, but in crisis situations they may be forced to move
to areas with better water and grazing resources, leading to conflict with local communities living in these
areas. Nomadic herders, in particular, may be more isolated from early warning systems, as they often move
to remote areas with poor communications coverage. Their mobile lifestyle also makes regular access to
weather information and early warnings difficult.
Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs), who are present in the Lac and Ouaddaï provinces as a
result of armed conflict, are a particularly vulnerable group to disasters. These people often live in precarious
conditions, with limited access to safe shelter, drinking water and basic services. Climatic disasters exacerbate
their already fragile situation by destroying their temporary homes, reducing their access to essential
resources and delaying humanitarian assistance when roads are impassable during periods of heavy rain.
Refugees and IDPs are often excluded from early warning systems, as they live outside the usual community
networks or in isolated camps and do not necessarily speak the same language as local communities. Their
access to weather information is often restricted, and warning dissemination mechanisms are not always
adapted to their specific needs. In Lac, for example, refugees mainly speak Hausa and English, while in
Ouaddaï, they speak Arabic and English.
38

=== PAGE 242 ===
Gender and access to information and early warning technologies
Although 78% of Chadians live in rural areas, the country's two main mobile operators, Airtel and Moov, have
increased 2G coverage to 86% of the population by 2020131. By 2020, 48.0% and 21.8% of the Chadian
population will be served by 3G and 4G networks respectively. In terms of household ownership of a
telephone, the differences between the proportions of households with a radio are smaller between urban
and rural households with the same level of well-being (GSMA/Deloitte, 2016).
According to (ECOSIT4 2018), more than half of households (58.6%) own at least one mobile phone
nationwide, 85.6% of urban households compared with 50.5% of rural households. In the capital, 97.3% of
households own at least one mobile phone, compared with an average of 79% in other urban centres. Almost
three people in ten (30%) own a mobile phone nationwide. This proportion is 56.9% in the capital. The
provinces of Barh-El-Gazal (44.3%), Kanem (42.6%) and Lac (38.0%) have significant proportions, while
Salamat, Moyen-Chari, Tandjilé and Sila, in descending order, remain below 20%. Ownership of other ICT
(Information and communication Technologies) goods breaks down as follows: radio (20.0%), television
(5.0%) and computers (1.4%).
Households with televisions are generally those that have access to electricity from various sources, such as
the SNE electricity network, solar panels or generators (gensets). In Chad as a whole, 5% of households own
a television set. By area of residence, this proportion is 40.9% in N'Djamena, 8.7% in other urban centres
(20.3% for all urban centres) and only 0.4% in rural areas. The average for urban areas as a whole is driven
by the capital, N'Djamena.
Nationally, only 1.4% of households have at least one computer, 12.2% in N'Djamena, 5.8% in urban areas as
a whole and 0.1% in rural areas. Unlike mobile phones, computer ownership seems to be reserved to some
extent, until now, for households with a higher level of prosperity.
Radio, a medium widely used to inform and communicate, is an asset that is used to a greater or lesser extent
by household members. It is owned by 20% of households nationally. Compared with household ownership
of a telephone, the differences between the proportions of households with a radio are smaller between
urban and rural households with the same level of well-being. Among the poorest households, 14.3% of
urban households have a radio, compared with 10.1% of rural households. Among households classified as
wealthier, 38.8% of those living in urban areas and 23.1% in rural areas have at least one radio.
At 31 March 2023, it is estimated that more than 69.7% of the population132, i.e. 12,577,105 out of
approximately 19,800,000 people, own a mobile phone based on SIM card users. Meanwhile, the fixed-line
penetration rate is low133 with 1,863 subscribers or 0.011%, mainly public institutions. The number of social
media users in Chad is strongly linked to smartphone ownership, which determines internet access
(3,598,419 people) and its penetration rate, which stood at 18% of the population at the start of 2023. The
EW4All project will have to take this into account, in particular when developing approaches for
disseminating early warnings.
In the provinces visited during the consultations, there are generally marked differences in access to
information between men and women, particularly with regard to disaster monitoring, warning and
management, irrespective of the channel (word of mouth, radio, television, mobile telephony and internet),
the area (urban or rural) and the standard of living (household income).
Men generally have more direct access to information in general, as they are often more present in public
spaces where information circulates more freely, they are more literate and they have more time and
resources to access radio, television, mobile phones and the internet (social networks, online media, etc.).
131 ARCEP 2020
132 ARCEP 2023
133 ARCEP 2022
39

=== PAGE 243 ===
On the other hand, women, particularly in rural areas, have limited access to these information channels
because of their heavy involvement in domestic and agricultural tasks, which keep them away from the
channels, but also because of socio-cultural constraints which mean that “a woman's value is measured by
the number of children she has and her ability to look after the household, to the detriment of her free time,
unlike a man whose value is measured by his bravery and the assets he owns, including the number and
influence of the members of his family”.
In addition, women often report that they pay less attention to the information conveyed through these
channels, either because the information is not perceived as directly relevant to them, or because it is less
suited to their specific needs. Women are also more dependent on information provided at major events
(weddings, births, etc.) and in collective settings, such as women's associations or groups, where they mainly
obtain information through regular meetings and awareness-raising workshops organised by partners. These
informal and formal meetings are becoming the preferred means of accessing information on climate risks
and disasters, but this also means that women often receive information with a certain delay, compared with
men.
Community radio stations are the main source of information for local people. Unlike the national radio and
television stations of the Office National des Médias Audiovisuels (ONAMA), which are not picked up
everywhere in rural areas, community radio stations enjoy greater coverage and the trust of local
communities. These radios are particularly important for broadcasting early warnings of natural disasters or
major climate changes. According to the testimonies gathered, the inhabitants of these provinces have more
confidence in these radios, as they offer interactive programmes, tackle local issues and are more accessible
in terms of language and content. The issues addressed include climate change and natural disasters,
although weather forecasts are not really covered, unlike national television, which broadcasts daily global
and provincial weather bulletins.
Agricultural extension agents and other rural development services (ANADER, SODELAC, SISSAP) also play an
important role in disseminating information to local producers. They regularly receive information bulletins
on changes in weather conditions and hydrological trends, and become essential channels for relaying this
information to communities. Their role is crucial in popularising disaster risk management practices,
particularly among farmers and livestock breeders. However, this transmission often depends on the
availability of information and the qualifications and involvement of these agents in the areas concerned.
Community meetings, word of mouth and town criers are also traditional channels that are still used to share
information in areas where access to modern technology is fairly limited. Disaster risk information is often
shared at these meetings through traditional or even religious leaders and chiefs. This process is slower, but
it is still effective in close-knit communities, where information circulates well through these traditional social
networks, whether formal or informal.
Increasingly, virtual platforms such as WhatsApp are being developed as modern social networks, enabling
certain institutions, groups and associations to exchange and share information more generally and on
climate risks and disaster management in particular. However, access to these platforms is still limited,
particularly in rural areas where network coverage is poor and access to the internet is technically and
financially restricted (internet costs remain relatively high). In rural areas, farmers and women are the most
affected by this inaccessibility to new technologies, and their involvement in these platforms remains low
compared with urban players and men respectively.
For example, during the discussion groups with the community of Bahboul in the Lac, it was observed that
only one male out of around fifty people owns a smartphone with Internet connectivity, whereas the
community's basic mobile phone owners are mainly men. This smartphone owner enjoys a certain notoriety,
as the other members of the community are obliged to go to him for information and to communicate with
the outside world.
Local communities in urban areas are not very well informed about weather forecasts, and those in rural
areas are virtually unaware of them. Nevertheless, they express a greater need to improve information and
40

=== PAGE 244 ===
communication channels for forecasting and managing natural disasters. Men and women, although having
different needs in terms of access to information, share the desire to have more reliable information through
more effective information channels that are better adapted to their local realities.
Women, particularly those involved in groups and associations, express a strong need for training and
awareness-raising adapted to their constraints and responsibilities. They want information channels that
allow them to access information more easily, despite their multiple occupations. This includes community
workshops, specific programmes broadcast on community radio stations at suitable times, and voice
messages on mobile phones that are useful even when they are busy with housework. Training women in
associations and groups is also a key channel for transmitting information on climate risk management and
disaster resilience.
As far as men are concerned, community radio stations continue to be the most desired source for monitoring
and warning, as they are already widely used and perceived as reliable. However, there is a desire to improve
early warning systems, with greater involvement of extension workers and the creation of more formal
mechanisms for disseminating alerts, notably via SMS or voice telephone notifications, where mobile
coverage allows.
There is also a growing demand for real-time weather and climate information and tools that enable local
communities, particularly farmers, to better anticipate periods of drought or flooding. Producers are also
expressing the need to acquire work equipment and technological tools to improve their resilience (better
production, better stock, better inputs, adapted seeds, etc.), which would enable them to overcome crises
linked to natural disasters more quickly as part of anticipatory action.
Despite these expressed wishes, a number of barriers stand in the way of improving access to information,
particularly for women. The first barrier is poverty and unequal access to modern technologies. Many rural
families cannot afford mobile phones, radios, televisions or modern work equipment. This makes it difficult
to disseminate information via digital or technological channels.
Low literacy, particularly among women, is another barrier, as many cannot read or interpret written or
technical information. This requires appropriate communication strategies, such as the use of visual aids or
simple audio messages in local languages.
The third barrier relates to access to energy, which is essential if less traditional channels are to be used,
especially in rural areas where simply recharging a mobile phone can require a great deal of effort. Access to
electricity in the provinces is far from sufficient, and even less permanent, in the same way as thermal
generators, opening up a new market for renewable energies, particularly solar power, which is taking on
significant proportions even in some of the most remote areas.
At community level, there is a lack of coordination between the various stakeholders (government,
committees, local communities, the humanitarian community, community radio stations and extension
workers), which can create gaps in the dissemination of coherent and reliable information on natural
disasters. Greater synergy between these actors would be necessary to ensure more comprehensive
coverage of risk information and early warnings, and to respond effectively to the needs of local communities,
particularly those of women and vulnerable groups.
At national level, the country is facing a number of major challenges in terms of access to climate information
and disaster risk reduction (DRR). Firstly, there is a lack of integration of DRR issues into school curricula at
both primary and secondary levels. The lack of educational content adapted to the different school levels,
combined with a lack of teacher training, limits the young generation's awareness of and preparation for
climate risks and disasters. This shortcoming is exacerbated by the lack of documents and teaching materials
dedicated to DRR, despite the potential efforts of Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs).
41

=== PAGE 245 ===
Chad must also overcome the challenge of informing and raising awareness among the general public about
climate change adaptation and DRR. Although initiatives such as the celebration of International DRR Day
and community awareness-raising programmes are envisaged, their implementation is hampered by a lack
of coordination and resources. Awareness-raising programmes on climate change adaptation and disaster
risk are less accessible to women, especially in rural areas. Unlike men, women, particularly those who are
illiterate or monolingual, have limited access to the formal sources of information (radio, SMS, internet) used
to disseminate these messages. They often rely on oral transmission, which reduces their ability to access
crucial information in a timely manner. Men are more often involved in training and workshops organised by
NGOs and local authorities.
Most awareness campaigns are conducted in French and Arabic, which could be a serious shortcoming for
some of the country's provinces. The participation of the city of Ndjamena in international campaigns
initiated by UNDRR, such as "Safe Cities", "Safe Schools" and "Safe Hospitals", remains limited, as does the
production and dissemination of communication and information tools adapted through appropriate
channels to the different population categories, particularly women and vulnerable groups. Finally, capacity-
building for journalists and national NGOs through specific training remains insufficiently developed, which
hinders the dissemination of relevant information and the mobilisation of civil society around DRR issues.
However, although efforts have been made in recent years by the country, with the support of these TFPs, to
raise awareness, train and inform local communities and national institutions about adaptation to climate
change and disaster risks, women's participation remains low given their vulnerability to climate change. In
the development and implementation of public policies to combat climate change and DRR, concrete efforts
are currently focused on awareness-raising workshops to inform stakeholders of the risks involved and the
importance of integrating gender issues, although the number of women generally attending these
workshops is very limited (15-30%).
Preparation, early action and response
In Chad, preparedness, early action and response to climatic disasters such as floods and droughts are mainly
coordinated by national and local institutions, including the Directorate General of Civil Protection (DGPC)
and the Action Committees (CPA, CDA, CLA). These structures play a key role in drawing up and implementing
contingency plans and emergency responses, although there are still shortcomings when it comes to
including vulnerable groups.
Existing contingency plans do not sufficiently differentiate between the specific needs of vulnerable groups,
such as women, people with disabilities, the elderly or children. Disabled people's organisations and
community representatives report a low level of involvement of women and vulnerable people in
consultation and response planning. This results in emergency responses that do not take their specific needs
into account, particularly for people with functional limitations, who face increased barriers in accessing
emergency services and resources.
Disaster management efforts are coordinated by the DGPC, provincial and local action committees, and
partners such as ANAM (climate forecasting) and SISAAP (food security). These institutions are supported by
international organisations such as the FAO, WFP and UNICEF to strengthen early warning systems and plan
inclusive responses. However, greater efforts are needed to integrate the principles of gender and inclusion
into their approaches, as well as to develop technical and logistical capacities.
Discussions with stakeholders reveal an urgent need to build institutional capacity for gender equality and
the inclusion of people with disabilities. This includes raising community awareness, training those involved
in disaster management, and integrating marginalised groups into consultation and planning processes. The
development of contingency plans specific to the needs of vulnerable groups and their inclusive
implementation are essential to ensure appropriate responses to climate shocks.
In the provinces visited during the consultations, anticipatory actions to deal with the risks of natural disasters
such as floods and droughts are already in place in various forms, although they are often limited in scope
42

=== PAGE 246 ===
and effectiveness. Local communities rely on ancestral knowledge to anticipate the risks of natural disasters.
They use natural indicators to anticipate floods and droughts. For example, they observe natural signs such
as changes in the behaviour of animals and insects (spiders moving from south to north, the behaviour of
certain birds, etc.), variations in vegetation, or atmospheric signs (stars, winds, the appearance of clouds in
the east, the cycle of coolness and heat before and after the rainy season), to predict floods and droughts. In
some areas, houses are built on higher ground to avoid flood damage, and dykes or small dams are built to
channel water during the rainy season and protect inhabited areas and fields. This strategy, which is based
on observations of the seasonal cycles of rainfall, high water and low water, helps to reduce the risk of
flooding, although the expansion of inhabited areas and climate change are disrupting these traditional
practices.
However, despite its effectiveness and reliability for communities, this knowledge, although valuable, is not
sufficiently taken into account in modern forecasting processes and even less integrated into warning,
preparedness and response systems, which represents a gap in risk management. For example, we were told
that a dyke built by local communities on the lake using local materials was more resistant to the effects of
weather and bad weather than the neighbouring dyke built by the humanitarian community using modern
materials. An approach that combines modern methods with local knowledge could improve the accuracy of
weather forecasts, impact predictions and community resilience.
Access to safe evacuation areas
In Chad, climatic disasters such as floods and droughts increase the vulnerability of women, children, the
elderly and people with disabilities, particularly in terms of access to safe evacuation sites. Although public
buildings such as schools, health centres and community facilities are often used as temporary evacuation
sites, these spaces are rarely adapted to meet the specific needs of vulnerable groups. Basic sanitation
facilities, such as separate toilets for men and women, access to drinking water and safe sleeping areas, are
often lacking, making life difficult for evacuees, particularly women and people with disabilities.
Overcrowding, lack of privacy and insecurity expose women and children to an increased risk of physical and
psychological violence in these places. The specific needs of women in terms of safety and dignity, as well as
those of the elderly and disabled, are often not taken into account in the planning and management of these
spaces. To respond to these shortcomings, it is essential to strengthen the capacity of evacuation sites to be
inclusive and safe, by incorporating facilities that meet the specific needs of vulnerable groups, in order to
reduce the risks and suffering during climatic crises.
Limited access to resources and services
In Chad, recurrent floods and droughts expose vulnerable groups, including rural women, the elderly, people
with disabilities, households living in poverty and nomadic and transhumant indigenous peoples, to
increased difficulties in preparing for climatic disasters.
Women and vulnerable groups remain the most affected by disasters, due to aggravating social factors such
as gender inequalities, poverty and illiteracy, which reduce their ability to withstand the impacts. In Lac, for
example, the CPA's needs assessment found that the majority of households in the province do not have
sufficient food stocks to cope with crises, which makes them particularly vulnerable to climatic disasters,
especially floods or droughts, and limits their ability to resist and recover quickly after a crisis.
These populations also face limited access to essential resources, such as drinking water, agricultural
equipment, and the financial means to implement preventive measures. During periods of prolonged
drought, water scarcity seriously affects agricultural and pastoral activities, reducing household income and
limiting their ability to save to protect themselves against future crises. Many families have to buy water to
meet their domestic needs, exacerbating their poverty and vulnerability.
The indigenous nomadic and transhumant groups have an economy based mainly on pastoral livestock
farming. They face difficulties in accessing basic socio-economic services, as well as natural resources such as
43

=== PAGE 247 ===
water and grazing land, especially as climate change disrupts their seasonal movements and makes them
more vulnerable (NAP 2021). Women are often marginalised in access to and management of land, even
though they play an essential role in agricultural activities and rural livelihoods. Cultural norms limit their
right to land ownership, often reserving this right for men. As a result, women depend mainly on family or
marital relationships for access to land, making them vulnerable to family conflict or loss of access in the
event of divorce or widowhood. Moreover, nomadic and transhumant communities are facing increasing
restrictions on access to their traditional rangelands and pastoral resources. Demographic expansion,
agricultural pressures and the absence of clear legal frameworks to protect their rights of access to
transhumance lands are exacerbating tensions between farmers and herders. Conflicts over land frequently
arise as a result of overlapping agricultural and pastoral activities. These limitations hamper mobility, which
is essential for the resilience of pastoral systems in the face of drought and flooding, increasing their
vulnerability to climatic and social crises.
The lack of inclusive policies and targeted support mechanisms, such as social safety nets adapted to climate
shocks, also hampers people's ability to mitigate the impacts of disasters. A thorough understanding of the
specific needs of women, people with disabilities and other marginalised groups is essential to designing
programmes that respond effectively to climate risks. By integrating inclusive approaches into disaster risk
reduction strategies, Chad could strengthen the resilience of the most vulnerable communities to the growing
impacts of climate chan
Recommendations to improve the inclusion of women and vulnerable groups
The following are the main recommendations from the community consultations, which will help to identify
areas for improving the inclusion of women and vulnerable groups in the development of the Gender Action
Plan for the EW4All intiative:
• Strengthen the participation of women and vulnerable groups: Introduce quotas in local committees
directly created by project and organise targeted training to include their perspectives in risk
management.
• Integrating local knowledge and disaggregated data: Collecting and using data disaggregated by
gender, age and disability to plan appropriate interventions, combining traditional knowledge and
modern technologies.
• Include inclusive infrastructures in SOP, training and contingency plan: This to build adapted
evacuation sites with specific facilities for women and vulnerable people (separate toilets, secure
access).
• Promote equitable access to warnings: Develop appropriate alert systems (SMS, audio messages) in
local languages, prioritising the needs of women and marginalised groups.
• Raising community awareness: Run campaigns on gender inequalities and the different impacts of
disasters through community radio stations and local leaders.
• Create feedback mechanisms: Put in place accessible systems to collect complaints and needs of
women and vulnerable groups in order to strengthen the relevance of interventions regarding SEP.
44

=== PAGE 248 ===
7 Gender Assessment for Ethiopia
As of July 1, 2024 the estimated population of Ethiopia is 132,059,767134, of which 66,167,291 people
are male and 65,892,477 (50.11%) are female (49.89%)135. Ethiopia has a large rural population with
77% of the population living in rural areas136. Twenty two percent (22%) of Ethiopian households are
female-headed137.
According to UN Women, people with disabilities in Ethiopia, make up 9.24% of the country's overall
population. Unemployment is higher among women with disabilities compared to men, regardless of
where they live.138
Ethiopia has made strides toward gender equality, but challenges persist, particularly in rural regions.
Significant progress has been achieved in areas such as maternal health and gender-responsive
policies. However, social norms, patriarchal traditions, and gender-based violence (GBV) still heavily
affect women's rights and opportunities. Ethiopia is ranked 176th out of 193 countries in the UNDP
Gender Development Index (GII) and 79th of 146 countries in the Global Gender Gap Report 2024, with
a score of 0.709139.
Literacy, Education and Vocational Training
Despite numerous efforts to improve access to education and training, Ethiopia continues to face a
high illiteracy rate, with women disproportionately affected. The gender gap is particularly striking, as
women's lower enrolment and higher dropout rates at the secondary level contribute to their higher
illiteracy rates. According to the 2016 EDHS140,which has the most recent available data, the illiteracy
rate among women stands at 57.1%, significantly higher than the 32.2% for men nationwide. In regions
like Somali, the situation is even more dire, with 79.4% of women aged 15-49 unable to read or write.
This educational gap severely restricts women's access to information and opportunities, limiting their
ability to fully participate in society and contribute to the country's economic development.
In Ethiopia, there are gender disparities in education, with more girls than boys dropping out of school
due to early marriage and domestic responsibilities. Efforts are being made to close the gap, but rural
areas continue to lag behind urban regions in terms of access to education and literacy programs for
women.
Pre-primary education
According to the Educational Statistics Annual Abstract (ESAA), the National Gross Enrolment Rate
(GER)141for pre-primary education in 2021 reached 36.7%, a sharp rise from 9% in 2010. Despite this
improvement, enrolment remains low nationwide. Addis Ababa leads with a GER of 93.8%, while other
regions vary from 67.4% in Gambella to just 3.2% in Somali. Male enrolment continues to surpass
female enrolment, with a GER of 37.7% for boys compared to 35.6% for girls. Nationally, the Net
134 Population of Ethiopia 1950-2024 & Future Projections (database.earth)
135 World Bank Gender Data Portal
136 Ethiopia | Data (worldbank.org)
137 Female headed households (% of households with a female head) - Ethiopia | Data (worldbank.org)
138 UN WOMEN (2024) Abridged version Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile Brief, p. 13
139 World Economic Forum (2024) Global Gender Gap 2024, p.175
140 Central Statistics Agency and the DHS Program, ICF (20016) Ethiopian Demographic Health Survey 2016.
https://www.dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR328/FR328.pdf
141 Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) refers to the overall enrolment at a specific level or stage of education, irrespective of the students' ages. It
is presented as a percentage—sometimes exceeding 100%—of the population within the officially recognized school-age group for that
educational level or cycle. This indicator reflects how effectively the education system covers its target demographic. /
45

--- Table 1 on Page 248 ---
As of July 1, 2024 the estimated population of Ethiopia is 132,059,767134, of which 66,167,291 people
are male and 65,892,477 (50.11%) are female (49.89%)

=== PAGE 249 ===
enrolment Rate (NER) was 21.8% for boys and 20.6% for girls, with the widest gender gap in Somali
(GPI of 0.83). This indicates that girls are less likely to enroll at the official pre-primary age compared
to boys.142
Primary and middle school education
Primary education in Ethiopia covers grades 1-8, with a 2021 National Gross Enrollment Ratio (GER)143
of 95.1%. Gender disparities are significant, particularly in pastoral regions like Somali and Afar, where
the Gender Parity Index (GPI) is 0.76 and 0.83, respectively. Addis Ababa is the only region where
female enrollment exceeds male enrollment. However, completion rates for grades 6 and 8 are lower
for girls, who face higher dropout, delayed entry, and repetition rates compared to boys. In 2019/20,
the national dropout rates for grades 1-8 was 15.2% for boys and 13.7% for girls.144
Secondary education
In Ethiopia, secondary education covers grades 9-12, but enrollment remains low at 42.1% in 2020/21,
compared to 95.1% for primary education. While this marks an improvement from 26.3% in 2014/15,
access to secondary education is still limited for both girls and boys. However, girls continue to fall
behind boys, with only 40.3% of girls enrolled in 2021, compared to 43.8% of boys.
Tertiary education
According to the Ethiopian Education Strategy Centre (ESC), of total students in 2020, women made
up 35% of undergraduates, 22% of master's students, and 13% of PhD students in Ethiopian public
universities. Though an improvement from 10 years ago, these numbers remain low, limiting women's
access to higher education and better job prospects. Gender gaps are stark, with fields like engineering,
having only 28% female undergraduates and just 9% at the PhD level.
Technical and Vocational training (TVET)
Female participation in TVET in Ethiopia has been comparable to that of males ranging between 51-
54% over the past decade. However, women are more concentrated in lower levels (1 and 2) and
underrepresented in higher levels (3 to 5). Enrolment is particularly low in regions like Afar, Gambella,
Somali, and Harari, where access issues are more severe, especially for women. Many woredas lack
TVET centres, making it difficult for women, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds, to
attend. Despite significant government investment and a rise in institutions from 458 in 2013 to over
1,800 in 2023, access challenges continue to disproportionately affect women145. In 2023, a policy shift
was announced to enhance TVET quality and address the unique needs of various regions, with a
particular focus on supporting female participation146.
142 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. Education Statistics, Annual Abstract,2020/21. https://ecde.aau.
edu.et/jspui/bitstream/123456789/276/1/MoE%2018%20ESAA%202013%20E.C%20%282020-2021%20G.C%29..pdf ; UNICEF. 2022.
Quality Pre-primary Education is the Basis of a Child’s Journey. https://www.unicef.org/ethiopia/stories/quality-pre-primary-education-
basis-childsjourney#:~:text=In%20Ethiopia%2C%20pre%2Dprimary%20education,to%2044%20percent%20in%202022. Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Education. Education Statistics, Annual Abstract, 2020/21 https://ecde.aau.
edu.et/jspui/bitstream/123456789/276/1
143 Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) measures the total number of children enrolled in a specific grade range, regardless of their age, expressed
as a percentage of the school-age population. This indicator encompasses enrollment in both Alternative Basic Education (ABE) and
traditional primary schools.
144Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN WOMEN (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024
145 Ibid
146 Cfr.: IPDR (2021) Hawassa University, Gender Audit of the Ethiopian Higher Education & Girum Abebe and Tsegay G Tekleselassie
Chansathith Chaleu. (2022). “National TVET policies and systems in Ethiopia: Opportunities and issues in challenging times.” International
Labor Organization, 2022. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--- africa/---ro-abidjan/---sro-
addis_ababa/documents/publication/wcms_863440.pdf
46

=== PAGE 250 ===
Education accessibility for people with disabilities
The Ethiopian Government has made strides toward equal educational access for students with
disabilities, but challenges remain. Issues such as transportation difficulties, inaccessible school
buildings, inadequate disability-friendly facilities, and insufficient learning materials persist.
Consequently, the Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) for pre-primary students with disabilities is 1.5% for
girls and 1.9% for boys. Across regions, enrolment rates for both sexes with disabilities are low,
although boys tend to have slightly higher rates than girls. Addis Ababa shows better performance,
with enrolment rates of 20.3% for boys and 12.8% for girls at the pre-primary level147.
Control of Assets and Digital Divide
In Ethiopia, women’s control over assets, including land, remains limited despite progressive
legalframeworks promoting gender equality. While the Ethiopian Constitution and the Revised Family
Code guarantee women equal rights to own and inherit land, traditional norms and practices often
restrict women’s access to and control over these resources. Women-headed households, particularly
in rural areas, are more likely to face challenges in land registration and tenure security, which directly
impacts their economic empowerment. Women’s access to bank accounts is also less compared to
men with 51% and 64% of women and men having access respectively (AFRO BAROMETER, 2024).
Access to technologies like mobile phones is also marked by gender disparities, with fewer women
owning or utilizing mobile devices and mobile internet services compared to men; 60% Vs 68 % as of
2023 creating a gender gap in mobile and internet usage (AFRO BAROMETER, 2024). However, relative
progress in rural phone ownership with approximately two-thirds of rural households owning a mobile
phone has been recorded (International Food Policy Research Institute, 2023). Despite this, sex
disaggregated mobile phone ownership is not equally spread across the four major regions of Ethiopia.
i.e Tigray, Oromia, Amhara and Southern Nations Nationalities and People’s Region (SNNP) as per data
as of 2019 according to IFPRI. Rates of ownership are growing quickly for heads of household in Tigray,
Oromia and SNNP, with rates of male heads slightly lagging in the Amhara region. This digital divide
hinders women’s ability to access critical information, financial services, and opportunities for
entrepreneurship. Furthermore, women's agency—their ability to make independent decisions and
influence their socio-economic conditions—is constrained by societal norms that often prioritize male
decision-making. While national policies and programs, such as gender-responsive agricultural and
digital inclusion initiatives, aim to enhance women’s agency and access to resources, significant gaps
persist in bridging these inequalities.
Employment and Labor Participation
The 2021 Ethiopian Labor & Migration survey reveals significant gender disparities in labour market
participation, with only 56.8% of women involved compared to 72.6% of men. When employed,
women are more likely to work in the informal sector (28.6%) compared to men (15.7%), which limits
their access to benefits like pensions and insurance￼148Additionally, a substantial portion of women
(45.3%) engage in unpaid family work, compared to 30.4% of men. Women predominantly hold lower-
level jobs, particularly in agriculture (41.3%) and elementary employment that consists of routine tasks
typically requiring minimal skills, training, or education (35.5%)￼149 Unemployment rates also
highlight gender inequality, with 11.7% of women versus 5% of men unemployed in 2021. The COVID-
19 pandemic disproportionately impacted female-dominated sectors.
147Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN WOMEN (2024) Abridged version Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile Brief
148 Ethiopian Statistics Services. (2022). Statistical Report on the 2022, 2nd Round Urban Employment Survey
149 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of Planning and Development (2021) Statistical Report on the 2021 Labor Force and
Migration Survey. Statistical Bulletin http://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/THE-2021-LABOUR-FORCE-AND-
MIGRATION-SURVEY-STATISTICAL-REPORT-1.pdf
47

=== PAGE 251 ===
Representation and Participation in Decision Making
Women’s representation in political and decision-making processes is improving, with recent efforts
to ensure gender-balanced leadership in public offices. However, women still face cultural barriers that
limit their participation at both local and national levels and significant leadership responsibilities
continue to be dominated by men in both private and public sectors150.
Meanwhile, progress in gender representation in Ethiopia's government has been notable, with
women achieving parity in ministerial appointments in 2018 (AGI 1.021). Women's representation in
line ministries rose from 13% in 2015 to 50% in 2018, highlighted by the appointment of a women as
Head of State, Supreme Court president, and Attorney General. However, by October 2021, women
held only 36% of ministerial positions, a decline from 2018, with most now in less influential roles151.
Systemic barriers continue to hinder women’s participation in decision-making and leadership, with
only 29% of state minister positions held by women. Regional disparities are significant, with female
representation as low as 7% in some areas. Addressing systemic barriers and enhancing women’s
leadership in both public and private sectors remains crucial for fostering gender equality152.
Gender-Based Violence and harmful practices
Ethiopia has implemented various laws and policies to combat sexual violence, domestic abuse, and
harmful practices. The Criminal Code addresses crimes like rape and domestic violence, while the
country has ratified international agreements such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Protocol on the African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) and Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action that protect individuals from gender-based violence.
Despite these efforts, significant gaps remain in legal enforcement. For instance, the Revised Criminal
Code does not recognize marital rape, and workplace harassment is inadequately addressed.
Additionally, psychological violence in marital settings is not covered153.
The 2016 Ethiopian Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS) found that 23% of women experienced
physical violence and 10% experienced sexual violence in their lifetime154. The 2022 humanitarian
needs overview indicated an increase in individuals needing gender-based violence (GBV) support,
rising from 3.5 million in 2021 to 5.8 million, primarily in conflict- and disaster-affected regions155.
Additionally, 63% of women surveyed aged 15-49 believe it's justifiable to beat a woman for violating
social roles (such as burning food, arguing with her husband, leaving the house without permission,
refusing intercourse and neglecting the children), demonstrating the need for awareness raising
interventions to help women understand their rights156. Violence in schools is the other facet of GBV
where school children face at least one form of violence. One study of violence against girls in primary
and secondary schools in nine regions of Ethiopia found that 46% of students spoke of sexual
150The fact that significant leadership responsibilities continue to be dominated by men is reflected in Ethiopia’s AGI score for
empowerment and representation which stands at 0.247. The African Gender Index (AGI) in the area of Empowerment and Representation
assesses the presence of women in leadership and decision-making positions within government and the private sector. It evaluates the
comparative numbers of women and men serving in parliamentary and cabinet roles, as well as the percentage of businesses with female
managers and the ratio of female to male managers, professionals, and technicians., African Development Bank (2020). Africa Gender
Index report https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/documents/publications/africa_gender_index_report_2019_-_analytical_rep
151 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024
152 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2020) Status of Women in Leadership Positions in the Legislative, Executive
and Judicial Branches of the Government of Ethiopia.
153 Ibid.
154 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024
155 Gender Based Violence AOR. (2022) Situation of GBV in Ethiopia. https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/gbv-aor-ethiopia-situation-gbv-
ethiopia-september-2022
156 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2020) Status of Women in Leadership Positions in the Legislative, Executive
and Judicial Branches of the Government of Ethiopia, p.48
48

=== PAGE 252 ===
harassment, degrading treatment and sexual attacks, most frequently on the journey to and from
school, but also in school compounds, with perpetrators including male students and older men (Save
the Children et al., 2008).
In response, the government has made progress in working on a national policy for the prevention and
response to Gender-Based Violence (GBV). This policy seeks to safeguard vulnerable groups and
uphold their human rights. The policy will provide a comprehensive framework from which various
laws, strategies, and guidelines can be developed.157 The current development stands at MoWSA
working with the Ministry of Planning and Development to merge Gender Equality GBV and Economic
Empowerment in one Gender Equality and Women Empowerment Policy rather than being endorsed
as separate Policies. The timeline for the endorsement of the Gender Equality and Empowerment
Policy is however not clear.
Harmful Traditional Practices (HTPs) in Ethiopia mainly result from social, cultural and religious norms.
Several national policies recognize Harmful Traditional Practices as detrimental to women's and girls'
rights. The 1993 National Policy on Ethiopian Women aims to eliminate these practices, supported by
the National Strategy for the Elimination of HTP and the roadmap to end Female Genital Mutilation
(FGM) and child marriage (2020-2024)158. In Ethiopia, 25 million women and girls have undergone
FGM, the highest in Eastern and Southern Africa, with 65% of women aged 15-49 affected. While FGM
prevalence has decreased from nearly 90% in 1970 to 50% in 2000 among adolescents, it remains a
significant issue driven by entrenched social and cultural norms.159 Social norms stigmatizing
premarital sexual activity and cultural beliefs controlling female sexuality perpetuate child marriage
and FGM160.
Despite the government's commitment to end child marriage by 2025, the 2016 EDHS found that
40.3% of women aged 20-24 were married before 18, with 14.1% married before 15.
Gender Policies and Legal Framework
Over the past 30 years, the Ethiopian government has prioritized gender equality in its development
efforts, introducing various laws, policies and reforms, such as the National Action Plan for Gender
Equality, to support this goal. However, implementation remains a challenge, especially in remote
areas, due to deep-rooted social norms hinder progress.
Ethiopia has advanced its international and regional gender commitments through national laws and
policies:
• National Policy on Women (NPW): In 1993, Ethiopia implemented the National Policy on
Women (NPW). It promotes gender-sensitive structures, ensuring equal political, economic,
and social rights. Currently, the government is finalizing a new National Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment (NP-GEWE), which will eventually replace the NPW. This
updated policy is being developed through a collaborative process led by the Ministry of
Women and Social Affairs.
157 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024
UN Women (2022) UN supporting development of National Policy and Strategy on GBV Prevention and Response in Ethiopia.
https://ethiopia.un.org/en/213638-un-supporting-development-national-policy-and-strategy-gbv-prevention-and-response-ethiopia
158 UN Women, UNAIDS, Federal HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Office (FHAPCO) (2020)Gender Assessment of the National HIV Response
in Ethiopia. https://africa.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/ethiopia%20gender%20assessment%20of%20the%20national%20
hiv%20response.pdf
159 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024.
160 For more information regarding social norms that are also diving to harmful practices see also International Bank for reconstruction and
Development (2019) Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report
49

=== PAGE 253 ===
• National Action Plan for Gender Equality (NAP-GE): Ethiopia's NAP-GE serves as a blueprint
for integrating gender considerations across sectors, fostering gender-sensitive planning and
implementation. The Plan aligns with Ethiopia's Ten-Year Development Plan and Growth and
Transformation Plan (GTP), emphasizing the inclusion of women in economic and leadership
roles.
• Constitution (1994): Guarantees gender equality, education, and affirmative action for women
and girls.
• Family Code (2000): Establishes equality between men and women, raises the legal marriage
age to 18, and grants women economic rights in long-term partnerships. However, some
regions (Afar, Somali) have not fully aligned.
• Criminal Code (2005): Criminalizes domestic violence, rape, FGM, abduction, and early
marriage.
• Other Legal Reforms:
o Prohibition of sexual harassment (2017)
o Protection for overseas workers (2016)
o Free legal services for women (2016)
o Gender budgeting in financial administration (2016)
• Ten-Year Development Plan: Promotes women’s participation in education, leadership, and
the economy.
• Education Policies: Aim to increase access for girls and women, including free education up to
grade eight and gender-sensitive initiatives.
• Health Policies: Focus on maternal and child health, expanding reproductive health services.
• Economic Programs: Support women’s entrepreneurship through microfinance and economic
participation.
• Disability Inclusion: Ensures equal rights and employment for persons with disabilities, with a
focus on women.161
• Growth and Transformation Plan I and II: GTP I aimed to mainstream women and youth
agendas in the national development and governance strategy of the country. GTP II requires
redoubling of efforts to address challenges around economic and social benefits for women.
• Gender-responsive budgeting (GRB) is a policy and planning approach introduced in Ethiopia
in 2016 as part of broader reforms to ensure that national and local government budgets
address gender disparities. GRB integrates gender considerations into the allocation of public
resources, aiming to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment through targeted
investments in programs and services that benefit women and marginalized groups.
International Commitments
Ethiopia is a signatory to several international conventions promoting gender equality, including:
• CEDAW (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women)
• Beijing Platform for Action
• Maputo Protocol (African Charter on Human and People's Rights on Women’s Rights) with
reservations on marriage and inheritance
• Maya Declaration on economic rights
• Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 5) on gender equality
More specific to the context of disasters, Ethiopia has endorsed the Sendai and the Hyogo
Frameworks both of which are applicable in disaster situations. These frameworks have addressed the
importance of giving due recognition to the gender dimension of disasters and highlights on the need
161 For more info see: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN WOMEN (2024) Abridged version Ethiopia Country Gender Equality
Profile Brief/ Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and UN Women. (2024) Ethiopia Country Gender Equality Profile 2024
50

=== PAGE 254 ===
for a gender perspective to be integrated into all disaster risk management policies, plans and decision-
making processes, including those related to risk assessment, early warning, information
management, and education and training. Ethiopia monitors and reports on its compliance to the
principles and stipulations in the frameworks. At a national level, the Strategic Program Investment
Framework (SPIF) is a strategic framework for the prioritization and planning of investments that will
drive Ethiopia’s Disaster Risk Management (DRM) system. It recognizes the differential impacts of
disaster on women and men and highlights gender-based risks and vulnerabilities to be identified as
one of its objectives under disaster risk profile.
Ethiopia has aligned these commitments with its Ten-Year Development Plan (2021-2030), integrating
gender equality across all sectors. Additionally, Ethiopia supports equal education rights through
international treaties like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Beijing+, SDGs, AU 2063, and the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. These frameworks ensure free and equal access
to education, with special measures for girls.
Gender-Related Institutional Arrangements
Several institutions in Ethiopia work to promote gender equality and women's empowerment. The
Ministry of Women and Social Affairs (MoWSA), established in 2014, leads these efforts, coordinating
gender policies across various ministries through Gender Directorates. These offices operate from the
federal level down to local Kebele units, reflecting the government's commitment to gender parity.
MoWSA oversees the National Action Plan on Gender Equality and advocates for women's rights.
The Annual Women’s Conference brings together stakeholders from government, UN agencies, NGOs,
and the private sector to discuss progress and challenges in gender equality. It also includes a forum
for women parliamentarians to address gender priorities and integrate them into national policies.
Various alliances and working groups, such as those focused on ending child marriage, FGM, and
violence against women, collaborate to improve the status of women and girls. The Gender Working
Group comprised of government representatives, development partners, and civil society
organizations focuses on aligning national gender initiatives with international frameworks like CEDAW
and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Community-level initiatives like the Women’s
Development Army (WDA) and professional women’s associations play a crucial role in advocacy,
training, and holding the government accountable for gender equality. Women’s Associations and
Cooperatives support capacity-building and economic empowerment initiatives. These groups provide
training, financial literacy programs, and access to microfinance, enabling women to participate more
actively in decision-making and disaster preparedness activities. Community-Based Organizations
(CBOs) similarly, often in partnership with NGOs, facilitate targeted interventions for vulnerable
women, including survivors of GBV, women-headed households, and persons with disabilities.
Gender, Climate Change and Early Warning Systems and disasters response
Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to climate change, facing frequent droughts, floods, crop failures, and
locust infestations. These disasters disproportionately impact women and vulnerable groups. Women,
especially in rural areas, face challenges in accessing resources, technology, and information, which
limits their ability to adapt to climate change. They often rely on agriculture and forest products, both
highly susceptible to climate shocks. Displaced women and girls face food insecurity, meaningful access
to services including healthcare, shelter, water and sanitation and are also susceptible to risks of
gender-based violence. Furthermore, women have limited access to agricultural inputs like seeds,
fertilizers, and irrigation systems, which undermines their resilience. Male-headed households
generally focus on farming adaptations, while female-headed households lean towards off-farm
51

=== PAGE 255 ===
income diversification. Women and girls also bear the burden of collecting firewood, often spending
hundreds of hours annually, exacerbating deforestation and limiting their time for education or
employment.
In addition, climate-related disasters increase health risks for women, particularly from waterborne
diseases due to inadequate sanitation during floods. Traditional gender roles, coupled with the impact
of disasters, lead to malnutrition, mental health issues, and physical strain on women and girls. Despite
these challenges, Ethiopia has made progress with policies like the Climate Resilient Green Economy
(CRGE) strategy, which aims to integrate gender-responsive climate action and move towards a low-
carbon economy. However, women’s involvement in decision-making remains limited due to persistent
gender norms.
Community consultations undertaken within the framework of the EW4All project design also attest
to the fact women are disproportionally impacted by disasters. The consultations conducted in Tigray,
Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region (SNNP), and Amhara, consistently
highlighted the intersection of gender and climate change impacts. Women, particularly in rural
settings, face heightened vulnerability due to their traditional roles in household management and
agriculture. In regions like Tigray, the impacts of climate change—manifested through erratic rainfall
patterns and severe droughts—have forced women to shift away from agriculture to alternative
income-generating activities, often without adequate support. Their dependence on natural resources
for household energy and food production further exacerbates their susceptibility to climate-induced
risks.
Climate change also disproportionately affects women-headed households. The economic insecurity
faced by these households is intensified by limited access to financial services, land, agricultural inputs
and resources including climate-resilient technologies, making them particularly vulnerable to food
insecurity. Platforms like the Emergency Coordination Center in Tigray offer some opportunities for
gender-responsive planning; however, resource constraints still hinder comprehensive support.
In Oromia and SNNP, grassroots organizations like self-help groups (SHGs) and women’s development
networks provide some support to their members, but their reach and capacity remain constrained by
socio-cultural barriers and resource limitations.
In relation to Gender-Responsive Early Warning Systems, across all the regions where consultations for
the EW4All project took place, the importance of gender-responsive early warning systems was
emphasized. Current systems often fail to consider the specific needs of women, persons with
disabilities (PWDs), and the elderly, who face barriers to accessing early warning information. For
instance, in Tigray, the destruction of community-based early warning networks due to conflict has left
many women without critical information. Similarly, in Oromia, logistical challenges hinder the
inclusivity and reach of these systems.
Efforts to integrate gender-sensitive practices into early warning systems have been made in SNNP and
Amhara. For example, the revision of woreda risk profiles that includes gender-specific indicators is an
opportunity to gather gender responsive data in all regions. Amhara's impact-based early warning
roadmap aims to address the unique vulnerabilities of women and marginalized groups by
mainstreaming gender in MHEWS. However, the absence of comprehensive data on gendered impacts
of past disasters hampers the development of truly responsive systems.
Disaster response strategies in Ethiopia are gradually incorporating gender-sensitive frameworks. The
Ethiopian Red Cross Society (ERCS), a key stakeholder, emphasizes gender diversity and inclusion in its
operations, targeting women and children in 35% of its disaster response efforts. ERCS also conducts
52

=== PAGE 256 ===
vulnerability and capacity assessments that include gender considerations, enabling the development
of targeted interventions for women and marginalized communities.
However, challenges persist. In Amhara, ongoing conflicts have disrupted traditional response
mechanisms, disproportionately impacting women and the elderly among internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In Hawzen Woreda of Tigray, the absence of reliable early warning and disaster response
systems has left women vulnerable to gender-based violence (GBV) and economic destitution. This is
attributed to the weakened collective resilience, community networks and limited women's access to
resources. The compounded effect of all has direct impact on vulnerable women’s exposure to GBV
and exploitation. The youth in Tigray also face challenges related to climate change, including reduced
agricultural productivity due to land degradation and irregular rainfall. These barriers discourage
agricultural involvement, leading many young people to migrate to urban areas, onward migration or
pursue less sustainable livelihoods, which negatively impacts both men and women. In Oromia,
political conflicts further complicate disaster response efforts, leaving marginalized communities,
including women, without adequate support. Additionally, the settlement of some communities in
rural locations bordering rivers expose them to flooding and the resultant impacts. Their cultural
beliefs however demand they stay on their lands because rivers overflowing is a symbol of abundance
and prosperity. The government has not yet mapped out such settlements along river lines due to
resource limitations.
In SNNP and Amhara, women, elderly individuals, and people with disabilities face particular
challenges during recurring hazards like drought and floods. In SNNP, women’s caregiving roles and
social norms, such as eating last, increase their vulnerability in times of food shortages. SNNP also has
high drought exposure, affecting 55% of woredas. Additionally, women in flood-prone areas are often
unaware of early warning information, heightening their risk. Similarly, in Amhara, drought, floods,
and ongoing conflict have intensified the hardships of women and other marginalized groups,
especially among nearly one million internally displaced persons (IDPs), who are largely composed of
women, elderly, and disabled individuals.
Some of the opportunities for gender-responsive and inclusive systems include capacity building
programs targeting women and marginalized groups, which can empower them to participate actively
in disaster preparedness and response. This can include technical skills training for managing early
warning systems and leadership development initiatives. Furthermore, community-based mechanisms
like self-help groups, women development associations, development agents and extension workers
widely exist in rural settings. Strengthening these grassroots networks can enhance the flow of early
warning information and foster economic resilience. Integrating these with formal disaster
management frameworks would enhance gender responsive and inclusive early warning systems and
disaster preparedness and response measures.
Women’s Representation and Participation in DRM Sectors
Women are disproportionately affected by disasters, and their involvement in disaster risk
management (DRM) is increasing. While Ethiopia is working on gender mainstreaming in disaster
preparedness and response, capacity-building efforts are still needed to integrate gender into all levels
of disaster risk management.
In Ethiopia, women’s status within the society has made it challenging for them to acquire the
necessary knowledge, information and resources to have agency. This affects their meaningful
participation in community engagement, including disaster preparedness and mitigation plans and
response and resilience processes. Women often bear the brunt of caregiving responsibilities, making
them more vulnerable to displacement and loss of livelihood in crises. Without adequate
representation, DRM strategies risk overlooking the unique needs and challenges that women face
53

=== PAGE 257 ===
during emergencies, such as access to reproductive health services or safe spaces for shelter. However,
some changes have been recorded where women participate in DRM. Institutional reforms have
ensured the participation of women in leadership positions of DRM undertakings through the
institutionalization of gender departments that oversee the gender responsiveness of the different
levels of project implementation. To this effect Pillar leads of the EW4All project have highlighted the
importance for gender to be mainstreamed across the full cycle of DRM and response. While this is a
good start into having a proper gender responsive process, there is the risk of missing the unique issues
of gender and the vulnerabilities of women within the overall DRM cycle. This is because gender
responsiveness may at times seem to only focus on numbers without actually understanding the
differential impact of disasters and the tailored response to address that.
Women’s perspectives are not included in DRM data collection, compilation, and analysis at the kebele
or woreda levels. While there are some efforts in gender equity in data collection and several
indicators, this does not necessarily influence if or how stakeholders prioritize gender needs or use
gender-sensitive data in mitigation, action planning, or decision-making at the kebele or woreda levels.
This is likely exacerbated by the limited number and voice of women in community planning and
committees (USAID, 2019).
A comparative analysis of the location specific consultations for the EW4All project indicate that across
all regions, women’s representation in leadership roles within DRM structures remains limited. In
Tigray, conflict and displacement have reversed many gains previously made in women's
empowerment. Before the conflict, women in Tigray were active participants in development and
decision-making platforms, including community-based disaster preparedness initiatives. However,
the war has not only disrupted these structures but also led to a disproportionate burden on women,
particularly as household heads managing economic and caregiving responsibilities. The number of
female-headed households has substantially increased as a result of the war and they are left with
little capacity to engage in decision-making processes.
In Oromia, cultural norms continue to restrict women’s participation in DRM leadership roles. Women
are often excluded from decision-making platforms, with leadership positions primarily occupied by
men. However, there are promising examples of grassroots initiatives, such as women-led self-help
groups (SHGs), which have started advocating for women’s inclusion in local DRM committees. These
groups offer a potential entry point for broader participation if adequately supported. In both Tigray
and Oromia, women face significant resource limitations, including lack of access to transportation,
information, and financial support, which restricts their ability to participate actively in DRM activities.
Amhara region demonstrates a mixed picture. While the regional DRM offices have attempted to
integrate women into local disaster preparedness committees, ongoing conflicts have marginalized
their voices further. Ongoing conflicts in Amhara have disproportionately affected women, leading to
their marginalization from DRM processes. Displaced women face additional challenges, such as lack
of access to early warning information and vulnerability to gender-based violence (GBV), which further
isolates them from DRM structures.
In SNNP, the engagement of women in DRM structures is relatively stronger in urban areas, where
education and awareness levels are relatively higher. However, in rural areas, traditional social norms
hinder their participation. Women often assume primary caregiving roles and are at greater risk during
disasters, especially in drought-prone or flood-prone areas. Women in some kebeles in SNNP are the
ones who cultivate land that is made fertile by rivers and flood. With limited access to early warning
information women have been swept away by sudden and raging floods while working on their farms.
Cultural norms such as women and children eating last in households, exacerbate their vulnerability
during droughts food shortages also causing malnutrition in children.
54

=== PAGE 258 ===
Nevertheless, challenges persist in advancing women to leadership roles within DRM sectors.
Leadership, coordination, and technical training opportunities are more accessible to men, often
leaving women underrepresented at decision-making tables. Limited access to communication tools,
such as mobile phones, TV and radios is the other significant challenge that contribute to the
disproportionate impact of climate change on women in rural areas.
The ERCS, for instance, has acknowledged this imbalance and emphasized the need for targeted
initiatives to empower women through leadership programs and tailored disaster management
training. Overall, because of their roles within their households and communities, women have strong
ties with the environment and natural resources. This should put them at the forefront in disaster
preparedness, response and resilience discussions and engagements. The consultations identified that
although DRM policies in Ethiopia promote gender equality, real-world execution is inconsistent. This
gap suggests that existing frameworks and protocols, while theoretically inclusive and show the
general intent, lack rigorous enforcement, especially at local levels which are attributed to logistical,
resource and cultural barriers. Thus, women's representation in decision-making roles, within the
broader governmental DRM structures, remains low, which restricts their influence in planning and
response activities. By including women in community DRM teams, the EW4All initiative could tap into
women’s central role in community networks for the attainment of gender responsive early warning
dissemination and higher responsiveness to alerts.
Gender in Early Warning Systems and Disaster Response
Ethiopia's DRM policies have evolved over the years, with the inclusion of gender as an important
aspect in national frameworks such as the 2013 National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk
Management 162, which serves as the key document guiding disaster risk management in Ethiopia.
While it acknowledges the importance of gender sensitivity, it lacks specific measures to address
gender-based violence (GBV) risks, offering no clear actions for prevention, mitigation, or response.
The policy recognizes gender as a cross-cutting issue, noting that women and other marginalized
groups are disproportionately affected by disasters. It emphasizes the need for DRM laws, programs,
and plans to "give special attention to women" and other vulnerable groups. Additionally, it states that
disaster response efforts should be accessible to pregnant and lactating women, along with other
marginalized populations. A revision of this policy is currently in progress163.
Ethiopian policies emphasize the importance of gender-sensitive approaches to DRM. The government
and various international organizations are working towards enhancing women’s participation,
especially in decision-making roles within local communities. However, substantial work is still needed
to ensure that women are actively involved in planning and implementing disaster preparedness and
response measures. Although progress has been made in integrating gender into early warning
systems, women still face barriers to accessing disaster-related information and technologies,
especially in rural areas. Efforts are underway to ensure that women have equal access to early warning
technologies. However, women’s access to early warning information and technologies is hindered by
several factors, including literacy barriers, limited access to technology, and socio-cultural norms.
Many women, especially in rural areas, do not have access to mobile phones, radios, or other
technology used for disseminating early warning messages. This limits their ability to receive timely
and accurate information about impending disasters.
162The National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk Management is a sectoral national strategic document applicable to the period of 2013-
2023. Its main objective is to reduce disaster risks and potential damage caused by a disaster through establishing a comprehensive and
coordinated disaster risk management system in the context of sustainable development. Ethiopia: National Policy and Strategy on Disaster
Risk Management | Refworld
national-policy-and-strategy-on-disaster-risk-management_9401f39d859678e1dfc6ea95493f2a01.pdf (climatepolicyradar.org)
163 IFRC and UNICEF (2021) Gender responsive disaster risk management-An analysis of gender integration in national and regional disaster
risk management frameworks in Eastern and Southern Africa.
55

--- Table 1 on Page 258 ---
2023. Its main objective is to reduce disaster risks and potential damage caused by a disaster through establishing a comprehensive and
coordinated disaster risk management system in the context of sustainable development.

=== PAGE 259 ===
Challenges to women's participation in Early Warnings and DRM include:
• Limited access to education and training in DRM.
• Cultural and societal norms that restrict women’s roles in decision-making.
• Lack of policies to enforce women's participation in leadership roles in DRM.
• Illiteracy
• Limited access to technology
• Limited access to financial services e.g. banks and credit
The status of women in early warning systems (EWS) across Ethiopia reveals significant gaps in
representation, participation, and access to information. The consultation findings highlight a stark
disparity in how women engage with EWS across Tigray, Oromia, SNNP, and Amhara, shaped by
cultural, logistical, and structural barriers. While some progress has been made in specific regions,
systemic challenges continue to undermine women’s effective inclusion and leadership in early
warning mechanisms.
In Tigray with many women overwhelmed by caregiving responsibilities, and many other in
displacement, their engagement in early warning activities has dwindled. For instance, in Hawzen
Woreda, the destruction of early warning networks and infrastructure has left women reliant on
informal channels or indigenous knowledge systems, which are inconsistent and often exclude their
perspectives. Prior to the conflict, women were active participants in community-based early warning
structures. Women’s development groups played a pivotal role in disseminating early warning
information related to droughts and floods.
In Oromia, early warning dissemination is primarily carried out through government structures at the
kebele level and local media. The Oromia BoWSA, although it exists down to the woreda level, the
structure has not been operational at Kebele level until very recently where its functionality is being
tested through piloting. This has its own limitations on early warning dissemination at community
level. Cultural norms also restrict women's mobility and access to public spaces where early warning
information is shared. The consultations also highlighted that women in pastoralist communities,
where mobility is essential for survival, often miss early warnings disseminated through male-
dominated forums. While self-help groups in Oromia have started integrating early warning education
into their activities, these efforts are not yet widespread or well-resourced.
In SNNP, there are different groups that are functioning to enhance women’s engagement in DRM with
the support of governments. However, these networks are not as supportive as women’s participation
is limited because of cultural impositions. In rural areas, the lack of gender-sensitive communication
tools—such as messages tailored to women’s literacy levels or schedules—limits their access to timely
information. The integration of women into woreda-level disaster risk committees has shown
potential, but it is still nascent and faces resistance from traditional community leaders. There are
different capacity building projects that are designed to empower women in DRM. But their
effectiveness needs to be measured. Similarly, in Amhara, women’s participation in early warning
systems is constrained by ongoing conflicts.
The Ethiopian Red Cross Society (ERCS) has made strides in incorporating women into community-
based DRM teams, where their insights contribute to better resource allocation and community
engagement. Women on the ground often have a keen awareness of local resources and vulnerable
individuals, and their involvement in disaster response and early warning can lead to quicker, more
targeted relief efforts. Women’s representation at community levels not only improves the reach and
effectiveness of disaster warnings but also builds a sense of ownership and trust among community
members.
56

=== PAGE 260 ===
Areas for Improvement in Early Warning, DRM and Gender Inclusiveness
Based on the information reviewed, and findings from consultations, the following general
recommendations are made with regards to gender inclusion in EW and DRM. To the extent possible,
this will be taken into consideration in the EW4All initiative based on its activities:
Enhance Gender-Sensitive Strategies: Develop and implement tailored engagement and training
programs for women and vulnerable groups to ensure their active participation in disaster
preparedness and response initiatives.
Improve Community Engagement: Enhance the role of community organizations in implementing
culturally appropriate communication and dissemination strategies, ensuring that all community
members receive timely and relevant information. It is therefore important to involve local
governments, leaders, and women’s organizations in the communities in the design and
implementation of early warnings.
Finalize Legal Frameworks: Advocate for the swift endorsement of the DRM Policy Enforcement
Document to solidify accountability mechanisms across all sectors involved in gender responsive
disaster risk management.
Policy Review and Reform: Government should review national DRM policies to ensure they are
gender-responsive and align with international frameworks such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction (2015-2030). This includes strengthening gender-responsive disaster laws and
regulations.
Gender Responsive Communication: Communication channels including media need to refine their
approach, integrating gender-specific needs and stakeholder feedback into their communication
strategy. Any measure to disseminate information must include facilitating access to the technology
that will be used to receive alerts and real-time updates. This will enhance the capacity to disseminate
early warning information as a nation that is not only accessible but also impactful.
Improve Access to Technologies: Improve access to technologies, such as mobile phones, for the most
vulnerable and marginalized groups including women, elderly and persons with disabilities by
providing subsidies. At the same time, invest in literacy and digital skills training to ensure
comprehensive support. These efforts will complement and enhance each other, empowering
vulnerable communities more effectively.
Revitalize or Strengthen Community Structures: Rebuilding/strengthening women’s development
groups, youth associations, and community-based organizations is crucial to strengthening social
cohesion, information flow, and economic resilience.
Enhance Access to Financial Services: Providing credit, cash support, and micro-financing options can
empower women and youth to re-engage in income-generating activities, from small businesses to
livestock rearing. This will help women to become resilient to shocks and be in a better place to
translate early warning information and take the necessary preparedness measures.
Enhance Gender-Responsive Early Warning Systems: Strengthening early warning systems to reach
all communities, especially vulnerable groups, is essential. This includes expanding the logistical
support and communication tools to improve access to remote areas. In line with this, needs
assessments and the communication of alerts must be in clear and accessible language, including local
languages and adapted to local culture. This may include the use of verbal messaging in parallel with
the written based alerts to overcome literacy barriers.
57

=== PAGE 261 ===
Support Mental Health Services: Addressing psychological trauma and social isolation is essential for
long-term recovery, especially for women and youth facing displacement, loss of livelihoods, and
increased responsibilities.
Promote Gender-Specific Data Collection: Assessment of the needs of women, developing gender-
specific indicators and reporting mechanisms within early warning systems will provide insights into
the distinct needs of women, children, and other vulnerable groups, ensuring that responses are
tailored and effective. Similarly, gender-disaggregated data, is crucial for effective planning, response
and DRR capacity development
Foster Collaboration with Civil Society: Tap into existing local and organizational capacities to build
upon already existing initiatives, understand local dynamics and vulnerabilities to hazards to build trust
among communities and facilitate ownership of early warning and DRM processes.
Strengthen Community Feedback Mechanisms: Creating platforms for community feedback on
disaster response initiatives can help authorities adjust their strategies based on real-time challenges
and needs, promoting more inclusive and responsive systems.
Capacity Building for Local Organizations: Supporting women’s associations, disability organizations,
and youth groups with training and resources will increase their ability to contribute meaningfully to
disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation initiatives. Groups of women who have active roles
within their communities, such as heads of households, or those actors who want to participate
actively in the development of project-related activities should be empowered.
Capacity Building for Government Institutions: Government staff must be provided with targeted
capacity-building initiatives that focus on understanding and integrating gender and inclusive
considerations in every aspect of EWS. Government should prioritize gender-sensitive training,
inclusive decision making and strengthening gender equality in leadership.
Adequate Funding for Gender-Responsive Disaster Management: Government with the support of
its partners to allocate dedicated funding stream for gender-responsive disaster risk reduction
initiatives, including training, research, and program implementation that target both women and men
equally.
Monitoring and accountability: Government with the support of its partners need to implement
robust mechanisms to track and ensure that allocated funds are being used effectively to promote
gender equality in disaster management.
Additionally, it is important to ensure the following are taken into account:
• Training and awareness workshops on interpreting early warnings and response measures
should be adapted to the needs and available time of women for their participation.
• Comprehensive review and action plan for Emergency Warning (EW) systems should provide
analysis and strategies to include inclusivity and to address the digital gender gaps.
• Provision of clear and actionable information tailored to different groups' needs.
58

=== PAGE 262 ===
8 Gender Assessment for Antigua and Barbuda
The estimated population of Antigua &Barbuda as of 2024 is 102,634164, of which 48,311 people are
male (47,07 %) and 54,323 are female (52,93 %). Approximately 76% of Antigua and Barbuda’s
population lives in rural areas and 97% lives in the island of Antigua; 60% of its population resides
along the coast.
Antigua and Barbuda has made significant strides over the past decades on issues affecting women
and girls and gender equality, particularly in education and health, where women outperform men.
Both girls and boys in Antigua and Barbuda have a very high completion rate of lower secondary
school165. There has also been a positive trend in maternal health. In fact, the maternal mortality ratio
in Antigua and Barbuda has significantly improved, decreasing from 51 in 2000 to 21 in 2020. This rate
is notably lower than the regional average, which is 88166.
However, challenges persist, including the prevalence of gender-based violence (GBV)167 and a
significant proportion of vulnerable single female-headed households, which reflects underlying
economic vulnerabilities. In fact, approximately half of the households in Antigua and Barbuda are led
by women, many of whom are single parents responsible for dependents such as the elderly and
individuals with disabilities168. This reflects a significant demographic where women often assume the
role of primary household managers, especially in single-parent families, which are common in the
country. The burden of providing for and caring for dependents, combined with challenges women
face in accessing economic opportunities, can therefore increase the vulnerability of female-headed
households (FHHs) in Antigua and Barbuda, especially during natural disasters169. This was evident in
2017, during Hurricane Irma, when it was estimated that at least half of the affected households were
FHHs, which were larger in size than male-headed households and may have experienced significant
damage due to their particular circumstances.170
In addition to these challenges, women continue to face inequalities in wages and access to economic
opportunities, signaling the need for sustained efforts to address these gaps171. These issues are
further exacerbated by the absence of legal provisions for parental leave or protections against the
dismissal of pregnant workers. While specific data on time use is missing, unpaid caregiving
responsibilities are largely borne by women172. Furthermore, despite a decline, Antigua and Barbuda's
adolescent fertility rate in 2022 was 32.3, still notably higher than the average of 11.2 for high-income
countries173.
Turning to political participation, only 5.6% of seats in national parliament were held by women
in 2023, marking a decline from 11.1% in 2022. The current rate is lower than the average rate in high
income economies and the lowest in the country since 2004, when it was 10.5%174.
An additional aspect that demands attention is the lack of gender-related data in several key areas,
which hampers efforts to bridge the gaps between men and women, as well as boys and girls. For
instance, the breakdown by sex of people with disabilities as well as the disability prevalence itself is
164 Antigua and Barbuda - The World Factbook (cia.gov)
165 https://genderdata.worldbank.org/en/economies/antigua-and-barbuda
166 Ibid.
167 Recent data from 2023 shows that 16% of women reported having experienced intimate partner violence in the past year. Cfr:
Commonwealth of Learning (2023). Gender Country Profile 2023. Antigua and Barbuda content (col.org)
168 The 2014 CARIBANK Country Gender Assessment indicated that approximately 47.4% of households are headed by women.
169 Directorate of Gender Affairs/DoGA 2019
170 Gender and Disaster Risk Management (DRM)- Antigua and Barbuda Country Profile. World Bank Document
171 World Bank Group (2021) Antigua and Barbuda Country Gender Scorecard World Bank Document
172 World Bank Group (2023). Antigua and Barbuda Gender Scorecard 2023
173 The Adolescent fertility rate is the number of births per 1000 women ages 15-19
174 https://genderdata.worldbank.org/en/economies/antigua-and-barbuda
59

--- Table 1 on Page 262 ---
The estimated population of Antigua &Barbuda as of 2024 is 102,634164, of which 48,311 people are
male (47,07 %) and 54,323 are female (52,93 %)

=== PAGE 263 ===
not readily available for Antigua and Barbuda, despite the fact that the country is actively working to
enhance policies and frameworks to ensure better inclusion and representation of persons with
disabilities in public policy and services175.
Antigua and Barbuda ranks 54th out of 193 countries in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI).
Nevertheless, no value is indicated in the UNDP Human Development report for the Gender Inequality
Index (GII) 176, likely due to the previously mentioned lack of available data. Interestingly and probably
for the same reason, Antigua and Barbuda is not among the 146 countries included in the World
Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report 2024 and ranked according to their Global Gender Gap
Index177.
Literacy, Education and Vocational Training
Education plays a crucial role in shaping the gender landscape in Antigua and Barbuda. The country
has achieved significant progress in terms of gender parity in education, with both boys and girls having
relatively equal access to primary and secondary education. However, disparities exist at higher levels.
In Antigua and Barbuda, the literacy rate is approximately 99%. This high literacy rate applies to both
men and women, though sex-disaggregated data is scarce. The literacy rate among adults (aged 15 and
above) highlights the country’s success in providing broad access to basic education178. However,
literacy gaps that affect specific groups, such as women in rural areas or those with fewer economic
opportunities, might still exist, though the lack of available data makes it difficult to ascertain this.
In Antigua and Barbuda, education enrolment data shows distinct trends across the different levels.
For primary education (ages 5–12), enrolment rates for both males and females are fairly balanced. In
the 2017–2018 academic year, males represented 46% of the total primary school population, while
females accounted for 54%, reflecting a slight female majority179. At the secondary level (ages 13–18),
the distribution becomes almost equal. For the same period, males made up 51% of the secondary
school population, while females represented 49%, indicating balanced participation between the two
sexes at this level180. To further support this balance, the government has implemented measures to
eliminate gender stereotypes within the school curriculum; for instance, subjects historically viewed
as male-dominated, such as Technical Drawing, have now been included in the curriculum of the
nation’s sole government-run all-girls secondary school181.
When looking at tertiary education, Antigua and Barbuda shows a trend where females outnumber
males. The gender parity index (GPI) for tertiary enrolment—measuring the ratio of females to males—
has been above 1, indicating more females are enrolled in higher education institutions compared to
males182. This aligns with global trends where women are increasingly accessing higher education. In
this context, women and girls have benefited from tertiary education access through impartial
scholarships, leading to more women receiving financial support despite the absence of affirmative
action. Additionally, efforts to create a safe and harassment-free learning environment have been
prioritized, exemplified by The Halo Foundation’s campaign, which underscores the importance of
175 International Disability Alliance: https://www.internationaldisabilityalliance.org/countries/ATG
176 UNDP (2024). Human Development Report 2023-24, pg.293.
177 World Economic Forum (2024) Global Gender Gap 2024
178 UN Women Data Hub: https://data.unwomen.org/country/antigua-and-barbuda
World Bank Data: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?locations=AG
IndexMundi - Country Facts: https://www.indexmundi.com/facts/antigua-and-barbuda/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS
179 Antigua and Barbuda Review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action Report 2014-2019. p 8
180 Ibid.
181 World Bank Group (2023). Antigua and Barbuda Gender Scorecard 2023
182 Antigua and Barbuda - School enrollment, tertiary (gross), gender parity index (GPI) (indexmundi.com)
60

=== PAGE 264 ===
addressing bullying in schools and promoting inclusivity. The government also ensures that schools
provide adequate sanitation facilities for girls and implements policies that allow pregnant adolescents
to continue their education. However, it is important to highlight that so far, this educational advantage
does not fully translate into labour market outcomes (discussed below)183.
Employment and Labor Participation
While women excel in higher education, enrolling and graduating at higher rates than men, this has
not translated into equal economic opportunities or leadership roles. Thus, despite progress in
education, labour market participation in Antigua and Barbuda reflects clear gender disparities.
Women have made strides in entering the workforce, yet they remain underrepresented in high-paying
and leadership positions.
The 2018 Labor Force Survey revealed that women's participation in the labor market is lower than
men's (68.9% compared to 76.1%), with the gap widening during reproductive years due to the greater
burden of unpaid domestic and caregiving responsibilities184. The employment-to-population ratio was
higher for men (70.5%) than for women (62.1%), and the unemployment rate among women was
higher than that of men, even if men were more likely to participate in the workforce. The higher
unemployment rate for women suggests that a larger share of women within the workforce were
unemployed and actively looking for work. In 2018, the unemployment rate for women stood at 9.9%,
whereas for men it was 7.3%185.
Similarly, the labor force participation rate for young men was higher than for young women. Around
52.8% of males aged 15 to 24 were either working or seeking employment, compared to 45.0% of
females in the same age group. Similar to the trend seen in the overall labor force, even though young
men had a greater participation rate, young women faced a higher unemployment rate, with 30.5%
unemployed compared to 21.6% of young men186. The same survey indicates that senior men were
more likely to remain active in the labor force than senior women. Approximately 31.5% of men, versus
10% of women, aged 65 and older were still engaged in the workforce.
The impact of COVID-19 on women’s employment has been particularly significant. Recent labor force
survey data shows that about 60% of workers in the tourism industry are women, highlighting their
vulnerability to the closures of hotels and related businesses during the pandemic, and potentially also
during national disasters. Additionally, when accounting for the broader effects of the downturn on
linked service industries, it's estimated that nearly one in three women may have been directly
affected by this decline187. This disproportionate impact on women is particularly concerning given
that many single-parent households in Antigua and Barbuda are predominantly led by women, who
often bear the responsibility of supporting larger families compared to men. As a result, any significant
drop in women’s income due to the effects of COVID-19 has had lasting repercussions, resulting in
ongoing challenges for the well-being of the children in their care188.
Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
According to UN Women, nearly one in three women in the Caribbean faces intimate partner violence
or sexual violence at some point in their lives189. A regional analysis of Women’s Health Surveys
183 World Bank Group (2023). Antigua and Barbuda Gender Scorecard 2023
184 Government of Antigua and Barbuda- Statistics Division (2020) Antigua and Barbuda 2018 Labor Force Survey Report 2018-Antigua-
and-Barbuda-LFS-Report.pdf (gov.ag)
185 Ibid.
186 Ibid.
187 ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA COVID-19 HEAT REPORT HUMAN AND ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT, p 15
Human and Economic Assessment of Impact (HEAT) Report - Antigua and Barbuda (undp.org),
188 Ibid
189 Caribbean GBV Law Portal: GBV In The Caribbean | UN Women – Multi-Country Office – Caribbean
61

=== PAGE 265 ===
conducted between 2016 and 2019 in five Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Member States—
Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago—revealed that ever-partnered
women aged 15–64 in relationships with men exhibiting attitudes and behaviors that reinforce male
dominance and perpetuate gender inequality were more likely to experience both lifetime and current
intimate partner violence.190.
In Antigua and Barbuda, Gender-Based Violence (GBV) disproportionately affects women and girls,
reflecting broader regional trends. While there is no evidence of an increase in gender violence post-
disaster191, high rates of domestic violence and a troubling prevalence of GBV remain significant
concerns. National surveys and reports from Non-Governmental Organizations reveal that domestic
violence, sexual harassment, and sexual assault are common, though often underreported due to
stigma and fear of retaliation, further exacerbating the issue192. This is further underscored by recent
statistics from 2023, which indicate that 16% of women193 reported experiencing intimate partner
violence in the previous year194. This statistic illustrates the ongoing challenges many women face
regarding safety and security in their personal relationships.
To address the issue, the Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA)195 plays a key role in supporting victims
and raising awareness through initiatives like the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence.
The 2023 campaign, under the theme "No Excuse: Changing the Narrative about Gender-based
Violence," included events such as a candlelight vigil and educational programs aimed at preventing
violence, particularly during public festivities196. DoGA has also established the Support and Referral
Centre (SARC), which offers services such as medical care, crisis counselling, and legal assistance for
survivors. This initiative aims to provide comprehensive care and advocacy for victims, underscoring
the government's commitment to tackling gender-based violence197.
These efforts reflect a growing acknowledgment of the need to protect women and girls in Antigua
and Barbuda, though more work remains to be done to eliminate GBV entirely. The government has
established hotlines, shelters, and support services for survivors of GBV, but these services are often
concentrated in urban areas, leaving rural women underserved. Training programs for law
enforcement officials and healthcare workers are also critical to improving response mechanisms.
The legal framework protecting women and girls from Gender-Based Violence (GBV) in Antigua and
Barbuda comprises the Constitution, Acts of Parliament, and common law. While domestic violence
legislation offers protection against physical and sexual violence, there is currently no specific
legislation addressing sexual harassment. Nonetheless, victims of sexual harassment in the workplace
can seek remedies through common law, relying on tort law (duty of care) and contract law (breach of
implied trust or constructive dismissal).
190 UN Women (2021). Research brief: Intimate partner violence in five CARICOM countries: Findings from National Prevalence Surveys on
violence against women.
191 Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Department of Environment, Ministry of Health, Wellness and the Environment – Antigua and
Barbuda(2019) Gender Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan-Climate Change Programme Resilience To Hurricanes,
Floods and Droughts in the Building Sector in Antigua and Barbuda, p.31
192 DoGA CONDEMNS ALL FORMS OF VIOLENCE & DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN & GIRLS – Directorate of Gender Affairs (gov.ag):
Empowering Change: 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence in Antigua & Barbuda - Antigua Observer Newspaper
193 Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in
the previous 12 months.
194 Data quoted in Commonwealth of Learning (2023). Gender Country Profile 2023. Antigua and Barbuda content (col.org)
195 Directorate of Gender Affairs (gov.ag) Overview – Directorate of Gender Affairs (gov.ag)
196 https://antiguaobserver.com/empowering-change-16-days-of-activism-against-gender-based-violence-in-antigua-barbuda/
197 Support and Referral Centre – Directorate of Gender Affairs (gov.ag)
62

=== PAGE 266 ===
Gender relevant legal framework and institutional arrangements
The summary provided in this section highlights the key laws, policies, and international commitments
relevant to the social, environmental, and economic framework guiding projects in Antigua and
Barbuda, emphasizing gender considerations and sustainable development.
National Legislation
Antigua and Barbuda Labour Code (1975, with significant amendments): Prevents discrimination in
employment based on various attributes, including race and gender. Labour Code (Amendment) Act
2010 - This amendment focuses on the protection of workers’ rights and introduced provisions related
to the employment of young persons and women.
Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda (1981): Prohibits discrimination based on sex and outlines that
discriminatory treatment cannot occur due to race, origin, political beliefs, and sex.
Sexual Offences Act (1995/amended in 2004: This act criminalizes various forms of sexual violence and
abuse, including rape and sexual assault. It aims to protect the rights and dignity of victims and
emphasizes the importance of consent.
Disaster Management Act (2002): Organizes preparedness and response for natural and man-made
disasters.
Childcare and Protection Act (2004): Creates a Child Protection Agency and sets standards for child-
care facilities, emphasizing child safety and the prohibition of child labor.
Domestic Violence Act (2015): This Act provides protection to individuals from domestic violence. It
establishes legal mechanisms for the prevention and protection of victims, allowing them to seek
restraining orders and providing for the care and support of those affected by domestic violence. The
Act recognizes the importance of addressing domestic violence as a critical gender issue.
Disabilities and Equal Opportunities Bill (2017): Protects the rights of persons with disabilities, aiming
to eliminate discrimination and ensure equal participation in society.
Environmental Protection and Management Act (2019): Serves as the principal framework for
environmental governance, integrating Multilateral Environmental Agreements and promoting
sustainable management.
National Policies
National Youth Policy (2007): Aims to empower youth across various domains such as education,
health, employment, and gender equality.
National Poverty Strategy (2011-2015): Focuses on building resilience through environmental
sustainability and integrating disaster risk reduction into planning processes.
Internal Policies
Department of Environment Gender Policy (2018): The Department of Environment in Antigua and
Barbuda established its Gender Policy in 2018. This policy aims to integrate gender considerations into
environmental management and projects and promotes gender equality in the context of sustainable
development198, it I also designates gender officers to support in this work.
198 Government of Antigua and Barbuda (2018) Department of Environment (DoE)(2018) Gender Policy
63

=== PAGE 267 ===
Environmental and Social Safeguard Policy (2018): In this policy the Department of Environment (DOE)
in Antigua and Barbuda requires that all projects comply with standards set forth in Multilateral
Environmental Agreements (MEAs) and the Environmental Protection Management Act of 2015,
addressing issues like biodiversity and climate change. Additionally, the DOE emphasizes the
importance of aligning projects with human rights, social protection, and gender conventions to which
the government is a signatory199.
Multilateral Agreements and International Conventions
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (1979): Protects
women's rights and promotes equal representation and opportunities.
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989): Ensures children's rights in civil, political, and social
contexts.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1992): Provides a framework for
climate action, emphasizing gender balance in climate policy.
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995): Calls for women's active involvement in
environmental decision-making.
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (2006): Ensures rights for persons with
disabilities, promoting equal access to rights and freedoms.
Rio+20 Outcome Document (2012): Affirms the need for gender-sensitive policies in sustainable
development.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (2015): The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
adopted by all United Nations Members States in 2015, created 17 world Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), including Goal 5, which aims to achieve gender equality and empower all women and
girls. The aim of these global goals is "peace and prosperity for people and the planet" – while tackling
climate change, promoting gender equality, and working to preserve oceans and forests.
UNFCCC Gender Action Plan (2017): Aims to enhance women's participation in climate-related
processes and policies.
Institutional arrangements
In Antigua and Barbuda, the Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGa) within the Ministry of Social
Transformation, Human Resource Development, Youth, and Gender Affairs spearheads the
development and execution of gender policies.
Antigua and Barbuda does not have a specific national gender policy that has been formalized as of
now200. However, there are ongoing efforts to develop a comprehensive National Gender Equality
Action Plan and policy. This initiative is being undertaken by the DoGa with the aim of aligning gender
considerations with the national development strategy. The process involves national consultations
with civil society and various government levels, ensuring that the proposed plan incorporates
monitoring and evaluation frameworks for accountability
199 Government of Antigua and Barbuda (2018) Department of Environment (DoE)(2018) Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy
200 Antigua and Barbuda | UN Women – Multi-Country Office – Caribbean: https://caribbean.unwomen.org/en/caribbean-gender-
portal/antigua-and-barbuda
64

=== PAGE 268 ===
Meanwhile, the Department of the Environment (DOE) developed in 2018 a gender policy201 that
focuses on the impacts of climate change and environmental policies on gender. This strategy also aims
to create specific policies and project designs to address gender disparities. By implementing this
approach, the DOE seeks to enhance project effectiveness, reduce risks, and increase the likelihood of
securing support from primary beneficiaries202.
In 2018, the DOE has also developed the Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy of Antigua and
Barbuda, establishing guidelines for managing environmental and social risks in development projects,
particularly those funded by international sources like the Green Climate Fund (GCF). It emphasizes
gender responsiveness by integrating gender considerations into all programs, ensuring equal access
to resources, justice, and environmental information for both women and men. In this policy, the DOE
promotes a gender-sensitive workplace that influences project development and implementation.
Continuous gender sensitization training is provided to staff, partners, and community groups.
Additionally, all partners and contractors must either have a gender policy or collaborate with the
Directorate of Gender Affairs to develop one, reinforcing the commitment to gender equality within
environmental framework203.
Gender, Climate Change and Early Warning Systems and Disasters Response
In 2020 and 2021, UN Women conducted studies highlighting the gendered impact of climate change
and disasters in the Caribbean, including Antigua and Barbuda204. These studies revealed significant
gender differences in how men and women experience the effects of natural hazards, with women,
particularly those heading households, being disproportionately affected. For instance, as already
illustrated above, women in female-headed households face financial instability when sectors like
tourism, on which they heavily rely, are disrupted by disasters. This was evident during the COVID-19
pandemic, where the absence of income support exposed many women to financial hardship.
Men, who dominate sectors like fisheries, also face challenges, but the loss of equipment like boats
mainly impacts their financial stability. On the other hand, women’s caregiving roles, especially for
children and the elderly, also leave them vulnerable when infrastructure, such as roads and healthcare,
is compromised by disasters. Pregnant women and those with disabilities are particularly at risk due
to inadequate access to medical care during emergencies. Women’s health, especially maternal health,
is at heightened risk from post-disaster issues like disease outbreaks, while mental health services
remain underutilized by men.
Moreover, female-headed households (that account for nearly half of all households in the country)
often struggle to access disaster information and resources due to economic limitations, such as the
inability to afford data plans for mobile devices, smartphones or transportation to social services. This
lack of access exacerbates their vulnerability during and after disasters. The studies also underscored
gaps in policies addressing gender inequality in disaster risk and climate change, with a lack of gender-
focused indicators or policies in place.
201 Microsoft Word - Approved DOE Gender Policy.docx (adaptation-fund.org): https://caribbean.unwomen.org/en/caribbean-gender-
portal/antigua-and-barbuda
202 GCF document (October 2020). Gender Assessment FP133: Resilience to hurricanes in the building sector in Antigua and Barbuda
Antigua and Barbuda | DOE_ATG | B.26/02, p 10
203 Government of Antigua and Barbuda (2018) Department of Environment (DoE)(2018) Environmental and Social Safeguards Policy
Microsoft Word - Approved DOE Environmental and Social Safeguard Policy.docx (adaptation-fund.org): https://www.adaptation-
fund.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Approved-DOE-Environmental-and-Social-Safeguard-Policy.pdf
204 UN Women Multi-Country Office (MCO) Caribbean (November 2020). Gender Inequality of Climate and Disaster Risk and Cost of
Inaction (GICDR) Study & UN Women Multi-Country Office (MCO) Caribbean & International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD)
(2021) and (UN Women) Gender-Responsive Resilience Building in the Caribbean: Understanding the Role of Knowledge, Attitudes,
Behaviours, and Practices in Coordination Mechanisms for Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction.
65

=== PAGE 269 ===
Overall, the need for gender-responsive policies and improved infrastructure to assist women,
especially those leading households, in tackling climate change and disaster risks is evident205.
Women’s Representation and Participation in climate and DRM Sectors
Women in Antigua and Barbuda face ongoing challenges in political leadership, holding just 5.6% of
seats in the national parliament, which reflects broader gender disparities in decision-making roles.
These disparities extend into key sectors like infrastructure and energy, where women are
underrepresented in technical fields but dominate administrative roles. Childcare and household
responsibilities further limit women’s ability to engage in disaster recovery, particularly for single-
parent households. This vulnerability weakens their resilience to climate change and delays recovery
efforts in key public services206.
Despite these challenges, women play significant roles in disaster management and climate change.
The National Office of Disaster Services (NODS) has women in nine (9) of the seventeen (17) district
disaster coordinator positions207. Meanwhile, in the Meteorological Services, responsible for issuing
warnings and forecasts and managing the early warning system (EWS), out of eight (8) meteorologists
and forecasters, two (2) are women, and among thirteen (13) meteorology observers, five (5) are
women (2018). Additionally, both the Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA) and the Department of
Environment (DoE) are led by female directors. The Government of Antigua and Barbuda has made
efforts to incorporate a gender perspective into disaster risk management (DRM) at the national,
sectoral, and agency levels. Similarly in areas related to climate change, women are strongly present
primarily through the Department of Environment as the government’s negotiator for climate change
and main implementing body of the Paris Agreement. As of 2021, the staffing of the Department of
Environment (including administrative and technical) is primarily female208.
Following Hurricane Irma in 2017, women played a key role in the creation and distribution of dignity
kits—containing essential health and hygiene items—to affected communities, as well as in recovery
efforts through their involvement in the Barbuda Council, where over half of its 11 members are
women209. Nevertheless, despite the presence of women in leadership positions within DRM-related
organizations, this has not necessarily resulted in gender-responsive policies or practices within the
sector210. Women’s contributions, although critical, are still hindered by broader systemic gender
imbalances that reduce their influence in technical, political, and climate-related fields.
Gender in Early Warning Systems and Disaster Preparedness
In Antigua and Barbuda, men and women reportedly prepare for and respond to climate-related
events in different ways, highlighting the role of gender in shaping resilience, as shown by the data and
reports in this section.
205 Cfr. UN Women/EnGenDER (November 2021) Gendered Impacts of climate change and disasters risk in Antigua and Barbuda- policy
brief EnGenDER_Gender Inequality CC DRR Brief_Antigua and BarbudaF_20220203.pdf (unwomen.org)
206 ESS Officer within the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Department of Environment, Ministry of Health, Wellness and the
Environment (October, 2019) Gender Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan- Climate Change program- Resilience to
hurricanes, floods and droughts in the building sector in Antigua and Barbuda
207 World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 2018. Caribbean 2017 Hurricane Season. An evidence-based Assessment of the Early
Warning System. https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5459
208 UNFCCC (2022) Antigua and Barbuda National Gender Submission. https://genderclimatetracker.org/resource/23227
209Local Government - Barbudaful: https://barbudaful.net/the-barbudaful-community/barbudaful-politics/local-government/
World Bank (2021) Antigua and Barbuda Country Gender Scorecard.
https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com.mcas.ms/sites/LCR/Documents/ Gender/Country%20Scorecards/LCR%20Country%20Gender%20
Scorecards%202021/Antigua_barbuda_SCORECARD-OK-linked. pdf?McasTsid=20892
Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA) (2019). Antigua and Barbuda Review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action: 2014–2019.
Antigua and Barbuda: Directorate of Gender Affairs. https://www.cepal.org/sites/ default/files/informe_beijing25_antigua_y_barbuda.pdf.
210 Canada Caribbean Resilience Facility(CRF); Canada,Global facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the World Bank ( 2022)
Gender and Disaster Risk Management. Antigua and Barbuda Country Profile.
66

=== PAGE 270 ===
Evacuation and Shelter Access: Women in rural areas of Antigua and Barbuda face specific challenges
related to mobility, primarily due to limited transportation options. During climate events, pregnant
women, elderly women, and persons with disabilities (PWDs) may be particularly vulnerable as roads
become inaccessible and coastal areas are prone to flooding. To address the risks of gender-based
violence (GBV) in shelters, the Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA), in collaboration with the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UN Women Caribbean Multi-Country Office, and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), developed guidelines to prevent sexual assault and GBV in shelter
settings. They also provided training for shelter managers on implementing these guidelines211.
Early Warning Systems (EWS): As noted in a 2018 report by the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO)212, radio remains a key source of hazard information, though social media is gaining influence
in the region as evidenced through surveys taken during project preparation. Platforms like WhatsApp
and Facebook, accessed via mobile phones, are becoming increasingly relevant for early warnings.
While the internet serves as a valuable tool for disseminating warnings, it may inadvertently create
barriers related to gender, location, and ethnicity, even if there is limited data on the digital divide
between men and women in Antigua and Barbuda. UN Women in its 2021 policy brief213 notes that
most households in Antigua and Barbuda have at least one mobile phone during disasters, allowing
them to access critical information. Nevertheless, low-income female-headed households may lack
access to data plans that are required by mobile phones for receiving disaster alerts.
Additionally, the 2018 WMO assessment which included Antigua and Barbuda in its review of EWS
systems, identified the following key gender considerations: (i) women and men may respond
differently to EWS based on how they spend their time; (ii) differences in household decision-making
power and family structures; (iii) the type of economic activities they engage in; and (iv) how they
perceive risk. The review recommended improvements, such as collecting and analysing gender-
specific risk and vulnerability data, establishing feedback mechanisms to ensure warnings reach key
stakeholders (especially women and vulnerable groups), and tailoring communication systems to
address the different needs of urban and rural populations, men and women, young and elderly, and
people with disabilities. It also suggested greater use of amateur radio and community alerts via social
media214.
Disaster Preparedness: UN Women in its 2021 policy brief215 reveal that women in Antigua and
Barbuda tend to spend more on disaster preparation, stocking up on essentials when alerted to an
upcoming disaster. However, this can increase their financial vulnerability if recovery takes longer than
expected. This is supported by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda and Adaptation Fund report
(2020), which found that women in the country spend an average of US$800 more than men on
disaster preparedness, including supplies such as shutters, tape for windows, food, and clothing. While
this finding warrants further analysis to understand the driving factors and impacts, global evidence
suggests that women’s household responsibilities and family roles may influence their disaster
211 Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA) (2019). Antigua and Barbuda Review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action: 2014–
2019. Antigua and Barbuda: Directorate of Gender Affairs. https://www.cepal.org/sites/
default/files/informe_beijing25_antigua_y_barbuda.pdf.
212 World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 2018. Caribbean 2017 Hurricane Season. An evidence-based Assessment of the Early
Warning System. https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=5459
213 UN Women/EnGenDER (November 2021) Gendered Impacts of climate change and disasters risk in Antigua and Barbuda- policy brief
EnGenDER_Gender Inequality CC DRR Brief_Antigua and BarbudaF_20220203.pdf (unwomen.org)
214 National Office of Disaster Services (NODS) ( 2018). Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems Report for Antigua and Barbuda. St. John’s,
Antigua and Barbuda: NODS.
215 UN Women/EnGenDER (November 2021) Gendered Impacts of climate change and disasters risk in Antigua and Barbuda- policy brief
EnGenDER_Gender Inequality CC DRR Brief_Antigua and BarbudaF_20220203.pdf (unwomen.org)
67

=== PAGE 271 ===
preparedness216. Notably, the Government of Antigua and Barbuda launched a social housing program
in 2018 targeting vulnerable urban populations, with a focus on women, particularly single mothers.
This initiative has improved access to safe, affordable, and climate-resilient housing for women,
acknowledging their vulnerability and often disadvantaged status217.
Opportunities for the project to support: Effective access to communication on early warnings and
hazard response present an opportunity for the project to support women in making informed
decisions that may reduce their impact to climate related hazards. In this regard the project must look
to enable communications solutions that are accessible regardless of data plans and access to smart
phones. In addition surveys taken in project development demonstrated the relevance of leveraging
community organizations and social structures to enhance capacity building to not only disseminate
information regarding hazards but also on potential preventive responses that allow for early access.
Finally, increasing the lead time of early alerts to allow for planning and decision making as well as
potential preventive actions would allow women headed households to ensure measures to reduce
vulnerability.
DRM Policies and Gender
The Government of Antigua and Barbuda is making progress in incorporating gender considerations
into disaster risk management (DRM) across national, sectoral, and agency levels. The National Office
of Disaster Services (NODS) collaborates with the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency
(CDEMA) to integrate gender into disaster risk reduction efforts. However, most national disaster
policies still lack specific gender content218.
The Environmental Protection and Management Act of 2019, outlines the Department of
Environment’s (DoE) role in leading climate resilience efforts. Through the Sustainable Island Resource
Framework Fund (SIRF Fund), the government provides financial support for vulnerable groups,
including loans for female-headed households to boost climate resilience. The Act also requires
periodic gender impact assessments of the Fund’s projects. Meanwhile the National Strategic
Biodiversity Action Plan aims to ensure sustainable use of biodiversity in Antigua and Barbuda. It aligns
with international goals like the Aichi Biodiversity Target 14219, focusing on restoring ecosystems that
benefit women, indigenous groups, and vulnerable communities.
The DoE’s Gender Policy promotes gender mainstreaming in environmental management,
emphasizing the active involvement of both men and women. The 2018 Environmental Social
Safeguard Policy reinforces this by mandating environmental, social, and gender screening of projects,
and ensuring vulnerable groups are consulted and included in decision-making220.
However, a review of Antigua and Barbuda's Post-Disaster Public Financial Management found that
gender equality is not factored into resource allocation for disaster response. A UN Women survey
216 Erman A., De Vries Robbé S. A., Thies S. F., Kabir K., and Maruo M. 2021. Gender Dimensions of Disaster Risk and Resilience. Existing
Evidence.
217 Directorate of Gender Affairs (DoGA) (2019). Antigua and Barbuda Review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action: 2014–
2019. Antigua and Barbuda: Directorate of Gender Affairs.
218 World Bank. (2021) Gender-Responsive Disaster Preparedness and Recovery in the Caribbean: Desk Review. Canada Caribbean
Resilience Facility. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35215
219 The Aichi Biodiversity Targets were established during the CBD's 10th Conference of the Parties in 2010 in Aichi, Japan. These 20 targets
aim to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2020 and provide a framework for action by governments, NGOs, and other stakeholders. They cover
various aspects of biodiversity, including habitat protection, species conservation, and the integration of biodiversity into national policies
and planning. Each target is designed to address specific drivers of biodiversity loss, promote sustainable practices, and enhance awareness
and participation in conservation efforts. Target 14: By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services, including services related
to water, and contribute to health, livelihoods and well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into account the needs of
women, indigenous and local communities, and the poor and vulnerable. Aichi Biodiversity Targets (cbd.int)
220 Canada Caribbean Resilience Facility (CRF); Canada, Global facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the World Bank ( 2022)
Gender and Disaster Risk Management. Antigua and Barbuda Country Profile
68

--- Table 1 on Page 271 ---
to water, and contribute to health, livelihoods and well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into account the needs of
women, indigenous and local communities, and the poor and vulnerable.

=== PAGE 272 ===
identified gaps in understanding gender concepts and biases, such as the expectation that women
prioritize family over career, as well as a lack of gender-disaggregated data in the sector221.
Potential Opportunities for the project to support
• In the preparation of climate information ensure that consultations with end users incorporate
women-only consultations and Focus groups, or discussions with women leaders and
organizations at rural and urban level, particularly accounting for coastal populations that are
most affected. This will allow a better assessment of needs and preferred communication
channels for women, ensuring that content and structure of message and timing to relay
message as well gender communicator communicating the message.
• For the planning of activities related to the design and dissemination of alert messages, the
project will work to enable support networks in the form of local cooperation groups.
Additionally, the project will look to ensure that training and awareness workshops are
organized on interpreting early warnings and response measures and are adapted to the needs
and available time of women for their participation, taking into account the double burden
placed on women.
• The project will look to support risk management education programs at a community level
including in schools and social structures, specifically aimed at women and girls. This would
allow to train and equip community members, including women and persons with disabilities,
for early warning actions.
• Measures to disseminate information must take into account the existing gender based digital
gaps that may become a barrier in receiving early warning alerts and real-time updates. In this
regard the project will look to identify technological solutions that are accessible to both men
and women, for example looking to identify SMS systems that do not require data plan nor
access to smart phone technology.
• Ensure that Comprehensive review and action plan for Emergency Warning (EW) systems
provide analysis and strategies to include inclusivity and to address the digital gender gaps,
while working to promote the representation and participation of vulnerable groups in
preparedness and response activities in community emergency groups.
Gender-disaggregated data, is crucial for effective planning and response. It is therefore essential to
integrate gender-responsive data collection and analysis in DRR capacity development. In this regard
the government of Antigua and Barbuda has made important advancement through their NDCs and
Climate Change communication in including gender disaggregated data. This best practice will be
promoted within the DRR space by working with NODS.
221 UN Women/EnGenDER (November 2021) Gendered Impacts of climate change and disasters risk in Antigua and Barbuda- policy brief
EnGenDER_Gender Inequality CC DRR Brief_Antigua and BarbudaF_20220203.pdf (unwomen.org)
69

=== PAGE 273 ===
9 Gender Assessment for Somalia
Somalia is ranked ‘medium’ on the UNDP Gender Development Index 2023-24, comparing Human
Development Index achievements for women and men222. Women consist of 50.5% of the total
population in Somalia223 and 31.9% of Somali households are female-headed224. Somalia has a large
rural population with 74% of the population living in rural areas, and most of them work in the
agriculture sector225. About 24.4% of the population, or 3.4 million people, are living with disabilities
in Somalia, including 20.3% with mild or moderate degrees of disability and 4.1% with a severe
disability226. Of people living with a disability, women are represented more (57%) than men (43%)227.
Meanwhile, Somalia’s gender equality-related indexes are ranked the lowest among the neighbouring
countries in the Horn of Africa region228. Somalia is ranked 122nd out of 193 countries in the Gender
Inequality Index (GII) and 102nd out of 146 countries in the Global Gender Gap Report 2023229. On the
other hand, Somalia’s rapid economic growth from 2009 to 2019, combined with structural change,
helped to increase labour earnings and reduce poverty230. Living standards have improved, helping
Somalia to narrow urban-rural gaps231. However, low-income and rural households still lag in access to
basic services and earning opportunities232. Access to healthcare services in Somalia, particularly
maternal health, remains critically inadequate. The country has one of the highest maternal mortality
rates globally, with 732 deaths per 100,000 live births as of 2015. Decades of civil war, ongoing
instability, and limited healthcare infrastructure contribute to this dire situation. Efforts by the Somali
government and international organizations like UNICEF and UNFPA aim to improve healthcare
services, but challenges persist, especially in rural areas233.
Education, Vocational Training and Literacy
Somalia has made significant progress in achieving gender parity in education, though enrolments are
still generally low. The net enrolment in primary education is around 57.6% for female students and
58.6% for male students for the academic year 2023-2024234. The enrolment rate at lower secondary
schools is about 23.9% for female students and 24.8% for male students, while the enrolment rate for
both sexes is lower for upper secondary schools, at 11.5% for women and 14.1% for men235. However,
the proportion of female students in tertiary education and technical vocational training is lower than
that of male students, particularly for non-traditional areas of study such as science, technology,
engineering, and math. The Ministry of Education (MoE) estimates that only 10% of female students,
compared to 22% of male students, pursued a Bachelor’s Degree in Science, Technology, Engineering,
Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM)-related subjects236. Literacy has improved steadily for both women
and men but remains higher for men at 52.3% compared to 45.4% for women237. There is also a literacy
gap between urban and rural areas, with urban areas like Mogadishu having higher literacy rates. For
222 Country Insights | Human Development Reports
223 Somali National Bureau of Statistics
224 https://nbs.gov.so/
225 MOAI
226 mogfa.gov.so
227 mogfa.gov.so
228 Global Gender Gap Report 2023 | World Economic Forum
229 Country Insights | Human Development Reports
230 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/somalia/publication/somalia-economic-update
231 Somalia | United Nations Development Programme
232 Somalia | United Nations Development Programme
233 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/somalia-health-and-demographic-survey-2020
234 Somalia | UNESCO
235 Somali National Bureau of Statistics
236 Wasaaradda Waxbarashada, Hiddaha Iyo Tacliinta Sare – Ministry Of Education, Culture and Higher Education
237 Somalia (SOM) - Demographics, Health & Infant Mortality - UNICEF DATA
70

=== PAGE 274 ===
example, in cities like Mogadishu, about 60% of adults (15 years and older) can read and write, but in
rural areas, only about 40% of adults are literate238. This gap shows how much harder it is for people
in rural areas to get an education. Girls and women in rural areas, especially those from ethnic
minorities and people with disabilities, face even more challenges. Over 72% of women in rural areas
have never gone to school, which is much higher compared to urban areas239. For children, only about
30% are enrolled in primary school, but this drops to 22% in rural areas, and even fewer girls attend
school240. In rural areas, the gender gap in education is wider, with less than half of the 22% of
pastoralist children in school being girls241. This means girls in these communities have fewer chances
to get an education and improve their lives.
Additionally, gender gaps in access to education are particularly evident among ethnic minorities and
people with disabilities242. Indigenous women in Somalia have higher illiteracy rates and fewer
educational opportunities compared to their male counterparts243. The dropout rate for Indigenous
adolescents aged 14-18 is significant, with girls being more affected due to the higher demand for
them to perform household chores. This results in a widening educational disparity for Indigenous
groups, people with disabilities, and those living in poverty244.
The education-related obstacles faced by rural girls and women in Somalia, such as higher illiteracy
rates and fewer opportunities, combined with other factors like gender stereotypes and patriarchy,
hamper their ability to access informed decision-making, hold jobs outside the home, understand
relevant laws and regulations, and access technologies, extension services, and finance245. Access to
early warning information is also affected246. Men are more likely to receive early warning information
from formal sources, while women often rely on informal and social sources247. This disparity means
that women are less likely to receive timely and accurate warnings, impacting their ability to take
appropriate action during disasters248. EW4ALL services need to be gender-responsive, ensuring equal
access to early warning information for both men and women249. Engaging women in the design and
implementation of early warning systems can help ensure these systems are more effective and
inclusive.
Employment and Labor Participation
In Somalia, women's labour participation in 2023 was 32.7%, compared to men's 52.5%250. According
to the Somalia Labour Force Survey, 57% of women aged 15 to 64 were employed in agriculture,
forestry, and fishing sectors; 10% in the industry sector; and 33% in services like hospitality, finance,
healthcare, and education251. However, just 30% of women are wage and salaried workers, while a
significant 70% are in vulnerable employment, often in the informal sector with poor working
238 https://www.unicef.org/somalia/education
239 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/somalia/overview
240 https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-education-sector-analysis-2021
241 https://www.unicef.org/somalia/gender-equality
242 https:/www.worldbank.org/en/country/somalia/overview
243 www.worldbank.org/en/country/somalia/overview
244 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRM.ENRR?locations=SO
245 https://www.iicba.unesco.org/en/somalia
246 https://www.citiesalliance.org/newsroom/news/results/somalia-early-warning-systems-climate-adaptation
247 https://www.citiesalliance.org/newsroom/news/results/somalia-early-warning-systems-climate-adaptation
248 https://www.citiesalliance.org/newsroom/news/results/somalia-early-warning-systems-climate-adaptation
249 https://www.citiesalliance.org/newsroom/news/results/somalia-early-warning-systems-climate-adaptation
250 UN Women – Headquarters
251 Somali National Bureau of Statistics
71

=== PAGE 275 ===
conditions, low pay, and no social protection252.Gender disparities are stark in Somalia. Women earn
about 62% of what men earn, own fewer assets, and face more barriers to accessing better-paying
jobs253. The gender wage gap stands at around 38%254, influenced by lower educational attainment for
women, labour market discrimination, and societal norms assigning women to primary domestic
roles255. These inequalities hinder women's ability to participate in formal employment, access skills
training, and advance their careers256.
Representation and Participation in Decision Making
Despite a robust gender equality perspective reflected in national policies and legal frameworks,
Somalia still faces significant challenges in achieving equal representation and participation of women
and men in decision-making positions. Women are under-represented at all levels of legislative and
executive bodies. In 2024, women hold 24% of Federal Parliament seats, up from previous years but
below the 30% target257. In the executive body, women occupy 10% of senior ministerial positions and
16% of under-secretary roles258. At the federal member state level, women hold 27% of leadership
roles in civil service and constitute 42% of the total civil service workforce259. However, at the sub-
national level, representation is low: 8% in governor positions, 3.43% at the district level, 10.65% of
chief positions in local councils, and 13% of deputy governor positions at the regional level260. Women
make up 20.3% of deputy governor positions at the district level261.
Gender-Based Violence, Social Norms and FGM in Somalia
Gender-based violence (GBV) remains a significant concern in Somalia. Over 60% of women face
physical abuse, denial of education, forced marriage, rape, and sexual harassment262. Harmful gender
norms, such as the belief that men are entitled to sex regardless of consent, contribute significantly to
GBV263. Marginalized women and girls, especially, face more challenges in accessing legal advice, safe
shelter, and mental support264.
Cultural practices and social norms continue to contribute to the unequal division of labour in
households and communities. Women and girls are involved in productive activities such as farming
and generating income, but they are also primarily responsible for household and childcare duties265
266. Much of their time is devoted to household chores, childcare, cooking, and cleaning. Indigenous
women, in particular, carry a heavy burden in terms of household chores, including housework,
farming, raising animals, and collecting forest foods, especially during food shortages and disasters267
268.
252 Somali National Bureau of Statistics
253 Somalia | United Nations Development Programme
254 https://www.worldbank.org/
255 mogfa.gov.so
256 Somalia | United Nations Development Programme
257 https://iknowpolitics.org/en/region/somalia-0
258 https://nbs.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Gender-Statistics-Booklet.pdf
259 https://nbs.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Gender-Statistics-Booklet.pdf
260 https://nbs.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Gender-Statistics-Booklet.pdf
261 https://nbs.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Gender-Statistics-Booklet.pdf
262 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/somalia-health-and-demographic-survey-2020
263 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/somalia-health-and-demographic-survey-2020
264 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/somalia-health-and-demographic-survey-2020
265 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_somalia_en.pdf
266 https://sidrainstitute.org/european-union-somalia-gender-analysis-study/
267 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_somalia_en.pdf
268 https://sidrainstitute.org/european-union-somalia-gender-analysis-study/
72

=== PAGE 276 ===
Women are still expected to follow social norms and beliefs that endorse men’s privilege while
undervaluing women’s capacity and potential269. This impacts the roles of women and men in decision-
making in households and society as a whole270. Women are involved in managing household budgets,
but men are the primary decision-makers for major expenditures271. Additionally, social norms and low
levels of education and literacy are major barriers preventing women and girls from accessing
information, technical skills, and training, having their voices heard, and enjoying preference in their
families and society272.
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) is a widespread practice in Somalia. According to the Somalia Health
and Demographic Survey (SHDS, 2020), 99% of women and girls aged 15-49 have undergone some
form of FGM273. This practice is deeply rooted in cultural and social norms and continues despite efforts
to eliminate it274.
Gender Policies and Legal Framework
The Federal Government of Somalia is committed to promoting gender equality and social inclusion in
disaster risk reduction and management, aligning with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Key national legislation and policies support this commitment:
The Provisional Constitution of 2012 guarantees equal rights for women and men, including human
rights, equality before the law, and active participation in all aspects of national life275. The Sexual
Offences Bill addresses sexual violence and promotes gender equality, though it has faced challenges
in implementation276. The Somalia National Disaster Management Policy focuses on the needs of
women, children, the elderly, and people with disabilities during disasters277. The National Gender
Policy promotes gender equality and women's leadership, reduces vulnerability to gender-based
violence, and improves social protection for the most vulnerable278. The Gender Action Plan (2021-
2025) emphasizes gender equality and women’s empowerment across various sectors. Somalia’s
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) include gender-focused measures for climate change
adaptation279. The National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (2021-2025) emphasizes gender-
responsive approaches280. The National Gender Mainstreaming Guidelines provide practical guidance
for integrating gender perspectives into disaster management policies281. The Guideline for Gender
Mainstreaming in Disaster Management provides detailed instructions for incorporating gender
perspectives in disaster risk reduction and management efforts282.
269 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_somalia_en.pdf
270 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_somalia_en.pdf
271 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2024-09/b30_report_somalia_en.pdf
272 https://sidrainstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Report_EU_Gender_Analysis_Somalia_Study-SIDRA_Final_2016.pdf
273 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/somalia-health-and-demographic-survey-2020
274 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
275 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
276 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
277 https://sodma.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/National-Disaster-Risk-Management-Policy-Revised-Draft-Edits10-12-2020.pdf
278http://nwm.unescwa.org/resources/312
279 https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-06/undp_somalia_gender_equality_strategy_2023-2026_summary.pdf
280 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/stories/news/2023/01/somalia-launches-national-action-plan-on-unscr-13-for-women-and-security
281 https://www.undp.org/somalia/publications/undp-somalia-gender-equality-strategy-2023-2026
282 chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://www.arc.int/gender-
platform/IMG/pdf/gender_analysis_on_drm_somalia.pdf
73

=== PAGE 277 ===
Additional gender-sensitive policies include the National Climate Change Policy283, the gender-
sensitive National Water Resource Management Policy284, the National Disaster Management
Strategy285, and the GCF Somalia NAP Climate Change Adaptation Gender toolkit286. These policies
aim to integrate gender perspectives into climate change, water resource management, and disaster
risk reduction efforts287.
Somalia is also committed to international frameworks like Convention on the Elimination of all forms
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (UNDRIP), United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and the African Union Agenda 2063288. Despite these
efforts, challenges include limited gender analysis skills within ministries and insufficient funding for
gender-focused interventions289 290.
Gender-Related Institutional Arrangements
In Somalia, gender-related institutional arrangements have evolved significantly in recent years,
reflecting both progress and ongoing challenges in promoting gender equality. The institutional
framework for gender equality is shaped by various policies, legal frameworks, and the roles of key
institutions. The Provisional Federal Constitution, adopted in 2012, includes provisions for gender
equality and women’s rights291. However, the implementation of these provisions remains
inconsistent. Efforts are ongoing to integrate a 30% quota for women’s representation in political
institutions, although this has yet to be fully realized292. Somalia has established mechanisms at both
federal and federal member state levels to advance gender equality and women's empowerment,
coordinated by the Ministry of Women and Families (MoWF) in collaboration with sectoral ministries,
local governments, and development partners293.
The Ministry of Women and Families (MoWF) plays a key role in promoting gender equality by
coordinating efforts across public institutions, civil society, and the private sector. It works closely with
the Technical Working Group on Gender (TWG-G) and supports the Somali National Committee for
Women (SNCW) in implementing CEDAW and ensuring legal protection for women294. MoWF also
collaborates with sectoral ministries through Gender Mainstreaming Action Groups (GMAGs), which
are responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring gender mainstreaming action plans
(GMAPs)295. At the federal member state level, each state has its own Ministry of Women and Human
Rights Development or equivalent, which works alongside MOWF and other sectoral ministries to
promote gender equality. These ministries partner with local governments and development
organizations to ensure the inclusion and participation of women in decision-making processes296. In
addition, The Somali Disaster Management Agency (SoDMA), as per its Gender Strategy & Road Map
283 https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
284 https://drive.google.com/file/d/11ZpInqCSTz53RYYLHxP0lJvYxyQ9pIHe/view?usp=sharing
285 https://www.preventionweb.net/media/97400/download
286 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
287 https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
288 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
289 https://www.arc.int/gender-platform/key-gender-issues-priorities-in-drm-somalia-policy-brief.html?lang=fr
290 https://nwm.unescwa.org/resources/312
291 adopted_constitution_eng_final_for_printing_19sept12_-_1.pdf
292 Ministry of Women & Human Rights Development –
293 UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026) | United Nations Development Programme
294 Gender-in-Somalia--Progress-Report-2012.pdf
295 UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026) | United Nations Development Programme
296 Country Fact Sheet | UN Women Data Hub
74

=== PAGE 278 ===
2024 – 2027297, will establish a Gender-DRM Working Group. This group aims to bring together key
stakeholders—including government entities, civil society organizations, and the private sector—to
promote sustained innovation and cross-sector collaboration. The focus will be on building capacity
through knowledge exchange and gender-focused research, ensuring that DRM policies and programs
are informed by gender-disaggregated data.
Meanwhile, the National Gender Commission oversees the implementation of gender policies and
ensures compliance with international gender equality standards298. Numerous Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs) actively advocate for women’s rights and provide essential services, such as legal
aid and support for survivors of gender-based violence299.
Disaster management at the sub-national, district, and village levels involves a multi-faceted approach.
The Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs & Reconciliation (MoIFAR) collaborates with local governments
to develop disaster risk management plans and strategies. District Disaster Risk Management
Committees (DDRMCs) coordinate disaster response and preparedness activities. Community-based
disaster risk management (CBDRM) initiatives build local capacity and resilience300.
Several inter-sectoral organizations are involved in disaster management, working closely with
government entities, civil society organizations, and the private sector. The Somali Disaster
Management Agency (SoDMA) leads emergency planning and response efforts, including establishing
early warning systems. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) enhances risk
management and builds national capacity in disaster tracking, data management, and early warning
systems. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) supports the National Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction, facilitating multi-sectoral and multi-disciplinary mechanisms for resilience-
building301.
Additionally, the World Food Programme (WFP) collaborates with SoDMA to develop anticipatory
action plans for floods and other disasters, while the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
leverages data tools for humanitarian response. Organizations such as UN Women, FAO, Danish
Refugee Council (DRC), Action for Women and Children Concern (AWCC), and Norwegian Refugee
Council (NRC) also collaborate with local governments, NGOs, and community-based organizations to
enhance disaster preparedness and response at all levels302. These institutions ensure gender-
responsive approaches in all phases of disaster management activities303 304.
Despite these advancements, several challenges persist. Deep-rooted cultural norms and practices,
such as female genital mutilation (FGM) and early marriage, continue to hinder gender equality
efforts305. Ongoing conflict and instability in certain regions exacerbate gender-based violence and
297https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pJOgplRMDOfR247h0yEczYbnwYrP-
JyO/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=101183427218989265382&rtpof=true&sd=true
298 Advancing Generation Equality Forum Commitment in Somalia | UN Women – Africa
299 UN Women Somalia trains civil society on gender in humanitarian Action | UN Women – Africa
300 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
301 https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
302 https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
303 https https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-
library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
304 https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
305 Where we are : Eastern and Southern Africa : Somalia | UN Women – Africa
75

=== PAGE 279 ===
limit the effectiveness of institutional arrangements306. Limited financial and human resources within
key institutions impede the full implementation of gender policies and programs307. Nevertheless, the
institutional framework in Somalia provides a foundation for continued efforts to promote gender
equality and empower women across the country308.
Women’s Representation and Participation in DRM Sectors
Women’s representation in Somalia's government remains low, especially in sectors like water
resource management, meteorology, hydrology, and disaster management. As of 2024, women hold
about 24% of parliamentary seats nationally309. In specific fields, 15% of senior positions in water
resource management are held by women, 10% in meteorology and hydrology, and around 20% in the
National Disaster Management Committee310 311. At the district level, their involvement decreases
significantly to about 5% in disaster management committees312. These disparities reflect broader
societal norms and systemic barriers that limit women’s participation in governance313. Efforts are
needed to improve training and resources for women to enhance their leadership in these critical
areas.
Table 1: Estimates of Female officials in Disaster Management in selected provinces314
Regions/Committee's Roles Total Women Percentage
Banadir (Mogadishu) 50 10 20%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 30 6 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team 15 0 0%
Response and Recovery Team 25 4 16%
Secretariat 20 2 10%
Total 120 22 18.3%
Puntland 40 8 20%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 25 5 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team 10 0 0%
Response and Recovery Team 15 1 13%
Secretariat 10 1 10%
Total 100 16 16%
Somaliland 45 7 15.5%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management 20 4 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team 8 0 0%
Response and Recovery Team 10 2 20%
Secretariat 7 1 14%
Total 90 14 15.5%
306 Overview of Gender-Based Violence in Somalia - Advocacy Brief, 2021 | United Nations in Somalia
307 UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026) | United Nations Development Programme
308 COUNTRY GENDER PROFILE: SOMALIA | Publications | UN Women – Africa
309 https:///africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
310 https//africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
311 https://moewr.gov.so/
312 https//africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
313 https//africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
314 Home - Somali National Bureau of Statistics
76

--- Table 1 on Page 279 ---
Regions/Committee's Roles | Total | Women | Percentage
Banadir (Mogadishu) | 50 | 10 | 20%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management | 30 | 6 | 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team | 15 | 0 | 0%
Response and Recovery Team | 25 | 4 | 16%
Secretariat | 20 | 2 | 10%
Total | 120 | 22 | 18.3%
Puntland | 40 | 8 | 20%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management | 25 | 5 | 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team | 10 | 0 | 0%
Response and Recovery Team | 15 | 1 | 13%
Secretariat | 10 | 1 | 10%
Total | 100 | 16 | 16%
Somaliland | 45 | 7 | 15.5%
Provincial Committee for Disaster Management | 20 | 4 | 20%
Explore, Rescue, and Security Team | 8 | 0 | 0%
Response and Recovery Team | 10 | 2 | 20%
Secretariat | 7 | 1 | 14%
Total | 90 | 14 | 15.5%

=== PAGE 280 ===
Notes:
• The numbers and percentages are an estimate only and will be updated as needed during project
implementation.
• Key regions with the estimate data include Banadir, Puntland, and Somaliland
• The roles listed correspond to those typically found in disaster management committees.
(Source: Somali National Bureau of Statistics, African Development Bank. (2024). AfDB Gender in Somalia, World
Bank. (2023). World Bank Somalia Overview, UN Women. (2024). UN Women Somalia, International Organization
for Migration (IOM). (2023). IOM Somalia, UNDP Somalia. (2023). UNDP Somalia Projects).
Gender in Early Warnings and Disaster Risk Response
In Somalia, the integration of gender considerations in early warning systems and disaster risk
response is essential to effectively address the vulnerabilities faced by different demographic groups.
Recent efforts by various organizations and governmental bodies have highlighted the need for
comprehensive data collection and analysis to inform disaster management strategies.
As part of the Key Platforms and Initiatives, The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNDRR) supports Somalia in implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,
promoting gender-inclusive disaster risk management practices that emphasize understanding
vulnerabilities through a gender lens315. The Somali Disaster Management Agency (SODMA) plays a
crucial role in coordinating disaster response efforts, aiming to strengthen community resilience and
incorporate gender perspectives in disaster preparedness and response planning, although challenges
in data collection and women's representation in decision-making persist316.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has been active in enhancing disaster resilience,
focusing on integrating gender into disaster risk management through capacity-building programs for
local authorities and communities, highlighting the need for gender-disaggregated data317. Similarly,
the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) works to improve food security and resilience to climate
shocks, employing gender-sensitive approaches to support women farmers and advocate for inclusive
data collection 318.
The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources is involved in disaster risk reduction related to water
management, creating flood risk maps and integrating gender considerations into water resource
management, which is crucial for affected communities319. Additionally, the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) collaborates with Somali authorities to enhance weather forecasting and early
warning systems, which need to incorporate gender-sensitive data to ensure effective communication
with all community members 320.
Despite the efforts of various organizations, the availability of gender-disaggregated data remains
limited, hampering the understanding of specific vulnerabilities and the impacts of disasters on
315 https://www.undrr.org/news/enhancing-risk-management-somalia-building-national-capacity-disaster-tracking-data-management
316 https://sodma.gov.so/som/annual-reporting/
317 https://www.undp.org/geneva/blog/advancing-resilience-building-through-gender-equality-and-womens-leadership
318 https://www.fao.org/somalia/fao-in-somalia/en/
319 https://www.fao.org/somalia/fao-in-somalia/en/
320 https://community.wmo.int/en/members/som
77

=== PAGE 281 ===
different groups, particularly women, children, and those with disabilities321. Furthermore, women's
representation in disaster management roles is often insufficient, limiting their input in planning and
decision-making processes, which is essential for inclusive and responsive disaster risk management
strategies322. Additionally, an improved coordination among various agencies, including UN bodies,
local government, and NGOs, is necessary to streamline data collection and ensure that gender
perspectives are integrated across all disaster management initiatives323. Establishing robust
mechanisms for collecting gender-disaggregated data across all disaster risk management platforms is
essential, including incorporating gender analysis into existing databases324. Additionally, building the
capacity of local authorities and communities to understand and address gender issues in disaster risk
management can improve resilience; training programs should emphasize gender-sensitive disaster
management practices325. Engaging women’s groups and community organizations in disaster
preparedness and response planning can provide critical insights into local vulnerabilities, enhancing
the effectiveness of interventions326. Finally, advocating for policies that mandate the inclusion of
gender considerations in disaster management at all levels will help create a more equitable approach
to risk reduction and response327.
Gender and Access to Early Warning Information and Technologies
In Somalia, recent efforts by various organizations and governmental bodies have highlighted the need
for comprehensive data collection and analysis to inform disaster management strategies and ensure
inclusivity. The implementation of EWS in Somalia is primarily managed by the Federal Government of
Somalia (FGS) through the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR) and the Somalia Water
and Land Information Management (SWALIM) project328. These systems are designed to monitor and
provide alerts for various natural hazards, including floods and droughts. As of 2023-2024, Somalia has
several centralized and decentralized EWS in place329.
Many international and local partners support the Federal and Federal Member States governments
in implementing and maintaining EWS. Key partners include United Nations agencies such as the Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (UNOCHA)330, international NGOs like ActionAid, Danish Refugee Council, Mercy Cops, Oxfam,
Save the Children, Norwegian Refugee Council, and World Vision331, and bilateral partners including
the United States, European Union, and various other countries332. The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), and the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) also play critical roles in enhancing disaster risk management and
early warning systems in Somalia333. For flood and drought alerts, organizations like ActionAid, Danish
Refugee Council, Mercy Cops, Oxfam, Save the Children, Norwegian Refugee Council, and World Vision
321 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/stories/news/2024/03/un-women-somalia-trains-civil-society-on-gender-in-humanitarian-action
322 https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/somalia-country-gender-profile
323 https://somalia.iom.int/
324 https://www.undp.org/geneva/blog/advancing-resilience-building-through-gender-equality-and-womens-leadership
325 https://www.wfp.org/operations/annual-country-report?operation_id=SO02&year=2023#/27256
326 https://www.arc.int/gender-platform/key-gender-issues-priorities-in-drm-somalia-policy-brief.html?lang=fr
327 https://nbs.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/SNBS-2023-Institutional-Annual-Report.pdf
328 Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Comprehensive Assessment of Existing EWS
330 International Organization for Migration, Disaster Risk Assessment
331 Acted Somalia, Integrated Support for IDPs and Communities
332 U.S. Embassy in Somalia, Partnership with Somalia
333 Action Against Hunger, Flood Response in Somalia
78

=== PAGE 282 ===
provide integrated emergency and early recovery support, including the dissemination of alerts and
information to improve preparedness and mitigation334. Leading telecom companies such as Hormuud
Telecom, Golis Telecom Group, and Somtel Network also play a crucial role in disseminating these
alerts.
Receiving warnings about natural hazards through EWS in Somalia does not necessarily require users
to have a registered mobile phone. However, mobile phones are a common medium for disseminating
alerts, especially in urban areas335. The primary beneficiaries of EWS in Somalia are vulnerable
communities, including internally displaced persons (IDPs), pastoralists, and agro-pastoralists. These
systems help them prepare for and mitigate the impacts of natural disasters by providing timely alerts
and information336. However, awareness and usage of EWS are generally low, particularly among
marginalized groups such as people with disabilities, the elderly, women, and Indigenous people337.
Many community members are not aware of the existence of these systems or do not understand how
to utilize them effectively338. Women, in particular, often receive information indirectly from local
authorities, which contributes to lower awareness and usage among them339.
The most preferred media for early warning alerts in Somalia include radio, mobile phones, and
community meetings. Radio remains the most popular platform, with over half of the population
listening to it weekly340. However, men tend to use all media platforms more than women341. According
to the Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey (SIHBS) 2022, 85.6% of males and 84.5% of
females over 15 years old own mobile phones342. This data highlights a relatively small gender gap in
mobile ownership. Access to mass media in Somalia shows significant gender disparities. Men are
more likely to use all media platforms compared to women. For instance, 46% of men use the internet
weekly compared to 37% of women343.
Water level management in Somalia is overseen by the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources and
the Somalia Water and Land Information Management (SWALIM). These institutions monitor and
manage water resources, including groundwater levels, to ensure sustainable usage344.
Focus group discussions for the Early Warning For All (EW4ALL) at the National Stakeholders
consultation and national surveys have highlighted the gender disparities in access to early warning
information and technologies. Women, especially in rural areas, have less access to information
compared to men345. These findings emphasize the need for targeted interventions to improve
awareness and usage of early warning systems (EWS) among women and other marginalized groups346.
Key recommendations from project-level national stakeholders consultations include, but are not
limited to, the need for:
334 Acted Somalia, Integrated Support for IDPs and Communities
335 Central Bank of Somalia, Mobile Money Regulations 2020
336 Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Comprehensive Assessment of Existing EWS
337 Country Policy and Information Note on Somalia
338 Country Policy and Information Note on Somalia
339 World Bank Document on Early Warning Systems for Improving Food Security
340 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
341 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
342 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/publications/somalia-integrated-household-budget-survey-2022
343 https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/publications/somalia-integrated-household-budget-survey-2022
344 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
345 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
346 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
79

=== PAGE 283 ===
• Increased awareness through targeted campaigns to educate communities, especially
marginalized groups, about the existence and usage of EWS;
• Improved accessibility by ensuring that EWS are accessible through multiple channels,
including mobile phones, radios, and community meetings;
• Implementing a gender-sensitive approaches to ensure that women have equal access to early
warning information;
• Strengthening partnerships with international and local organizations to enhance the
effectiveness of EWS;
• Investment on capacity building for local institutions to manage and disseminate early
warning information effectively.
By addressing these areas, Somalia can improve its disaster preparedness and resilience, ensuring that
all communities benefit from early warning systems at all levels.
Preparedness, Early Actions, and Responses
Observations from the Early Warning for All (EW4ALL) project national level consultations have
revealed that contingency and emergency plans in Somalia often overlook the specific needs of women
and vulnerable groups, such as persons with disabilities, living in affected areas. Despite the
importance of community engagement, these groups are frequently unaware of these processes and
are less likely to be involved347 348.
In regions like Banadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Southwest, Jubaland, and Somaliland, community
meetings have shown that many women and people with disability have not been invited to participate
in the consultation process for local contingency and emergency plans or development plans.
Consequently, they remain unaware of the specific needs and interventions included in these plans349.
Focus group discussions (FGDs) with the Somalia National Disability Agency (NDA) and representatives
from organizations for people with disabilities (OPDs) revealed that disaster management
interventions often fail to address the specific needs of persons with disabilities, particularly women
and girls. This includes considerations for different types of disabilities and ensuring access to
necessary services.
Stakeholders emphasized the need to enhance the capacity and skills of individuals involved in disaster
management, including training on gender equality and disability inclusion to ensure that
interventions effectively address the needs of all affected groups350. Consultations for the Gender
Strategy & Road Map 2024–2027351 by SoDMA revealed that women and girls face unique
vulnerabilities during disasters. These include health risks, economic hardships, and psychosocial
stress. Their needs encompass access to reproductive health services, protection from gender-based
violence, privacy and safety, economic empowerment, education, and leadership opportunities352.
347 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2023/11/country-gender-profile-somalia
348 https://undrr.org/ew4all-nairobi-workshops-2024
349 https://undrr.org/ew4all-nairobi-workshops-2024
350 https://undrr.org/ew4all-nairobi-workshops-2024
351https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pJOgplRMDOfR247h0yEczYbnwYrP-
JyO/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=101183427218989265382&rtpof=true&sd=true
352 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
80

=== PAGE 284 ===
To effectively address the gendered impacts of disasters, it is crucial to incorporate gender
considerations into all DRM initiatives. This involves identifying and responding to gender-specific
vulnerabilities, ensuring equitable access to resources and decision-making, and promoting women's
leadership in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery efforts353 354.
Key recommendations from project-level consultations include, but are not limited to, the need for:
• Comprehensive data collection, with gender-disaggregated data;
• Gender analysis of past disasters, to understand challenges and opportunities;
• Integrating gender considerations into all stages of disaster management, including planning,
preparedness, response, and recovery;
• Capacity building for SoDMA staff;
• Disaster preparedness and response efforts should focus on equipping communities with the
knowledge, skills, and resources needed to actively participate in disaster management. This
should include the creation of local disaster response committees with gender-balanced
leadership structures and the development of inclusive early warning systems;
• Promoting women’s participation and leadership in decision-making processes related to
disaster risk reduction, response, and recovery is essential for ensuring inclusive and effective
strategies that address their needs and priorities;
• Engage diverse stakeholders such as women’s organisations, CSOs, and marginalised
communities to ensure that their perspectives and needs are included in decision-making
processes;
• Develop and distribute gender-sensitive DRM toolkits and guidelines to standardise gender
integration across all sectors in alignment with the UN Women’s strategy on gender-
responsive disaster risk reduction and supports SDG 5, promoting gender equality through
inclusive DRM processes.
Mainstreaming gender considerations into policies, procedures, and guidelines relating to disaster
management and reduction involves integrating gender perspectives at all levels of decision-making
and across all aspects of disaster preparedness, response, recovery, and risk reduction.
Access to Safe Evacuation Spaces
Efforts to improve access to safe evacuation sites in Somalia have been made through collaboration
between the Federal Government, UN agencies, donors, INGOs, and CSOs. However, significant gaps
remain in ensuring that these facilities meet basic standards for safety, hygiene, and security, especially
during natural disasters such as flooding and drought. Across the Federal Member States (FMS),
including Puntland, Somaliland, Galmudug, Southwest, Hirshabelle, and Jubaland, disparities exist in
the availability and quality of evacuation sites.
The Federal Government, in collaboration with the UN and humanitarian partners, has set national
minimum standards for safe evacuation sites. These standards include the provision of separate
sanitation facilities for men and women, access to clean water, and secure shelter for vulnerable
groups such as women, children, the elderly, and people with disabilities . Despite these standards,
many evacuation sites remain under-equipped due to resource constraints, insecurity, and
infrastructure challenges. The Federal Government’s National Disaster Management Agency (SODMA)
has been leading efforts to coordinate with the Federal Member States to ensure preparedness, but
challenges remain in implementation and monitoring at the state level355.
353 https://undrr.org/ew4all-nairobi-workshops-2024
354 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1byegURxSW39hfdOg31HcsQIn9rAlOl6b/view?usp=sharing
355 Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Comprehensive Assessment of Existing EWS
81

=== PAGE 285 ===
In Puntland, coastal and flood-prone areas such as Bosaso and Garowe face frequent displacement
during flooding and cyclones. However, only 8 out of 70 identified evacuation sites meet the national
minimum standards. Public spaces such as schools and mosques are often used as temporary shelters,
but overcrowding is a persistent issue, especially in urban areas like Bosaso. Women and children are
particularly vulnerable to gender-based violence (GBV) in these evacuation sites, and reports from
local NGOs indicate that women lack access to separate toilets, increasing their vulnerability to abuse.
Many displaced families are forced to rely on unsafe water sources due to insufficient clean water
supply356.
In Somaliland, the government has made some strides in establishing safe evacuation sites, particularly
in areas prone to drought and flooding, such as Hargeisa and Borama. However, only 6 out of 50 sites
meet the minimum standards. Challenges include limited access to clean water, poor sanitation
facilities, and insufficient shelter for displaced populations. Women in focus group discussions
reported concerns about personal safety, especially during periods of extended stay in these sites.
Reports from international NGOs indicate that women and girls are at heightened risk of physical and
emotional abuse in overcrowded shelters357.
In Galmudug, regions like Galkayo and Hobyo frequently experience flooding, leading to displacement.
Unfortunately, only 4 out of 60 designated evacuation sites meet the basic needs of displaced families.
Communities in rural areas face additional challenges, with many relying on makeshift shelters that
offer little protection from the elements. Women and girls, in particular, lack access to adequate
sanitation facilities, often sharing toilets with men, which increases their vulnerability to violence. The
elderly and persons with disabilities are also disproportionately affected, as evacuation sites are often
not accessible for those with mobility issues358.
In Southwest State, areas like Baidoa and Afgooye are heavily impacted by seasonal flooding, leading
to frequent displacements. Of the 100 evacuation sites identified, only 10 meet the national minimum
standards. Key concerns raised by displaced families include overcrowding, lack of clean water, and
poor sanitation. Women in these areas reported to CSOs that they often face the risk of sexual
harassment when using shared sanitation facilities. Additionally, families in rural areas face challenges
in accessing evacuation sites due to poor road infrastructure, making it difficult for them to reach safer
areas during floods359.
Hirshabelle, particularly in regions such as Beledweyne and Jowhar, is highly vulnerable to riverine
flooding along the Shabelle River. Only 5 out of 80 identified evacuation sites meet the minimum
standards for safety and hygiene. During focus group discussions for the Somalia EW4ALL national level
consultations women in Beledweyne expressed concerns about the lack of clean water and the need
to rely on river water for drinking and cooking, which poses serious health risks. Overcrowding in
shelters is also a significant issue, with many families sharing limited space. The elderly and persons
with disabilities are also disproportionately affected, as evacuation sites are often not accessible for
those with mobility issues360.
The Federal Government, in partnership with the UN, donors, and INGOs, has recognized the need for
urgent action to improve the safety and accessibility of evacuation sites across all Federal Member
States. Key recommendations from project-level consultations include:
356 International Organization for Migration
357 Acted Somalia.
358 U.S. Embassy in Somalia, Partnership with Somalia
359 Action Against Hunger, Flood Response in Somalia
360 Somalia National Bureau of Statistics.
82

=== PAGE 286 ===
• Improving infrastructure in evacuation sites to ensure they meet the national
minimum standards, with a focus on providing separate sanitation facilities for men and
women.
• Ensuring clean water is available at all evacuation sites to reduce reliance
Limited Access to Resources and Services
Vulnerable groups in Somalia, including the poor, rural women, the elderly, persons with disabilities,
and nomadic communities, face significant challenges in preparing for disasters due to restricted
access to resources and services. According to focus group discussions conducted for various projects,
community members in disaster-prone areas reported not having sufficient savings to buy extra food,
boats, or household supplies for emergencies, as they barely earn enough to survive each day361.
Both women and men in drought-prone areas noted that during dry seasons, especially with increasing
high temperatures and heat, their crops, agricultural activities, and livelihoods were severely affected.
This negatively impacted their income, leaving them with inadequate means to support their families
and no savings for emergencies. They also experienced a severe lack of water for household use,
including cooking, washing clothes, and bathing, as well as for safe drinking water, due to insufficient
supplies from wells, water pumps, and rainwater storage. Some families had to purchase water for
drinking and household use, further exacerbating their vulnerability and poverty362.
Limited access to resources significantly hampers the capacity of the poor, women, elderly, and
persons with disabilities to better prepare for and take early actions to mitigate disaster risks and
impacts on themselves and their households. The Somali government, supported by various
international donors and organizations, has expanded its social protection policy to include 'shock-
responsive social protection' for at-risk households. This initiative aims to build resilience and mitigate
disaster impacts363.
Recurring droughts in Somalia have had devastating effects on agriculture, livestock, and water
resources, exacerbating food insecurity and malnutrition and pushing vulnerable populations toward
famine and displacement. Additionally, periodic floods, especially in riverine and coastal areas, have
disrupted livelihoods, destroyed infrastructure, and increased the spread of waterborne diseases,
further complicating recovery and reconstruction efforts. Environmental degradation, such as
desertification and deforestation, worsens poverty and food insecurity, intensifying the country's
vulnerability to disasters364.
The impact of disasters on vulnerable populations—particularly women and girls—is a critical issue
requiring urgent attention. The intersection of gender and disaster risk management (DRM) is
increasingly recognized as a vital consideration in addressing the disproportionate effects of disasters
on marginalized groups. Women and girls are often more vulnerable during disasters due to preexisting
social, economic, and cultural inequalities. These include limited access to resources, lower socio-
economic status, restricted mobility, and lack of decision-making power. As a result, women and girls
361 IOM Somalia
363 Somalia - Acted
364 Homepage - U.S. Embassy in Somalia
83

=== PAGE 287 ===
are more likely to suffer higher rates of mortality, injury, displacement, and loss of livelihoods
compared to men365.
Community-Led Early Warning and Disaster Risk Reduction Initiatives
The Federal Government of Somalia has implemented several community-led early warning and
disaster risk reduction initiatives in collaboration with international donors and organizations. These
include the Building Resilient Communities in Somalia (BRCiS), which is a humanitarian consortium led
by the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) that supports Somali communities in developing resilience
to shocks and moving out of poverty. The program focuses on integrated programming models, flexible
multi-year funding streams, and community structures to generate systemic change 366.
Meanwhile, the Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework (RRF), developed by the Federal
Government of Somalia's Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, in partnership
with the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs & Disaster Management, aims to break the cycle of recurrent
disasters and move towards medium-term recovery and long-term resilience367.
Additionally, the Federal Member States have implemented various community-led early warning and
disaster risk reduction initiatives tailored to their specific needs. For instance, the Hirshabelle State
Flood Response Plan was launched in response to severe flooding in 2019. With support from the
Federal Government and international partners, the plan provides critical lifesaving assistance and
invests in longer-term solutions 368. Additionally, the Integrated Support for Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs) and Communities program, implemented by the International Rescue Committee (IRC)
and other partners, supports IDPs and host communities in regions including Gedo, Lower Shabelle,
and Hiraan369.
International organizations and NGOs play critical roles in supporting these initiatives. UNDP supports
various disaster risk reduction initiatives in Somalia, including capacity building and resilience
programs370. SODMA (Somali Disaster Management Agency) is the central body for disaster
management in Somalia, coordinating efforts at federal and state levels to improve early warning
systems and response capabilities371. FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) works on improving
food security and resilience to climate shocks, supporting community-based disaster risk reduction
and early warning systems372. Organizations such as World Vision, Oxfam, Danish Refugee Council
(DRC), and Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) are also involved in various community-led initiatives to
enhance resilience and disaster preparedness 373. These initiatives aim to enhance the resilience of
vulnerable communities to natural disasters and climate change.
365 Somalia - Hunger Relief in Africa | Action Against Hunger
366 BRCiS Consortium - Building Resilient Communities in Somalia | NRC
367 Somalia-RRF-Summary-Report_final_layout6July2018-2.pdf
368 Somalia Flood Response Plan - November 2019 - January 2020 - Somalia | ReliefWeb
369 Somalia | International Rescue Committee (IRC)
370 Somalia | United Nations Development Programme
371 SoDMA | Hay'adda Maareynta Masiimoobiyinka Soomaaliyeed
372 FAO in Somalia | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
373 FAO in Somalia | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
84

=== PAGE 288 ===
Areas for Improvement in Early Warning and Gender Inclusiveness
In Somalia, several areas require improvement to enhance early warning systems (EWS) and gender
inclusiveness. These improvements are crucial for ensuring that EWS effectively serve all community
members, particularly women and vulnerable groups. Below are the key areas for improvement and
recommendations.
• Enhancing GEDSI Analysis: Integrate Gender Equality, Disability, and Social Inclusion (GEDSI)
analysis into disaster risk assessments to capture the needs of diverse groups. Improving
platforms like PRISM and CamDi to include disaggregated data and make them publicly
available is essential374.
• Improving Early Warning Dissemination: A comprehensive review and action plan for
Emergency Warning (EW) systems should provide analysis and strategies to include inclusivity
and address digital gender gaps. Multiple communication channels, including cell
broadcasting, should be used for wider reach. Community-based interventions, including
outreach activities targeting women and persons with disabilities who have no access to
mobile phones, should be implemented. Providing clear, actionable information tailored to
different groups' needs and conducting training and awareness campaigns specifically
targeting women, ensuring gender balance and youth participation, is crucial375.
• Preparedness and Early Action: Ensure evacuation sites meet minimum standards and are safe
for all, particularly women and girls, and are designed inclusively. Train and equip community
members, including women and persons with disabilities, for early warning actions. Building
evidence for shock-responsive social protection schemes for preparedness and anticipatory
action in target provinces, especially to include the poor, women, and persons with
disabilities, is necessary376.
• Cross-Pillar Coordination: Create GEDSI mainstreaming guidelines and training for emergency
warning systems. Increase the representation and participation of vulnerable groups in
preparedness and response activities. Incorporate GEDSI aspects into standard operating
procedures and monitoring frameworks, collecting and analyzing disaggregated data377.
• Enhancing Gender-Responsive Strategies: Developing and implementing gender-responsive
strategies in crisis prevention, preparedness, and recovery is essential. Early warning systems
should address the specific needs and vulnerabilities of women and girls by incorporating
gender perspectives into all aspects of disaster management378.
• Removing Structural Barriers: Addressing structural barriers that limit women's economic
autonomy and unpaid work is crucial. Aligning public and private finance through integrated
national financing frameworks and investing in gender-responsive infrastructure can help
374 BRCiS Consortium - Building Resilient Communities in Somalia | NRC
375 Somalia-RRF-Summary-Report_final_layout6July2018-2.pdf
376 Gender equality, disability and social inclusion analysis – Good practice note
377 The Role of Climate information and Early Warning Systems in Supporting Disaster Risk Reduction in Somalia - Somalia | ReliefWeb
378 Investment in early warning – early actions reaps massive reward against El Niño flood threats | United Nations in Somalia
85

=== PAGE 289 ===
remove these barriers, enabling women to better participate in and benefit from early
warning systems379.
• Preventing and Responding to Gender-Based Violence: Improving the skills and knowledge of
police officers, judges, prosecutors, and other officials to ensure justice for survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence (SGBV) is essential. Providing medical, legal, and psychosocial
support to SGBV survivors ensures their needs are met in disaster situations380.
• Promoting Women's Participation and Leadership: Encouraging women's participation and
leadership in all forms of decision-making is vital. This includes promoting women's political
participation and leadership and ensuring their involvement in disaster risk reduction
initiatives. Women's leadership can lead to more inclusive and effective disaster management
strategies381.
• Strengthening Data Collection and Analysis: Improving data collection and analysis on gender-
specific impacts of disasters and early warning systems is vital. This data can inform more
effective policies and programs that address the unique needs of women and girls382.
Building Capacity and Awareness: Enhancing the capacity of communities, especially women and
persons with disabilities, to understand and respond to early warning information is essential.
Conducting awareness campaigns and training programs can help build this capacity, enabling
communities to better prepare for and respond to disasters383.
379https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pJOgplRMDOfR247h0yEczYbnwYrP-
JyO/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=101183427218989265382&rtpof=true&sd=true
380 SIDA 2015 Preventing and Responding to GBV .pdf
381 UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026) | United Nations Development Programme
382 UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026) | United Nations Development Programme
383 SOMALI DISABILITY NETWORK
86

=== PAGE 290 ===
10 Gender Action Plan MCP EW4All
Thia GAP is a consolidated document for Outputs 1 and 2, and as such it is considered the global GAP. Output 2 countries have country-specific GAPs as part
of the country funding proposals which provide a further breakdown for each country. Each country’s gender staff will report to the global PMU on their
country-specific GAP in order to inform this global GAP. It will be the responsibility of the global PMU to report to GCF on this global GAP. Since the project
activities are mainstreamed, the main cost of the GAP will be the hiring of country-level and global-level gender staff. Nevertheless, an estimate for each
country has been provided for each activity based on a proportion of the activity budget. This GAP is considered a flexible document and will be further
updated during project implementation.
Principal Objective of the GAP: To enhance early warning systems and disaster preparedness through gender-sensitive strategies that accommodate to the unique needs of women,
men, girls, and boys, ensuring inclusive resilience and timely response to climate-induced and other natural disasters.
Output 1
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
Development of guidelines, training materials, and strategic All those developed Years 1-3 UNDP, WMO, $50,000 total
orientation documents UNDRR
Design and implementation of analytic frameworks and models All those developed Years 2-3 UNDP, WMO, $50,000 total
for national adoption take into account gender considerations UNDRR
M&E framework for EW4All take into account gender Gender-specific targets included in the M&E framework Years 2-3 UNDP, WMO, $30,000 total
considerations UNDRR
UN global knowledge bank and knowledge sharing products At least 50% of knowledge sharing products include gender- Years 3-5 UNDP, WMO, $15,000 total
include lessons relating to gender aspects related lessons UNDRR
Global and technical expert working groups include female Efforts made to achieve equity in female and male Year 1 to UNDP, WMO, none
representatives participation, aiming for 50% of females whenever possible Year 5 UNDRR
Output 2
Specific Objective for Output 2 countries:
1. Strengthen disaster risk knowledge by developing a comprehensive risk assessment framework, databases, and capacity-building initiatives for national and local actors.
2. Improve detection, monitoring, and forecasting capabilities through harmonized data collection, forecasting tools, and interoperability across sectors.
87

--- Table 1 on Page 290 ---
Principal Objective of the GAP: To enhance early warning systems and disaster preparedness through gender-sensitive strategies that accommodate to the unique needs of women,
men, girls, and boys, ensuring inclusive resilience and timely response to climate-induced and other natural disasters. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Output 1 |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
Development of guidelines, training materials, and strategic
orientation documents |  | All those developed | Years 1-3 | UNDP, WMO,
UNDRR | $50,000 total |  | 
Design and implementation of analytic frameworks and models
for national adoption take into account gender considerations |  | All those developed | Years 2-3 | UNDP, WMO,
UNDRR | $50,000 total |  | 
M&E framework for EW4All take into account gender
considerations |  | Gender-specific targets included in the M&E framework | Years 2-3 | UNDP, WMO,
UNDRR | $30,000 total |  | 
UN global knowledge bank and knowledge sharing products
include lessons relating to gender aspects |  | At least 50% of knowledge sharing products include gender-
related lessons | Years 3-5 | UNDP, WMO,
UNDRR | $15,000 total |  | 
Global and technical expert working groups include female
representatives |  | Efforts made to achieve equity in female and male
participation, aiming for 50% of females whenever possible | Year 1 to
Year 5 | UNDP, WMO,
UNDRR | none |  | 
 | Output 2 |  |  |  |  |  | 
Specific Objective for Output 2 countries:
1. Strengthen disaster risk knowledge by developing a comprehensive risk assessment framework, databases, and capacity-building initiatives for national and local actors.
2. Improve detection, monitoring, and forecasting capabilities through harmonized data collection, forecasting tools, and interoperability across sectors. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

=== PAGE 291 ===
3. Enhance early warning dissemination and communication by establishing functional networks and communication protocols, ensuring last-mile connectivity to vulnerable
populations.
4. Boost preparedness for early response and recovery by developing participatory and gender-responsive disaster preparedness measures and enhancing local and national
capacities for anticipatory action.
Pillar 1: Improved Disaster Risk Knowledge and Capacities
Results: Sector based project plans and implementations in disaster early warning, preparedness and response are inclusive and gender sensitive
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
1. Integrate gender-responsive data collection and analysis in • Number of hazard risk assessments that include Year 1 to UNDP and $250,000 per
DRR capacity development, particularly on disaster risk data, gender considerations (target: 3-5). Year 5, implementing country
that includes vulnerability, capacity and exposure of • Availability of a gender-sensitive disaster impact with agencies in each
populations. Develop a centralized disaster impact database database (target: 1). most of country
that tracks and addresses gender-specific disaster impacts. • % reports include sex- disaggregated data (target: the
2. Develop and deploy a centralized database that also tracks 100%) activities
gender-specific disaster impacts. • 70% of DRM staff trained by Year 3, 100% by Year expected
3. Train DRM staff on gender-sensitive data analysis 5. in years
techniques. • 2 trainings in each country annually targeting 50% 2-4.
female participants.
Pillar 2: Integrated Actions for Detection, Monitoring, and Forecasting
Results: Increased awareness and preparedness among women and vulnerable groups in response to hazard warnings
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
1. Conduct community awareness campaigns targeting • Percentage of early warning systems that provide Year 1 to UNDP and
women, elderly, and persons with disabilities on impact- gender-sensitive information (target: 100%). year 5, implementing $200,000 per
based forecasting • % of campaigns conducted in rural areas (target: with agencies in each country
2. Capacity development trainings related to impact-based 80%) most of country, relevant
forecasting (ensure that the training content includes • % increase in awareness of DRM strategies among the NGOs and
information on how women and men of different ages women by Year 5 (target: 40-50%) activities partners
88

--- Table 1 on Page 291 ---
3. Enhance early warning dissemination and communication by establishing functional networks and communication protocols, ensuring last-mile connectivity to vulnerable
populations.
4. Boost preparedness for early response and recovery by developing participatory and gender-responsive disaster preparedness measures and enhancing local and national
capacities for anticipatory action. |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Pillar 1: Improved Disaster Risk Knowledge and Capacities |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Results: Sector based project plans and implementations in disaster early warning, preparedness and response are inclusive and gender sensitive |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
1. Integrate gender-responsive data collection and analysis in
DRR capacity development, particularly on disaster risk data,
that includes vulnerability, capacity and exposure of
populations. Develop a centralized disaster impact database
that tracks and addresses gender-specific disaster impacts.
2. Develop and deploy a centralized database that also tracks
gender-specific disaster impacts.
3. Train DRM staff on gender-sensitive data analysis
techniques. |  | • Number of hazard risk assessments that include
gender considerations (target: 3-5).
• Availability of a gender-sensitive disaster impact
database (target: 1).
• % reports include sex- disaggregated data (target:
100%)
• 70% of DRM staff trained by Year 3, 100% by Year
5.
• 2 trainings in each country annually targeting 50%
female participants. | Year 1 to
Year 5,
with
most of
the
activities
expected
in years
2-4. | UNDP and
implementing
agencies in each
country | $250,000 per
country |  | 
 | Pillar 2: Integrated Actions for Detection, Monitoring, and Forecasting |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Results: Increased awareness and preparedness among women and vulnerable groups in response to hazard warnings |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
1. Conduct community awareness campaigns targeting
women, elderly, and persons with disabilities on impact-
based forecasting
2. Capacity development trainings related to impact-based
forecasting (ensure that the training content includes
information on how women and men of different ages |  | • Percentage of early warning systems that provide
gender-sensitive information (target: 100%).
• % of campaigns conducted in rural areas (target:
80%)
• % increase in awareness of DRM strategies among
women by Year 5 (target: 40-50%) | Year 1 to
year 5,
with
most of
the
activities | UNDP and
implementing
agencies in each
country, relevant
NGOs and
partners | $200,000 per
country |  | 

--- Table 2 on Page 291 ---
Percentage of early warning systems that provide
gender-sensitive information (target: 100%).

=== PAGE 292 ===
may be affected by hazards and how to communicate • % of females who have participated in capacity expected
warnings effectively to diverse groups, including development sessions (target 40-50%) in years
children, women, the elderly, persons with disabilities as • % of training sessions include gender-sensitive 3-5.
well as other vulnerable populations). content on the differential impacts of hazards and
3. Establish women-led community DRM teams to support effective communication strategies for diverse
awareness and preparedness. groups (target: 100%)
4. Develop and distribute accessible early warning • % of target areas receiving warnings in accessible
messages in local languages and formats. formats by Year 3 (70%), by Year 5 (100%)
Pillar 3: Nation-wide Warning Dissemination and Communication
Result: Increased gender equality and inclusion in early warning systems and disaster risk communication
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
1. Develop inclusive communication strategies with specific • Percentage of early warning messages that Year 1 to UNDP and $130,000 per
outreach efforts for women, girls, and female-headed specifically target women and girls (target: 60%). year 5, implementing country
households. • Number of SOPs developed with a gender lens with agencies in each
2. Strengthen communication networks to ensure last-mile (target: 3-5). most of country, relevant
connectivity to vulnerable groups, especially women • % of simulation exercises that engage women as the NGOs and
living in remote and rural areas. leaders (target: 50%). activities partners
3. Integration of inclusion and gender aspects into technical • % of areas with updated gender-sensitive early expected
assistance on warning dissemination channels including warning dissemination plans by the end of the in years
Common Alerting Protocols (CAP) project (target: 70% by year 3, 100% by year 5) 3-5.
4. Design and implement inclusive and gender sensitive • % of project beneficiaries receiving news or
Early Warning Systems improved early warning information disaggregated
by sex, age, and diversities compared to baseline
(target: 80-90%)
• % of community early warning systems
incorporated gender-responsive elements and met
89

--- Table 1 on Page 292 ---
may be affected by hazards and how to communicate
warnings effectively to diverse groups, including
children, women, the elderly, persons with disabilities as
well as other vulnerable populations).
3. Establish women-led community DRM teams to support
awareness and preparedness.
4. Develop and distribute accessible early warning
messages in local languages and formats. |  | • % of females who have participated in capacity
development sessions (target 40-50%)
• % of training sessions include gender-sensitive
content on the differential impacts of hazards and
effective communication strategies for diverse
groups (target: 100%)
• % of target areas receiving warnings in accessible
formats by Year 3 (70%), by Year 5 (100%) | expected
in years
3-5. |  |  |  | 
 | Pillar 3: Nation-wide Warning Dissemination and Communication |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Result: Increased gender equality and inclusion in early warning systems and disaster risk communication |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
1. Develop inclusive communication strategies with specific
outreach efforts for women, girls, and female-headed
households.
2. Strengthen communication networks to ensure last-mile
connectivity to vulnerable groups, especially women
living in remote and rural areas.
3. Integration of inclusion and gender aspects into technical
assistance on warning dissemination channels including
Common Alerting Protocols (CAP)
4. Design and implement inclusive and gender sensitive
Early Warning Systems |  | • Percentage of early warning messages that
specifically target women and girls (target: 60%).
• Number of SOPs developed with a gender lens
(target: 3-5).
• % of simulation exercises that engage women as
leaders (target: 50%).
• % of areas with updated gender-sensitive early
warning dissemination plans by the end of the
project (target: 70% by year 3, 100% by year 5)
• % of project beneficiaries receiving news or
improved early warning information disaggregated
by sex, age, and diversities compared to baseline
(target: 80-90%)
• % of community early warning systems
incorporated gender-responsive elements and met | Year 1 to
year 5,
with
most of
the
activities
expected
in years
3-5. | UNDP and
implementing
agencies in each
country, relevant
NGOs and
partners | $130,000 per
country |  | 

=== PAGE 293 ===
established criteria for gender inclusivity compared
to baseline (target: 80-90%)
• % of Common Alerting protocols (CAP) and other
technical assistance integrated inclusion and
gender aspects in warning dissemination channels
by year 3 (target: 90-100%), by year 5 (100%)
• % of individuals from vulnerable groups targeted
report receiving timely and actionable early
warning messages via targeted SMS alerts (target:
60-80%)
• % of alerts developed/used are non-written, to
overcome literacy barriers (target: 30-50%)
Pillar 4: Enhanced Preparedness for Timely Responses and Early Actions
Result: Gender-Responsive Capacity Building and Leadership of women and marginalized groups in national and community early action response initiatives
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
1. Develop disaster preparedness plans that incorporate • Percentage of disaster preparedness plans Year 1 to UNDP and $350,000 per
the unique needs of women, men, and vulnerable developed with gender considerations (target: year 5, implementing country
groups, ensuring gender balance in decision-making. 100%). with agencies in each
2. Build community capacity with a focus on empowering • % of women’s groups that participate in most of country, relevant
women in leadership roles in disaster response teams. preparedness training annually (target: 50%) the NGOs and
3. Early Warning &Early Action champions training for • % men and women community members who activities partners,
community members including women, persons with have received training on EW and EA across all expected women’s
disability, children, and youth. regions (target: 50:50) in years organizations
4. Leadership training for women in the development and • % of women assume leadership roles in the 2-4.
dissemination of early warning systems. development and dissemination of early warning
systems as a result of the training (target: 10-20%)
• % of women participants report increased
confidence and skills in participating early warning
90

--- Table 1 on Page 293 ---
 |  | established criteria for gender inclusivity compared
to baseline (target: 80-90%)
• % of Common Alerting protocols (CAP) and other
technical assistance integrated inclusion and
gender aspects in warning dissemination channels
by year 3 (target: 90-100%), by year 5 (100%)
• % of individuals from vulnerable groups targeted
report receiving timely and actionable early
warning messages via targeted SMS alerts (target:
60-80%)
• % of alerts developed/used are non-written, to
overcome literacy barriers (target: 30-50%) |  |  |  |  | 
 | Pillar 4: Enhanced Preparedness for Timely Responses and Early Actions |  |  |  |  |  | 
 | Result: Gender-Responsive Capacity Building and Leadership of women and marginalized groups in national and community early action response initiatives |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
1. Develop disaster preparedness plans that incorporate
the unique needs of women, men, and vulnerable
groups, ensuring gender balance in decision-making.
2. Build community capacity with a focus on empowering
women in leadership roles in disaster response teams.
3. Early Warning &Early Action champions training for
community members including women, persons with
disability, children, and youth.
4. Leadership training for women in the development and
dissemination of early warning systems. |  | • Percentage of disaster preparedness plans
developed with gender considerations (target:
100%).
• % of women’s groups that participate in
preparedness training annually (target: 50%)
• % men and women community members who
have received training on EW and EA across all
regions (target: 50:50)
• % of women assume leadership roles in the
development and dissemination of early warning
systems as a result of the training (target: 10-20%)
• % of women participants report increased
confidence and skills in participating early warning | Year 1 to
year 5,
with
most of
the
activities
expected
in years
2-4. | UNDP and
implementing
agencies in each
country, relevant
NGOs and
partners,
women’s
organizations | $350,000 per
country |  | 

=== PAGE 294 ===
system development and dissemination, as
measured by pre-and post-training surveys (target:
70-80%)
General: Enhanced GEDSI mainstreaming in EW4All project management and disaster preparedness and response.
Activities Targets/Indicators Timeline Responsibility Estimated Cost/
Resources
1. Integration of GEDSI aspects into SOP and relevant • GEDSI mainstreaming guidelines developed and Year 1 to UNDP and $150,000 per
adopted for early warning (EW) systems
developed protocols on EW year 5, implementing country
(Guidelines on risk communication, inclusive
2. Design monitoring, evaluation, and learning frameworks with agencies in each
preparedness, regional adaptation guideline,
that are GEDSI-responsive feedback mechanism and data collection). (Target: most of country
3. Collect and analyze disaggregated data, and GEDSI- 3-5) the
• Number of SOPs and protocols on early warning
related case studies, and progress updates on GEDSI activities
that explicitly include GEDSI aspects (target: 3-5)
implementation of all relevant project reports expected
• % increase in vulnerable groups (disaggregated by
4. Ensure the GRM within the framework of EW4All is in years
sex, age, and diversities) participation in early
gender responsive. warning, preparedness, and response activities 2-4.
compared to baseline (target: 30-50%)
• Monitoring, evaluation, and learning frameworks
that include specific GEDSI-related indicators and
considerations (participation, impact analysis,
gender disaggregated data and feedback
integration) developed (target: 3-4)
• % of all relevant project reports include
disaggregated data and GEDSI-focused analysis by
the end of the program timeline (target: 100%)
• At least 1 case studies per year per country
focusing on successful GEDSI implementation.
• % of grievance reports received are sex-
disaggregated annually (target: 100%)
Total $1,080,000 per
country
91

--- Table 1 on Page 294 ---
 |  | system development and dissemination, as
measured by pre-and post-training surveys (target:
70-80%) |  |  |  |  | 
 | General: Enhanced GEDSI mainstreaming in EW4All project management and disaster preparedness and response. |  |  |  |  |  | 
Activities | Activities | Targets/Indicators | Timeline | Responsibility |  | Estimated Cost/ | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | Resources | 
1. Integration of GEDSI aspects into SOP and relevant
developed protocols on EW
2. Design monitoring, evaluation, and learning frameworks
that are GEDSI-responsive
3. Collect and analyze disaggregated data, and GEDSI-
related case studies, and progress updates on GEDSI
implementation of all relevant project reports
4. Ensure the GRM within the framework of EW4All is
gender responsive. |  | • GEDSI mainstreaming guidelines developed and
adopted for early warning (EW) systems
(Guidelines on risk communication, inclusive
preparedness, regional adaptation guideline,
feedback mechanism and data collection). (Target:
3-5)
• Number of SOPs and protocols on early warning
that explicitly include GEDSI aspects (target: 3-5)
• % increase in vulnerable groups (disaggregated by
sex, age, and diversities) participation in early
warning, preparedness, and response activities
compared to baseline (target: 30-50%)
• Monitoring, evaluation, and learning frameworks
that include specific GEDSI-related indicators and
considerations (participation, impact analysis,
gender disaggregated data and feedback
integration) developed (target: 3-4)
• % of all relevant project reports include
disaggregated data and GEDSI-focused analysis by
the end of the program timeline (target: 100%)
• At least 1 case studies per year per country
focusing on successful GEDSI implementation.
• % of grievance reports received are sex-
disaggregated annually (target: 100%) | Year 1 to
year 5,
with
most of
the
activities
expected
in years
2-4. | UNDP and
implementing
agencies in each
country | $150,000 per
country |  | 
Total |  |  |  |  |  | $1,080,000 per | 
 |  |  |  |  |  | country | 

=== PAGE 295 ===
__________
92
